OceanofPDF.com
About	Systematic	Theology
The	Christian	church	has	a	long	tradition	of	systematic	theology,	that	is,
studying	theology	and	doctrine	organized	around	fairly	standard	categories
such	as	the	Word	of	God,	redemption,	and	Jesus	Christ.	This	introduction	to
systematic	theology	has	several	distinctive	features.
A	strong	emphasis	on	the	scriptural	basis	for	each	doctrine	and	teaching
Clear	writing,	with	technical	terms	kept	to	a	minimum
A	contemporary	approach,	treating	subjects	of	special	interest	to	the
church	today
A	friendly	tone,	appealing	to	the	emotions	and	the	spirit	as	well	as	the
intellect
Frequent	application	to	life
Resources	for	worship	with	each	chapter
Bibliographies	with	each	chapter	that	cross-reference	subjects	to	a	wide
range	of	other	systematic	theologies.
“Grudem’s	book	.	.	.	stands	squarely	in	the	historical	Reformed	tradition	on
the	main	issues	of	theology,	including	the	doctrine	of	Scripture,	the	doctrine
of	God,	and	the	doctrine	of	salvation.	.	.	.	Perhaps	the	strongest	feature	of	the
book	is	its	accessibility.	Grudem	does	not	water	down	the	meat	of	theology.
But	by	minimizing	technical	terminology	and	by	including	hymns,	questions,
and	indications	of	application,	he	makes	systematic	theology	much	more
accessible	and	life-invigorating	for	a	large	range	of	Christian	readers.”
Vern	S.	Poythress,
	Westminster	Theological	Seminary
“The	whole	church	is	indebted	to	Wayne	Grudem	for	a	fresh	presentation	of
evangelical	Christianity.	.	.	.	Even	those	who	do	not	share	his	.	.	.	positions	on
certain	issues	will	be	enriched	by	Grudem’s	clear	statement	of	basic
evangelical	theology	and	his	helpful	cross-references	to	other	major
theological	positions.	Of	particular	value	is	his	constant	eye	to	the	application
of	doctrine	to	personal	life,	ministry,	and	the	church.	For	Grudem,	intellectual
understanding	cannot	be	separated	from	heart	experience.”
Allan	Coppedge,
	Asbury	Theological	Seminary
“Systematic	Theology
	by	Wayne	Grudem	is	classic	theology	for	today’s
church.	.	.	.	Beyond	most	theological	works,	Grudem	addresses	doctrine	to
life,	in	thought,	practice,	and	worship.	Although	not	everyone	will	agree	with
all	of	Grudem’s	conclusions,	he	has	gifted	the	church	with	a	wealth	of	biblical
and	theological	teaching	in	a	solid,	conservative,	evangelical	tradition.”
Robert	L.	Saucy,
	Talbot	School	of	Theology
“Dr.	Grudem’s	new	work	is	characterized	by	exegetical	depth,	clarity	of
expression,	and	contemporary	relevance.	It	deserves	wide	acceptance	as	a	text
in	systematic	theology.”
John	Jefferson	Davis,
	Gordon-Conwell	Theological	Seminary
“Grudem’s	
Systematic	Theology
	is	destined	to	become	a	classic.	He	leads	his
readers	through	the	most	controversial	and	difficult	areas	of	theology	with
unparalleled	clarity.	.	.	.	This	work	is	capable	of	leading	a	beginner	into	the
process	of	mature	theological	reflection	as	well	as	challenging	and	delighting
the	seasoned	theologian.	I	have	never	enjoyed	a	systematic	theology	as	much
as	this.”
Jack	Deere,
	Author	and	Lecturer
“Grudem	builds	a	wonderfully	personal	evangelical	theology	from	a	deep
commitment	to	the	truth	and	authority	of	Scripture	that	honors	the	best
traditions	of	Protestant	orthodoxy.	.	.	.	It	will	help	evangelicals	realize	the
importance	of	doctrine	while	encouraging	us	toward	a	much-needed
theological	consensus.”
Gerry	Breshears,
	Western	Seminary,	Portland,	Oregon
“Written	in	a	clear	manner,	this	is	one	theological	publication	that	is	worthy
of	serious	study	by	everyone.”
Baptist	Standard
“It	will	teach	you,	challenge	you,	expand	your	thinking,	and	warm	your	heart.
Theologian,	pastor,	and	layperson	alike	will	benefit	greatly	from	this	finely
crafted	work.	It	comes	from	the	heart	and	mind	of	one	of	the	church’s	finest
servants	and	most	careful	and	able	scholars.”
James	A.	Borland,
	Liberty	University
“Once	in	a	while	one	encounters	a	book	in	which	some	statements	are	so	apt
that	one	feels	like	saying:	‘I	wish	I	had	written	that.’	Dr.	Grudem’s	
Systematic
Theology
	is	one	such	book!	It	is	.	.	.	not	burdened	with	technicalities	that
make	it	difficult	to	understand,	although	technical	terms	.	.	.	are	explained	so
that	the	reader	may	be	cognizant	of	them.	It	is	very	well	organized	and
presents	a	thorough	evangelical	position.	Where	evangelicals	differ	it
provides	a	fair	evaluation	of	diverging	views.	It	has	valuable	paragraphs	on
application,	significant	Scriptures	to	be	memorized,	and	an	appendix	with
important	creeds	and	confessions	of	faith.”
Roger	Nicole,
	Reformed	Theological	Seminary,	Orlando,	Florida
“Wayne	Grudem	understands	that	every	Christian	‘does	theology,’	that
doctrine	inevitably	finds	its	application	in	the	believer’s	life.	Clearly	written,
this	volume	demonstrates	an	appreciation	for	the	rich	diversity	of	traditions
within	the	body	of	Christ	while	at	the	same	time	reminding	us	that	our	faith	is
rooted	in	historic	Christian	truth.”
Chuck	Colson,
	Prison	Fellowship	Ministries
“If	you	were	hoping	to	find	a	student’s	textbook	of	theology	that	seeks	your
spiritual	no	less	than	your	intellectual	formation,	rejoice.	Wayne	Grudem	has
written	exactly	what	you	wanted,	and	he	has	done	so	very	competently
indeed.”
J.I.	Packer,
	Regent	College
“
Systematic	Theology
	by	Wayne	Grudem	is	a	fair-minded,	thorough	text	in
systematic	theology—the	best	I	have	seen	in	recent	years	in	terms	of
convenient	organization,	clarity,	and	a	willingness	to	tackle	the	most	salient
issues	of	the	day.	This	is	an	admirable	blending	of	the	scholarly	and
devotional	elements	seldom	achieved	in	academic	books.”
Paige	Patterson,
	Southeastern	Baptist	Seminary
“Systematic	Theology	is	remarkable	for	its	extraordinary	juxtapositions.	It	is
penetrating	but	not	confusing;	forthright	and	unequivocal	but	not	reckless	or
overstated;	readable	and	clear	but	not	superficial;	biblically	grounded,	even
biblically	saturated,	but	not	textually	careless	or	glib;	devout	and	reverent	but
not	uncritical	or	naive;	practical	but	not	trendy	or	sentimental;	comprehensive
but	not	majoring	on	minors;	a	book	for	the	church	but	not	parochial	or
sectarian.	I	expect	to	turn	to	it	for	decades.”
John	Piper,
	Bethlehem	Baptist	Church,	Minneapolis
“Altogether	a	magnificent	achievement	which	deserves	to	be	widely	used
among	evangelicals.”
Gerald	Bray,
	Beeson	Divinity	School
“Grudem	has	opened	the	windows	to	let	fresh	air	blow	away	mustiness	and
permit	the	Holy	Spirit	to	infuse	soundly	biblical,	clearheaded	evangelical
theology	with	new	life	and	power.”
Jack	W.	Hayford,
	The	Church	on	the	Way,	Van	Nuys,	California
This	book	is	available	in	computer-readable	form	from	Bits	&	Bytes
Computer	Resources,	623	N.	Iowa	Ave.,	Whitefish,	MT	
59937.
OceanofPDF.com
SYSTEMATIC	
THEOLOGY
•	An	Introduction	to	Biblical	Doctrine	•
WAYNE	
GRUDEM
OceanofPDF.com
Copyright
Systematic	Theology	
EPub	Reader	Format
Copyright	©	1994	by	Wayne	Grudem
Appendix	6	and	glossary	copyright	©	2000	by	Wayne	Grudem
Requests	for	information	should	be	addressed	to:
Zondervan,	
Grand	Rapids,	Michigan	49530
ISBN-13:	978-0-310-56602-1
All	rights	reserved.	No	part	of	this	publication	may	be	reproduced,	stored	in	a	retrieval	system,	or	transmitted	in	any	form	or	by
any	means—electronic,	mechanical,	photocopy,	recording,	or	any	other—except	for	brief	quotations	in	printed	reviews,	without
the	prior	permission	of	the	publisher.
Unless	otherwise	noted,	Scripture	quotations	are	taken	from	the	Revised	Standard	Version	of	the	Bible,	copyright	©	1946,	1952,
1971,	by	the	Division	of	Christian	Education	of	the	National	Council	of	Churches	of	Christ	in	the	USA,	and	are	used	by
permission.	However,	the	author	has,	with	permission,	modernized	archaic	personal	pronouns	and	has	changed	the	verbs
accordingly.	Scripture	quotations	marked	NASB	are	from	the	New	American	Standard	Bible,	copyright	©	1960,	1962,	1963,
1968,	1971,	1972	by	the	Lockman	Foundation,	La	Habra,	California.	Used	by	permission.	Those	marked	NIV	are	from	the	
Holy
Bible:	New	International	Version
®
.	NIV
®
.	Copyright	©	1973,	1978,	1984	by	International	Bible	Society.	Used	by	permission	of
Hodder	and	Stoughton	Ltd.	and	Zondervan.	Use	of	italic	in	Scripture	quotations	indicates	Wayne	Grudem’s	emphasis.
OceanofPDF.com
This	book	is	dedicated	to	eight	people
whom	God	sovereignly	brought	into	my	life:
Arden	and	Jean	Grudem,	my	parents,
who	taught	me	to	believe	the	Bible,
to	trust	in	God,
and	to	speak	and	write	clearly;
A.	Kenneth	Ham,	my	Baptist	pastor,
who	awakened	in	me	a	love	for	systematic	theology
by	teaching	a	class	on	Christian	doctrine
when	I	was	thirteen	years	old,
and	who	taught	me	by	example	to	believe
every	word	of	Scripture;
Edmund	Clowney,	John	Frame,	and	Vern	Poythress,
Westminster	Seminary	professors	and	friends,
who	influenced	my	theological	understanding
more	than	anyone	else,
and	who	taught	me	Reformed	theology	in
humble	submission	to	every	word	of	Scripture;
and	Harald	Bredesen	and	John	Wimber,
pastors	and	friends,
who,	more	than	anyone	else,
taught	me	about	the	power	and	work
of	the	Holy	Spirit.
OceanofPDF.com
Contents
About	Systematic	Theology
Copyright
ABBREVIATIONS
PREFACE
Chapter	1
:			Introduction	to	Systematic	Theology
What	is	systematic	theology?	Why	should	Christians	study	it?
How	should	we	study	it?
PART	1:
THE	DOCTRINE	OF	THE	WORD	OF	GOD
Chapter	2
:			The	Word	of	God
What	are	the	different	forms	of	the	Word	of	God?
Chapter	3
:			The	Canon	of	Scripture
What	belongs	in	the	Bible	and	what	does	not	belong?
Chapter	4
:			The	Four	Characteristics	of	Scripture:	(1)	Authority
How	do	we	know	that	the	Bible	is	God’s	Word?
Chapter	5
:			The	Inerrancy	of	Scripture
Are	there	any	errors	in	the	Bible?
Chapter	6
:			The	Four	Characteristics	of	Scripture:	(2)	Clarity
Can	only	Bible	scholars	understand	the	Bible	rightly?
Chapter	7
:			The	Four	Characteristics	of	Scripture:	(3)	Necessity
For	what	purposes	are	the	Bible	necessary?	How	much	can
people	know	about	God	without	the	Bible?
Chapter	8
:			The	Four	Characteristics	of	Scripture:	(4)
Sufficiency
Is	the	Bible	enough	for	knowing	what	God	wants	us	to	think	or
do?
PART	2:
THE	DOCTRINE	OF	GOD
Chapter	9
:			The	Existence	of	God
How	do	we	know	that	God	exists?
Chapter	10
:			The	Knowability	of	God
Can	we	really	know	God?	How	much	of	God	can	we	know?
Chapter	11
:			The	Character	of	God:	“Incommunicable”
Attributes
How	is	God	different	from	us?
Chapter	12
:			The	Character	of	God:	“Communicable”
Attributes	(Part	1)
How	is	God	like	us	in	his	being	and	in	mental	and	moral
attributes?
Chapter	13
:			The	Character	of	God:	“Communicable”
Attributes	(Part	2)
How	is	God	like	us	in	attributes	of	will	and	in	attributes	that
summarize	his	excellence?
Chapter	14
:			God	in	Three	Persons:	The	Trinity
How	can	God	be	three	persons,	yet	one	God?
Chapter	15
:			Creation
Why,	how,	and	when	did	God	create	the	universe?
Chapter	16
:			God’s	Providence	
If	God	controls	all	things,	how	can	our	actions	have	real
meaning?	What	are	the	decrees	of	God?
Chapter	17
:			Miracles
What	are	miracles?	Can	they	happen	today?
Chapter	18
:			Prayer
Why	does	God	want	us	to	pray?	How	can	we	pray	effectively?
Chapter	19
:			Angels	
What	are	angels?	Why	did	God	create	them?
Chapter	20
:			Satan	and	Demons
How	should	Christians	think	of	Satan	and	demons	today?
Spiritual	warfare.
PART	3:
THE	DOCTRINE	OF	MAN
Chapter	21
:			The	Creation	of	Man
Why	did	God	create	us?	How	did	God	make	us	like	himself?
How	can	we	please	him	in	everyday	living?
Chapter	22
:			Man	as	Male	and	Female
Why	did	God	create	two	sexes?	Can	men	and	women	be	equal
and	yet	have	different	roles?
Chapter	23
:			The	Essential	Nature	of	Man
What	does	Scripture	mean	by	“soul”	and	“spirit”?	Are	they	the
same	thing?
Chapter	24
:			Sin
What	is	sin?	Where	did	it	come	from?	Do	we	inherit	a	sinful
nature	from	Adam?	Do	we	inherit	guilt	from	Adam?
Chapter	25
:			The	Covenants	Between	God	and	Man
What	principles	determine	the	way	God	relates	to	us?
PART	4:
THE	DOCTRINES	OF	CHRIST	AND	THE	HOLY	SPIRIT
Chapter	26
:			The	Person	of	Christ
How	is	Jesus	fully	God	and	fully	man,	yet	one	person?
Chapter	27
:			The	Atonement
Was	it	necessary	for	Christ	to	die?	Did	Christ’s	entire	earthly
life	earn	any	saving	benefits	for	us?	The	cause	and	nature	of	the
atonement.	Did	Christ	descend	into	hell?
Chapter	28
:			Resurrection	and	Ascension
What	was	Christ’s	resurrection	body	like?	What	is	its
significance	for	us?	What	happened	to	Christ	when	he	ascended
into	heaven?	What	is	meant	by	the	states	of	Jesus	Christ?
Chapter	29
:			The	Offices	of	Christ
How	is	Christ	prophet,	priest,	and	king?
Chapter	30
:			The	Work	of	the	Holy	Spirit
What	are	the	distinctive	activities	of	the	Holy	Spirit	throughout
the	history	of	the	Bible?
PART	5:
THE	DOCTRINE	OF	THE	APPLICATION	OF	REDEMPTION
Chapter	31
:			Common	Grace
What	are	the	undeserved	blessings	that	God	gives	to	all	people,
both	believers	and	unbelievers?
Chapter	32
:			Election	and	Reprobation
When	and	why	did	God	choose	us?	Are	some	not	chosen?
Chapter	33
:			The	Gospel	Call	and	Effective	Calling
What	is	the	gospel	message?	How	does	it	become	effective?
Chapter	34
:			Regeneration
What	does	it	mean	to	be	born	again?
Chapter	35
:			Conversion	(Faith	and	Repentance)
What	is	true	repentance?	What	is	saving	faith?	Can	people
accept	Jesus	as	Savior	and	not	as	Lord?
Chapter	36
:			Justification	(Right	Legal	Standing	Before	God)
How	and	when	do	we	gain	right	legal	standing	before	God?
Chapter	37
:			Adoption	(Membership	in	God’s	Family)
What	are	benefits	of	being	a	member	of	God’s	family?
Chapter	38
:			Sanctification	(Growth	in	Likeness	to	Christ)
How	do	we	grow	in	Christian	maturity?	What	are	the	blessings
of	Christian	growth?
Chapter	39
:			Baptism	in	and	Filling	With	the	Holy	Spirit
Should	we	seek	a	“baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit”	after
conversion?	What	does	it	mean	to	be	filled	with	the	Holy	Spirit?
Chapter	40
:			The	Perseverance	of	the	Saints	(Remaining	a
Christian)
Can	true	Christians	lose	their	salvation?	How	can	we	know	if
we	are	truly	born	again?
Chapter	41
:			Death	and	the	Intermediate	State
What	is	the	purpose	of	death	in	the	Christian	life?	What
happens	to	our	bodies	and	souls	when	we	die?
Chapter	42
:			Glorification	(Receiving	a	Resurrection	Body)
When	will	we	receive	resurrection	bodies?	What	will	they	be
like?
Chapter	43
:			Union	With	Christ
What	does	it	mean	to	be	“in	Christ”	or	“united	with	Christ”?
PART	6:
THE	DOCTRINE	OF	THE	CHURCH
Chapter	44
:			The	Church:	Its	Nature,	Its	Marks,	and	Its
Purposes
What	is	necessary	to	make	a	church?	How	can	we	recognize	a
true	church?	The	purposes	of	the	church.
Chapter	45
:			The	Purity	and	Unity	of	the	Church
What	makes	a	church	more	or	less	pleasing	to	God?	What	kinds
of	churches	should	we	cooperate	with	or	join?
Chapter	46
:			The	Power	of	the	Church
What	kind	of	authority	does	the	church	have?	How	should
church	discipline	function?
Chapter	47
:			Church	Government	
How	should	a	church	be	governed?	How	should	church	officers
be	chosen?	Should	women	serve	as	pastors	of	churches?
Chapter	48
:			Means	of	Grace	Within	the	Church
What	are	the	different	activities	within	the	life	of	the	church	that
God	uses	to	bring	blessing	to	us?	What	do	we	miss	if	we	neglect
involvement	in	a	local	church?
Chapter	49
:			Baptism
Who	should	be	baptized?	How	should	it	be	done?	What	does	it
mean?
Chapter	50
:			The	Lord’s	Supper
What	is	the	meaning	of	the	Lord’s	Supper?	How	should	it	be
observed?
Chapter	51
:			Worship
How	can	our	worship	fulfill	its	great	purpose	in	the	New
Testament	age?	What	does	it	mean	to	worship	“in	spirit	and	in
truth”?
Chapter	52
:			Gifts	of	the	Holy	Spirit	(1):	General	Questions
What	are	spiritual	gifts?	How	many	are	there?	Have	some	gifts
ceased?	Seeking	and	using	spiritual	gifts.
Chapter	53
:			Gifts	of	the	Holy	Spirit	(2):	Specific	Gifts
How	should	we	understand	and	use	specific	spiritual	gifts?
PART	7:
THE	DOCTRINE	OF	THE	FUTURE
Chapter	54
:			The	Return	of	Christ:	When	and	How?
When	and	how	will	Christ	return?	Could	he	come	back	at	any
hour?
Chapter	55
:			The	Millennium
What	is	the	Millennium?	When	does	it	occur?	Will	Christians
go	through	the	Great	Tribulation?
Chapter	56
:			The	Final	Judgment	and	Eternal	Punishment
Who	will	be	judged?	What	is	hell?
Chapter	57
:			The	New	Heavens	and	New	Earth
What	is	heaven?	Is	it	a	place?	How	will	the	earth	be	renewed?
What	will	it	be	like	to	live	in	the	new	heavens	and	new	earth?
APPENDIX	1
:	HISTORIC	CONFESSIONS	OF	FAITH
APPENDIX	2
:	SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGES	FROM	THE	NIV	AND
NASB
APPENDIX	3
:	CONTEMPORARY	WORSHIP	SONGS	CLASSIFIED	BY
CHAPTER
APPENDIX	4
:	ANNOTATED	BIBLIOGRAPHY	OF	EVANGELICAL
SYSTEMATIC	THEOLOGIES
APPENDIX	5
:	MASTER	LIST	OF	SYSTEMATIC	THEOLOGIES	CROSS-
REFERENCED	AT	THE	END	OF	EACH	CHAPTER
APPENDIX	6
:	THE	
MONOGENEĞS
	CONTROVERSY:	“ONLY”	OR
“ONLY	BEGOTTEN”?
GLOSSARY
INDEXES	
List	of	Authors
List	of	Hymns
List	of	Scripture
ABOUT	THE	AUTHOR
ABOUT	THE	PUBLISHER
OceanofPDF.com
Abbreviations
BAGD
	
A	Greek-English	Lexicon	of	the	New	Testament	and	Other	Early
Christian	Literature.	
Ed.	Walter	Bauer.	Rev.	and	trans.	Wm.	Arndt,
F.	W.	Gingrich,	and	F.	Danker.	Chicago:	University	of	Chicago
Press,	1979.
BDB
	
A	Hebrew	and	English	Lexicon	of	the	Old	Testament.	
F.	Brown,	S.
R.	Driver,	and	C.	Briggs.	Oxford:	Clarendon	Press,	1907;
reprinted,	with	corrections,	1968.
BETS
	
Bulletin	of	the	Evangelical	Theological	Society
BibSac
	
Bibliotheca	Sacra
cf.
	
compare
CRSQ
	
Creation	Research	Society	Quarterly
CT
	
Christianity	Today
CThRev
	
Criswell	Theological	Review
DPCM
	
Dictionary	of	Pentecostal	and	Charismatic	Movements.	
Stanley
M.	Burgess	and	Gary	B.	McGee,	eds.	Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,
1988.
EBC
	
Expositor’s	Bible	Commentary.	
Frank	E.	Gaebelein,	ed.	Grand
Rapids:	Zondervan,	1976.
ed.
	
edited	by,	edition
EDT
	
Evangelical	Dictionary	of	Theology.	
Walter	Elwell,	ed.	Grand
Rapids:	Baker,	1984.
et	al.
	
and	others
IBD
	
The	Illustrated	Bible	Dictionary.	
Ed.	J.	D.	Douglas,	et	al.	3	vols.
Leicester:	Inter-Varsity	Press,	and	Wheaton:	Tyndale	House,	1980.
ISBE
	
International	Standard	Bible	Encyclopedia.	
Revised	edition.	G.	W.
Bromiley,	ed.	Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1982.
JAMA
	
Journal	of	the	American	Medical	Association
JBL
	
Journal	of	Biblical	Literature
JETS
	
Journal	of	the	Evangelical	Theological	Society
JSOT
	
Journal	for	the	Study	of	the	Old	Testament
KJV
	
King	James	Version	(Authorized	Version)
LSJ
	
A	Greek-English	Lexicon,	
ninth	edition.	Henry	Liddell,	Robert
Scott,	H.	S.	Jones,	R.	McKenzie.	Oxford:	Clarendon	Press,	1940.
LXX
	
Septuagint
mg.
	
margin	or	marginal	notes
n.
	
note
N.d.
	
no	date	of	publication	given
N.p.
	
no	place	of	publication	given
NASB
	
New	American	Standard	Bible
NDT
	
New	Dictionary	of	Theology.	
S.	B.	Ferguson,	D.	F.	Wright,	J.	I.
Packer,	eds.	Leicester	and	Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,
1988.
NIDCC
	
New	International	Dictionary	of	the	Christian	Church.	
Ed.	J.	D.
Douglas	et	al.	Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1974.
NIDNTT
	
The	New	International	Dictionary	of	New	Testament	Theology.	
3
vols.	Colin	Brown,	gen.	ed.	Grand	Rapids:
	
Zondervan,	1975–78.
NIGTC
	
New	International	Greek	Testament	Commentaries
NIV
	
New	International	Version
NKJV
	
New	King	James	Version
NTS
	
New	Testament	Studies
ODCC
	
Oxford	Dictionary	of	the	Christian	Church.	
Ed.	F.	L.	Cross.
London	and	New	York:	Oxford	University	Press,	1977.
rev.
	
revised
RSV
	
Revised	Standard	Version
TB
	
Tyndale	Bulletin
TDNT
	
Theological	Dictionary	of	the	New	Testament.	
10	vols.	G.	Kittel
and	G.	Friedrich,	eds.;	trans.	G.	W.	Bromiley.	Grand	Rapids:
Eerdmans,	1964–76.
TNTC
	
Tyndale	New	Testament	Commentaries
TOTC
	
Tyndale	Old	Testament	Commentaries
trans.
	
translated	by
TrinJ
	
Trinity	Journal
vol.
	
volume
WBC
	
Word	Biblical	Commentary
WTJ
	
Westminster	Theological	Journal
OceanofPDF.com
Preface
I	have	not	written	this	book	for	other	teachers	of	theology	(though	I	hope
many	of	them	will	read	it).	I	have	written	it	for	students—and	not	only	for
students,	but	also	for	every	Christian	who	has	a	hunger	to	know	the	central
doctrines	of	the	Bible	in	greater	depth.
This	is	why	I	have	called	the	book	“An	Introduction	to	Biblical	Doctrine.”	I
have	tried	to	make	it	understandable	even	for	Christians	who	have	never
studied	theology	before.	I	have	avoided	using	technical	terms	without	first
explaining	them.	And	most	of	the	chapters	can	be	read	on	their	own,	so	that
someone	can	begin	at	any	chapter	and	grasp	it	without	having	read	the	earlier
material.
Introductory	studies	do	not	have	to	be	shallow	or	simplistic.	I	am	convinced
that	most	Christians	are	able	to	understand	the	doctrinal	teachings	of	the	Bible
in	considerable	depth,	provided	that	they	are	presented	clearly	and	without	the
use	of	highly	technical	language.	Therefore	I	have	not	hesitated	to	treat
theological	disputes	in	some	detail	where	it	seemed	necessary.
Yet	this	book,	despite	its	size,	is	still	an	
introduction	
to	systematic	theology.
Entire	books	have	been	written	about	the	topics	covered	in	each	chapter	of
this	book,	and	entire	articles	have	been	written	about	many	of	the	verses
quoted	in	this	book.	Therefore	each	chapter	is	capable	of	opening	out	into
additional	study	in	more	breadth	or	more	depth	for	those	who	are	interested.
The	bibliographies	at	the	end	of	each	chapter	give	some	help	in	that	direction.
The	following	six	distinctive	features	of	this	book	grow	out	of	my	convictions
about	what	systematic	theology	is	and	how	it	should	be	taught:
1.
	A	Clear	Biblical	Basis	for	Doctrines.	
Because	I	believe	that	theology
should	be	explicitly	based	on	the	teachings	of	Scripture,	in	each	chapter	I
have	attempted	to	show	where	the	Bible	gives	support	for	the	doctrines	under
consideration.	In	fact,	because	I	believe	that	the	words	of	Scripture
themselves	have	power	and	authority	greater	than	any	human	words,	I	have
not	just	given	Bible	references;	I	have	frequently	
quoted	
Bible	passages	at
length	so	that	readers	can	easily	examine	for	themselves	the	scriptural
evidence	and	in	that	way	be	like	the	noble	Bereans,	who	were	“examining	the
scriptures	daily	to	see	if	these	things	were	so”	(Acts	17:11).	This	conviction
about	the	unique	nature	of	the	Bible	as	God’s	words	has	also	led	to	the
inclusion	of	a	Scripture	memory	passage	at	the	end	of	each	chapter.
2.	Clarity	in	the	Explanation	of	Doctrines.	
I	do	not	believe	that	God
intended	the	study	of	theology	to	result	in	confusion	and	frustration.	A	student
who	comes	out	of	a	course	in	theology	filled	only	with	doctrinal	uncertainty
and	a	thousand	unanswered	questions	is	hardly	“able	to	give	instruction	in
sound	doctrine	and	also	to	confute	those	who	contradict	it”	(Titus	1:9).
Therefore	I	have	tried	to	state	the	doctrinal	positions	of	this	book	clearly	and
to	show	where	in	Scripture	I	find	convincing	evidence	for	those	positions.	I
do	not	expect	that	everyone	reading	this	book	will	agree	with	me	at	every
point	of	doctrine;	I	do	think	that	every	reader	will	understand	the	positions	I
am	arguing	for	and	where	Scripture	can	be	found	to	support	those	positions.
I	think	it	is	only	fair	to	readers	of	this	book	to	say	at	the	beginning	what	my
own	convictions	are	regarding	certain	points	that	are	disputed	within
evangelical	Christianity.	I	hold	to	a	conservative	view	of	biblical	inerrancy,
very	much	in	agreement	with	the	“Chicago	Statement”	of	the	International
Council	on	Biblical	Inerrancy	(chapter	5	and	appendix	1),	and	a	traditional
Reformed	position	with	regard	to	questions	of	God’s	sovereignty	and	man’s
responsibility	(chapter	16),	the	extent	of	the	atonement	(chapter	27),	and	the
question	of	predestination	(chapter	32).	Consistent	with	the	Reformed	view,	I
hold	that	those	who	are	truly	born	again	will	never	lose	their	salvation
(chapter	40).	With	regard	to	male-female	relationships,	I	argue	for	a	view	that
is	neither	traditional	nor	feminist,	but	“complementarian”—namely,	that	God
created	man	and	woman	equal	in	value	and	personhood,	and	equal	in	bearing
his	image,	but	that	both	creation	and	redemption	indicate	some	distinct	roles
for	men	and	women	in	marriage	(chapter	22)	and	in	the	church	(chapter	47).
On	church	government,	I	advocate	a	modified	congregational	form	of
government,	with	plural	elders	in	governing	positions	(chapter	47).	I	argue	for
a	baptistic	view	of	baptism,	namely,	that	those	who	give	a	believable
profession	of	personal	faith	should	be	baptized	(chapter	49).	I	hold	that
“baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit”	is	a	phrase	best	applied	to	conversion,	and
subsequent	experiences	are	better	called	“being	filled	with	the	Holy	Spirit”
(chapter	39);	moreover,	that	all	the	gifts	of	the	Holy	Spirit	mentioned	in	the
New	Testament	are	still	valid	for	today,	but	that	“apostle”	is	an	office,	not	a
gift,	and	that	office	does	not	continue	today	(chapters	52,	53).	I	believe	that
Christ’s	second	coming	could	occur	any	day,	that	it	will	be	premillennial—
that	is,	that	it	will	mark	the	beginning	of	his	thousand-year	reign	of	perfect
peace	on	the	earth—but	that	it	will	be	post-tribulational—that	is,	that	many
Christians	will	go	through	the	great	tribulation	(chapters	54,	55).
This	does	not	mean	that	I	ignore	other	views.	Where	there	are	doctrinal
differences	within	evangelical	Christianity	I	have	tried	to	represent	other
positions	fairly,	to	explain	why	I	disagree	with	them,	and	to	give	references	to
the	best	available	defenses	of	the	opposing	positions.	In	fact,	I	have	made	it
easy	for	students	to	find	a	conservative	evangelical	statement	on	each	topic
from	within	their	own	theological	traditions,	because	each	chapter	contains	an
index	to	treatments	of	that	chapter’s	subject	in	thirty-four	other	theology	texts
classified	by	denominational	background.	(If	I	have	failed	to	represent	an
opposing	view	accurately	I	would	appreciate	a	letter	from	anyone	who	holds
that	view,	and	I	will	attempt	to	make	corrections	if	a	subsequent	edition	of
this	book	is	published.)
3.	Application	to	Life.	
I	do	not	believe	that	God	intended	the	study	of
theology	to	be	dry	and	boring.	Theology	is	the	study	of	God	and	all	his
works!	Theology	is	meant	to	be	
lived	
and	
prayed	
and	
sung!	
All	of	the	great
doctrinal	writings	of	the	Bible	(such	as	Paul’s	epistle	to	the	Romans)	are	full
of	praise	to	God	and	personal	application	to	life.	For	this	reason	I	have
incorporated	notes	on	application	from	time	to	time	in	the	text,	and	have
added	“Questions	for	Personal	Application”	at	the	end	of	each	chapter,	as
well	as	a	hymn	related	to	the	topic	of	the	chapter.	True	theology	is	“teaching
which	accords	with	godliness”	(1	Tim.	6:3),	and	theology	when	studied
rightly	will	lead	to	growth	in	our	Christian	lives,	and	to	worship.
4.	Focus	on	the	Evangelical	World.	
I	do	not	think	that	a	true	system	of
theology	can	be	constructed	from	within	what	we	may	call	the	“liberal”
theological	tradition—that	is,	by	people	who	deny	the	absolute	truthfulness	of
the	Bible,	or	who	do	not	think	the	words	of	the	Bible	to	be	God’s	very	words
(see	chapter	4,	on	the	authority	of	Scripture).	For	this	reason,	the	other	writers
I	interact	with	in	this	book	are	mostly	within	what	is	today	called	the	larger
“conservative	evangelical”	tradition—from	the	great	Reformers	John	Calvin
and	Martin	Luther,	down	to	the	writings	of	evangelical	scholars	today.	I	write
as	an	evangelical	and	for	evangelicals.	This	does	not	mean	that	those	in	the
liberal	tradition	have	nothing	valuable	to	say;	it	simply	means	that	differences
with	them	almost	always	boil	down	to	differences	over	the	nature	of	the	Bible
and	its	authority.	The	amount	of	doctrinal	agreement	that	can	be	reached	by
people	with	widely	divergent	bases	of	authority	is	quite	limited.	I	am	thankful
for	my	evangelical	friends	who	write	extensive	critiques	of	liberal	theology,
but	I	do	not	think	that	everyone	is	called	to	do	that,	or	that	an	extensive
analysis	of	liberal	views	is	the	most	helpful	way	to	build	a	positive	system	of
theology	based	on	the	total	truthfulness	of	the	whole	Bible.	In	fact,	somewhat
like	the	boy	in	Hans	Christian	Andersen’s	tale	who	shouted,	“The	Emperor
has	no	clothes!”	I	think	someone	needs	to	say	that	it	is	doubtful	that	liberal
theologians	have	given	us	any	significant	insights	into	the	doctrinal	teachings
of	Scripture	that	are	not	already	to	be	found	in	evangelical	writers.
It	is	not	always	appreciated	that	the	world	of	conservative	evangelical
scholarship	is	so	rich	and	diverse	that	it	affords	ample	opportunity	for
exploration	of	different	viewpoints	and	insights	into	Scripture.	I	think	that
ultimately	we	will	attain	much	more	depth	of	understanding	of	Scripture
when	we	are	able	to	study	it	in	the	company	of	a	great	number	of	scholars
who	all	begin	with	the	conviction	that	the	Bible	is	completely	true	and
absolutely	authoritative.	The	cross-references	to	thirty-four	other	evangelical
systematic	theologies	that	I	have	put	at	the	end	of	each	chapter	reflect	this
conviction:	though	they	are	broken	down	into	seven	broad	theological
traditions	(Anglican/Episcopalian,	Arminian/Wesleyan/Methodist,	Baptist,
Dispensational,	Lutheran,	Reformed/Presbyterian,	and	Renewal/Charismatic/
Pentecostal),	they	all	would	hold	to	the	inerrancy	of	the	Bible	and	would
belong	to	what	would	be	called	a	conservative	evangelical	position	today.	(In
addition	to	these	thirty-four	conservative	evangelical	works,	I	have	also	added
to	each	chapter	a	section	of	cross-references	to	two	representative	Roman
Catholic	theologies,	because	Roman	Catholicism	continues	to	exercise	such	a
significant	influence	worldwide.)
5.	Hope	for	Progress	in	Doctrinal	Unity	in	the	Church.	
I	believe	that	there
is	still	much	hope	for	the	church	to	attain	deeper	and	purer	doctrinal
understanding,	and	to	overcome	old	barriers,	even	those	that	have	persisted
for	centuries.	Jesus	is	at	work	perfecting	his	church	“that	he	might	present	the
church	to	himself	in	splendor,	without	spot	or	wrinkle	or	any	such	thing,	that
she	might	be	holy	and	without	blemish”	(Eph.	5:27),	and	he	has	given	gifts	to
equip	the	church	“until	we	all	attain	to	the	unity	of	the	faith	and	of	the
knowledge	of	the	Son	of	God”	(Eph.	4:13).	Though	the	past	history	of	the
church	may	discourage	us,	these	Scriptures	remain	true,	and	we	should	not
abandon	hope	of	greater	agreement.	In	fact,	in	this	century	we	have	already
seen	much	greater	understanding	and	some	greater	doctrinal	agreement
between	Covenant	and	Dispensational	theologians,	and	between	charismatics
and	noncharismatics;	moreover,	I	think	the	church’s	understanding	of	biblical
inerrancy	and	of	spiritual	gifts	has	also	increased	significantly	in	the	last	few
decades.	I	believe	that	the	current	debate	over	appropriate	roles	for	men	and
women	in	marriage	and	the	church	will	eventually	result	in	much	greater
understanding	of	the	teaching	of	Scripture	as	well,	painful	though	the
controversy	may	be	at	the	present	time.	Therefore,	in	this	book	I	have	not
hesitated	to	raise	again	some	of	the	old	differences	(over	baptism,	the	Lord’s
Supper,	church	government,	the	millennium	and	the	tribulation,	and
predestination,	for	example)	in	the	hope	that,	in	some	cases	at	least,	a	fresh
look	at	Scripture	may	provoke	a	new	examination	of	these	doctrines	and	may
perhaps	prompt	some	movement	not	just	toward	greater	understanding	and
tolerance	of	other	viewpoints,	but	even	toward	greater	doctrinal	consensus	in
the	church.
6.	A	Sense	of	the	Urgent	Need	for	Greater	Doctrinal	Understanding	in	the
Whole	Church.	
I	am	convinced	that	there	is	an	urgent	need	in	the	church
today	for	much	greater	understanding	of	Christian	doctrine,	or	systematic
theology.	Not	only	pastors	and	teachers	need	to	understand	theology	in
greater	depth—the	
whole	church	
does	as	well.	One	day	by	God’s	grace	we
may	have	churches	full	of	Christians	who	can	discuss,	apply,	and	
live	
the
doctrinal	teachings	of	the	Bible	as	readily	as	they	can	discuss	the	details	of
their	own	jobs	or	hobbies—or	the	fortunes	of	their	favorite	sports	team	or
television	program.	It	is	not	that	Christians	lack	the	
ability	
to	understand
doctrine;	it	is	just	that	they	must	have	access	to	it	in	an	understandable	form.
Once	that	happens,	I	think	that	many	Christians	will	find	that	understanding
(and	living)	the	doctrines	of	Scripture	is	one	of	their	greatest	joys.
Many	people	have	helped	me	in	the	writing	of	this	book.	First	I	should
mention	my	students,	past	and	present,	both	at	Bethel	College	in	St.	Paul,
Minnesota	(1977–81),	and	then	at	Trinity	Evangelical	Divinity	School	(1981–
present).	Their	thoughtful,	insightful	contributions	during	classroom
discussions	have	influenced	every	chapter	of	this	book.
God	has	blessed	me	with	help	from	some	excellent	typists.	The	typing	of	the
manuscript	was	started	by	Sherry	Kull	several	years	ago.	Later,	Mary	Morris,
Ron	Tilley,	Kathryn	Sheehan,	Shelly	Mills,	Rebecca	Heidenreich,	Jenny	Hart,
and	Carol	Pederson	typed	several	portions.	Then	the	largest	part	of	the
manuscript	was	typed	with	great	skill	and	care	by	Tammy	Thomas,	who	also
helped	with	some	editing.	Andi	Ledesma	and	Joyce	Leong	cheerfully	helped
with	photocopying	many	times.	Finally,	Kim	Pennington	faithfully	and
accurately	typed	in	the	many	corrections	and	changes	that	came	during	the
editorial	process.	I	am	grateful	to	all	of	them	for	their	help.
John	O.	Stevenson	did	excellent	work	in	compiling	the	bibliographies,	and
Don	Rothwell	completed	a	significant	portion	of	the	cross-references	to	other
theology	texts.	H.	Scott	Baldwin,	Tom	Provenzola,	and	Mark	Rapinchuk	were
a	great	help	in	proofreading	and	in	library	research.	Mark	Rapinchuk	also
compiled	the	indexes	of	authors	and	Scripture	references.	Beth	Manley
provided	excellent	help	in	proofreading.	George	Knight	III,	Robert	Reymond,
Harold	Hoehner,	Robert	Saucy,	Doug	Moo,	Tom	Nettles,	Tom	McComiskey,
Doug	Halsne,	Steve	Nicholson,	Doug	Brandt,	Steve	Figard,	Gregg	Allison,
Ellyn	Clark,	and	Terry	Mortenson	provided	detailed	comments	on	different
portions.	Raymond	Dillard	kindly	provided	me	with	a	computerized	text	of
the	Westminster	Confession	of	Faith.	Bruce	Shauger	solved	my	computer
problems	several	times,	and	Tim	McLaughlin	repaired	my	computer	at	a
crucial	time.	My	long-time	friend	John	Hughes	gave	me	needed	advice	on
computers	and	manuscript	publication	several	times.	My	sons	also	helped	me
when	deadlines	approached:	Elliot	with	library	research,	and	Oliver	and
Alexander	(and	Alexander’s	friend	Matt	Tooley)	with	compiling	and
correcting	the	indexes.
One	person	has	had	greater	influence	on	the	final	form	of	this	book	than	any
other:	David	Kingdon,	Theological	Books	Editor	at	Inter-Varsity	Press,
England,	has	been	helpful	far	beyond	my	expectations	in	his	work	as	an
astute,	conscientious,	and	wise	editor.	He	has	worked	through	every	chapter
with	great	care,	suggesting	corrections,	additions,	and	deletions,	and
interacting	with	my	arguments	in	extensive	memos.	His	wide-ranging
knowledge	of	theology,	biblical	studies,	and	the	history	of	doctrine	has	been
of	immense	value	to	me,	and	the	book	is	much	better	as	a	result	of	his	work.
Moreover,	Frank	Entwistle	of	Inter-Varsity	Press	and	Stan	Gundry,	Jim	Ruark,
and	Laura	Weller	of	Zondervan	have	been	gracious	and	patient	with	me	about
many	details	regarding	publication	of	the	book.
I	could	not	have	completed	this	work	without	the	generous	provision	of
sabbaticals	from	Trinity	Evangelical	Divinity	School	in	the	fall	of	1983,	the
fall	of	1985,	the	winter	of	1989,	and	the	fall	of	1991,	and	I	am	grateful	to
Trinity’s	board	of	directors	for	allowing	me	this	time	to	write.	I	am	also	very
thankful	for	the	support	of	my	parents,	Arden	and	Jean	Grudem,	who
generously	provided	financial	help	that	enabled	me	to	write	during	these	and
other	times,	and	who	have	also	been	a	constant	encouragement	to	me	along
the	way,	both	in	their	prayers	and	in	their	unwavering	belief	that	a	book	like
this—written	in	nontechnical	language	so	that	they	and	thousands	of
Christians	like	them	could	understand	it—would	be	valuable	for	the	church.
I	think	that	almost	everyone	who	knew	me	was	praying	for	this	project	at
some	time	or	other—especially	my	student	advisees	over	several	years	at
Trinity,	and	many	friends	in	my	church.	I	have	frequently	been	aware	of	the
Lord’s	help	in	response	to	those	prayers,	giving	me	health	and	strength,
freedom	from	interruptions,	and	an	unwavering	desire	to	complete	the	book.
Most	of	all,	I	am	thankful	for	the	support	of	my	wife,	Margaret,	and	my	sons,
Elliot,	Oliver,	and	Alexander.	They	have	been	patient	and	encouraging,	have
prayed	for	me	and	loved	me,	and	continue	to	be	a	great	source	of	joy	in	my
life,	for	which	I	thank	God.
I	am	sure	that	this	book,	like	all	merely	human	books,	has	mistakes	and
oversights,	and	probably	some	faulty	arguments	as	well.	If	I	knew	where	they
were,	I	would	try	to	correct	them!	Therefore	I	would	be	grateful	if	any
interested	readers	would	send	me	suggestions	for	changes	and	corrections.	I
do	not	guarantee	that	I	can	acknowledge	every	letter,	but	I	will	give
consideration	to	the	material	in	every	letter	and	make	corrections	where	I	can.
“O	give	thanks	to	the	L
ORD
,	for	he	is	good;	for	his	steadfast	love	endures	for
ever!”	(Ps.	118:29).
“Not	to	us,	O	L
ORD
,	not	to	us,	but	to	your	name	give	glory”	(Ps.	115:1).
Wayne	Grudem	
Trinity	Evangelical	Divinity	School	
2065	Half	Day	Road	
Deerfield,	Illinois	60015	
USA
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	
1
Introduction	to	Systematic	Theology
What	is	systematic	theology?	Why	should	Christians	study	it?	How
should	we	study	it?
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
A.	Definition	of	Systematic	Theology
What	is	systematic	theology?	Many	different	definitions	have	been
given,	but	for	the	purposes	of	this	book	the	following	definition	will
be	used:	
Systematic	theology	is	any	study	that	answers	the	question,
“What	does	the	whole	Bible	teach	us	today?”	about	any	given
topic.
1
This	definition	indicates	that	systematic	theology	involves
collecting	and	understanding	all	the	relevant	passages	in	the	Bible
on	various	topics	and	then	summarizing	their	teachings	clearly	so
that	we	know	what	to	believe	about	each	topic.
1.
	Relationship	to	Other	Disciplines.
	The	emphasis	of	this	book	will	not
therefore	be	on	
historical	theology	
(a	historical	study	of	how	Christians	in
different	periods	have	understood	various	theological	topics)	or	
philosophical
theology	
(studying	theological	topics	largely	without	use	of	the	Bible,	but
using	the	tools	and	methods	of	philosophical	reasoning	and	what	can	be
known	about	God	from	observing	the	universe)	or	
apologetics	
(providing	a
defense	of	the	truthfulness	of	the	Christian	faith	for	the	purpose	of	convincing
unbelievers).	These	three	subjects,	which	are	worthwhile	subjects	for
Christians	to	pursue,	are	sometimes	also	included	in	a	broader	definition	of
the	term	
systematic	theology.	
In	fact,	some	consideration	of	historical,
philosophical,	and	apologetic	matters	will	be	found	at	points	throughout	this
book.	This	is	because	historical	study	informs	us	of	the	insights	gained	and
the	mistakes	made	by	others	previously	in	understanding	Scripture;
philosophical	study	helps	us	understand	right	and	wrong	thought	forms
common	in	our	culture	and	others;	and	apologetic	study	helps	us	bring	the
teachings	of	Scripture	to	bear	on	the	objections	raised	by	unbelievers.	But
these	areas	of	study	are	not	the	focus	of	this	volume,	which	rather	interacts
directly	with	the	biblical	text	in	order	to	understand	what	the	Bible	itself	says
to	us	about	various	theological	subjects.
If	someone	prefers	to	use	the	term	
systematic	theology	
in	the
broader	sense	just	mentioned	instead	of	the	narrow	sense	which	has
been	defined	above,	it	will	not	make	much	difference.
2
	Those	who
use	the	narrower	definition	will	agree	that	these	other	areas	of	study
definitely	contribute	in	a	positive	way	to	our	understanding	of
systematic	theology,	and	those	who	use	the	broader	definition	will
certainly	agree	that	historical	theology,	philosophical	theology,	and
apologetics	can	be	distinguished	from	the	process	of	collecting	and
synthesizing	all	the	relevant	Scripture	passages	for	various	topics.
Moreover,	even	though	historical	and	philosophical	studies	do
contribute	to	our	understanding	of	theological	questions,	only
Scripture	has	the	final	authority	to	define	what	we	are	to	believe,
3
and	it	is	therefore	appropriate	to	spend	some	time	focusing	on	the
process	of	analyzing	the	teaching	of	Scripture	itself.
Systematic	theology,	as	we	have	defined	it,	also	differs	from	
Old
Testament	theology,	New	Testament	theology,	
and	
biblical	theology.
These	three	disciplines	organize	their	topics	historically	and	in	the
order	the	topics	are	presented	in	the	Bible.	Therefore,	in	Old
Testament	theology,	one	might	ask,	“What	does	Deuteronomy	teach
about	prayer?”	or	“What	do	the	Psalms	teach	about	prayer?”	or
“What	does	Isaiah	teach	about	prayer?”	or	even,	“What	does	the
whole	Old	Testament	teach	about	prayer	and	how	is	that	teaching
developed	over	the	history	of	the	Old	Testament?”	In	New
Testament	theology	one	might	ask,	“What	does	John’s	gospel	teach
about	prayer?”	or	“What	does	Paul	teach	about	prayer?”	or	even
“What	does	the	New	Testament	teach	about	prayer	and	what	is	the
historical	development	of	that	teaching	as	it	progresses	through	the
New	Testament?”
“Biblical	theology”	has	a	technical	meaning	in	theological	studies.
It	is	the	larger	category	that	contains	both	Old	Testament	theology
and	New	Testament	theology	as	we	have	defined	them	above.
Biblical	theology	gives	special	attention	to	the	teachings	of
individual	authors	and	sections	
of	Scripture,	and	to	the	place	of
each	teaching	in	the	
historical	development	
of	Scripture.
4
	So	one
might	ask,	“What	is	the	historical	development	of	the	teaching
about	prayer	as	it	is	seen	throughout	the	history	of	the	Old
Testament	and	then	of	the	New	Testament?”	Of	course,	this
question	comes	very	close	to	the	question,	“What	does	the	whole
Bible	teach	us	today	about	prayer?”	(which	would	be	
systematic
theology	
by	our	definition).	It	then	becomes	evident	that	the
boundary	lines	between	these	various	disciplines	often	overlap	at
the	edges,	and	parts	of	one	study	blend	into	the	next.	Yet	there	is
still	a	difference,	for	biblical	theology	traces	the	historical
development	of	a	doctrine	and	the	way	in	which	one’s	place	at
some	point	in	that	historical	development	affects	one’s
understanding	and	application	of	that	particular	doctrine.	Biblical
theology	also	focuses	on	the	understanding	of	each	doctrine	that	the
biblical	authors	and	their	original	hearers	or	readers	possessed.
Systematic	theology,	on	the	other	hand,	makes	use	of	the	material
of	biblical	theology	and	often	builds	on	the	results	of	biblical
theology.	At	some	points,	especially	where	great	detail	and	care	is
needed	in	the	development	of	a	doctrine,	systematic	theology	will
even	use	a	biblical-theological	method,	analyzing	the	development
of	each	doctrine	through	the	historical	development	of	Scripture.
But	the	focus	of	systematic	theology	remains	different:	its	focus	is
on	the	collection	and	then	the	summary	of	the	teaching	of	all	the
biblical	passages	on	a	particular	subject.	Thus	systematic	theology
asks,	for	example,	“What	does	the	whole	Bible	teach	us	today	about
prayer?”	It	attempts	to	summarize	the	teaching	of	Scripture	in	a
brief,	understandable,	and	very	carefully	formulated	statement.
2.	Application	to	Life.
	Furthermore,	systematic	theology	focuses	on
summarizing	each	doctrine	as	it	should	be	understood	by	present-day
Christians.	This	will	sometimes	involve	the	use	of	terms	and	even	concepts
that	were	not	themselves	used	by	any	individual	biblical	author,	but	that	are
the	proper	result	of	combining	the	teachings	of	two	or	more	biblical	authors
on	a	particular	subject.	The	terms	
Trinity,	incarnation,	
and	
deity	of	Christ,	
for
example,	are	not	found	in	the	Bible,	but	they	usefully	summarize	biblical
concepts.
Defining	systematic	theology	to	include	“what	the	whole	Bible
teaches	us	
today”	implies	that	application	to	life	is	a	necessary	part
of	the	proper	pursuit	of	systematic	theology.	Thus	a	doctrine	under
consideration	is	seen	in	terms	of	its	practical	value	for	living	the
Christian	life.	Nowhere	in	Scripture	do	we	find	doctrine	studied	for
its	own	sake	or	in	isolation	from	life.	The	biblical	writers
consistently	apply	their	teaching	to	life.	Therefore,	any	Christian
reading	this	book	should	find	his	or	her	Christian	life	enriched	and
deepened	during	this	study;	indeed,	if	personal	spiritual	growth
does	not	occur,	then	the	book	has	not	been	written	properly	by	the
author	or	the	material	has	not	been	rightly	studied	by	the	reader.
3.	Systematic	Theology	and	Disorganized	Theology.
	If	we	use	this
definition	of	systematic	theology,	it	will	be	seen	that	most	Christians	actually
do	systematic	theology	(or	at	least	make	systematic-theological	statements)
many	times	a	week.	For	example:	“The	Bible	says	that	everyone	who	believes
in	Jesus	Christ	will	be	saved.”	“The	Bible	says	that	Jesus	Christ	is	the	only
way	to	God.”	“The	Bible	says	that	Jesus	is	coming	again.”	These	are	all
summaries	of	what	Scripture	says	and,	as	such,	they	are	systematic-
theological	statements.	In	fact,	every	time	a	Christian	says	something	about
what	the	whole	Bible	says,	he	or	she	is	in	a	sense	doing	“systematic
theology”—according	to	our	definition—by	thinking	about	various	topics	and
answering	the	question,	“What	does	the	whole	Bible	teach	us	today?”
5
How	then	does	this	book	differ	from	the	“systematic	theology”	that
most	Christians	do?	First,	it	treats	biblical	topics	in	a	
carefully
organized	way	
to	guarantee	that	all	important	topics	will	receive
thorough	consideration.	This	organization	also	provides	one	sort	of
check	against	inaccurate	analysis	of	individual	topics,	for	it	means
that	all	other	doctrines	that	are	treated	can	be	compared	with	each
topic	for	consistency	in	methodology	and	absence	of	contradictions
in	the	relationships	between	the	doctrines.	This	also	helps	to	ensure
balanced	consideration	of	complementary	doctrines:	Christ’s	deity
and	humanity	are	studied	together,	for	example,	as	are	God’s
sovereignty	and	man’s	responsibility,	so	that	wrong	conclusions
will	not	be	drawn	from	an	imbalanced	emphasis	on	only	one	aspect
of	the	full	biblical	presentation.
In	fact,	the	adjective	
systematic	
in	systematic	theology	should	be
understood	to	mean	something	like	“carefully	organized	by	topics,”
with	the	understanding	that	the	topics	studied	will	be	seen	to	fit
together	in	a	consistent	way,	and	will	include	all	the	major	doctrinal
topics	of	the	Bible.	Thus	“systematic”	should	be	thought	of	as	the
opposite	of	“randomly	arranged”	or	“disorganized.”	In	systematic
theology	topics	are	treated	in	an	orderly	or	“systematic”	way.
A	second	difference	between	this	book	and	the	way	most	Christians
do	systematic	theology	is	that	it	treats	topics	in	
much	more	detail
than	most	Christians	do.	For	example,	an	ordinary	Christian	as	a
result	of	regular	reading	of	the	Bible	may	make	the	theological
statement,	“The	Bible	says	that	everyone	who	believes	in	Jesus
Christ	will	be	saved.”	That	is	a	perfectly	true	summary	of	a	major
biblical	teaching.	However,	in	this	book	we	devote	several	pages	to
elaborating	more	precisely	what	it	means	to	“believe	in	Jesus
Christ,”
6
	and	twelve	chapters	(chapters	32	–	43)	will	be	devoted	to
explaining	what	it	means	to	“be	saved”	in	all	of	the	many
implications	of	that	term.
Third,	a	formal	study	of	systematic	theology	will	make	it	possible
to	formulate	summaries	of	biblical	teachings	with	
much	more
accuracy	
than	Christians	would	normally	arrive	at	without	such	a
study.	In	systematic	theology,	summaries	of	biblical	teachings	must
be	worded	precisely	to	guard	against	misunderstandings	and	to
exclude	false	teachings.
Fourth,	a	good	theological	analysis	must	find	and	treat	fairly	
all	the
relevant	Bible	passages	
for	each	particular	topic,	not	just	some	or	a
few	of	the	relevant	passages.	This	often	means	that	it	must	depend
on	the	results	of	careful	exegesis	(or	interpretation)	of	Scripture
generally	agreed	upon	by	evangelical	interpreters	or,	where	there
are	significant	differences	of	interpretation,	systematic	theology
will	include	detailed	exegesis	at	certain	points.
Because	of	the	large	number	of	topics	covered	in	a	study	of
systematic	theology	and	because	of	the	great	detail	with	which
these	topics	are	analyzed,	it	is	inevitable	that	someone	studying	a
systematic	theology	text	or	taking	a	course	in	systematic	theology
for	the	first	time	will	have	many	of	his	or	her	own	personal	beliefs
challenged	or	modified,	refined	or	enriched.	It	is	of	utmost
importance	therefore	that	each	person	beginning	such	a	course
firmly	resolve	in	his	or	her	own	mind	to	abandon	as	false	any	idea
which	is	found	to	be	clearly	contradicted	by	the	teaching	of
Scripture.	But	it	is	also	very	important	for	each	person	to	resolve
not	to	believe	any	individual	doctrine	simply	because	this	textbook
or	some	other	textbook	or	teacher	says	that	it	is	true,	unless	this
book	or	the	instructor	in	a	course	can	convince	the	student	from	the
text	of	Scripture	itself.	It	is	Scripture	alone,	not	“conservative
evangelical	tradition”	or	any	other	human	authority,	that	must
function	as	the	normative	authority	for	the	definition	of	what	we
should	believe.
4.	What	Are	Doctrines?
	In	this	book,	the	word	
doctrine	
will	be	understood
in	the	following	way:	
A	doctrine	is	what	the	whole	Bible	teaches	us	today
about	some	particular	topic.	
This	definition	is	directly	related	to	our	earlier
definition	of	systematic	theology,	since	it	shows	that	a	“doctrine”	is	simply
the	result	of	the	process	of	doing	systematic	theology	with	regard	to	one
particular	topic.	Understood	in	this	way,	doctrines	can	be	very	broad	or	very
narrow.	We	can	speak	of	“the	doctrine	of	God”	as	a	major	doctrinal	category,
including	a	summary	of	all	that	the	Bible	teaches	us	today	about	God.	Such	a
doctrine	would	be	exceptionally	large.	On	the	other	hand,	we	may	also	speak
more	narrowly	of	the	doctrine	of	God’s	eternity,	or	the	doctrine	of	the	Trinity,
or	the	doctrine	of	God’s	justice.
7
The	book	is	divided	into	seven	major	sections	according	to	seven
major	“doctrines”	or	areas	of	study:
Part	1:		The	Doctrine	of	the	Word	of	God
Part	2:		The	Doctrine	of	God
Part	3:		The	Doctrine	of	Man
Part	4:		The	Doctrines	of	Christ	and	the	Holy	Spirit
Part	5:		The	Doctrine	of	the	Application	of	Redemption
Part	6:		The	Doctrine	of	the	Church
Part	7:		The	Doctrine	of	the	Future
Within	each	of	these	major	doctrinal	categories	many	more	specific	teachings
have	been	selected	as	appropriate	for	inclusion.	Generally	these	meet	at	least
one	of	the	following	three	criteria:	(1)	they	are	doctrines	that	are	most
emphasized	in	Scripture;	(2)	they	are	doctrines	that	have	been	most
significant	throughout	the	history	of	the	church	and	have	been	important	for
all	Christians	at	all	times;	(3)	they	are	doctrines	that	have	become	important
for	Christians	in	the	present	situation	in	the	history	of	the	church	(even	though
some	of	these	doctrines	may	not	have	been	of	such	great	interest	earlier	in
church	history).	Some	examples	of	doctrines	in	the	third	category	would	be
the	doctrine	of	the	inerrancy	of	Scripture,	the	doctrine	of	baptism	in	the	Holy
Spirit,	the	doctrine	of	Satan	and	demons	with	particular	reference	to	spiritual
warfare,	the	doctrine	of	spiritual	gifts	in	the	New	Testament	age,	and	the
doctrine	of	the	creation	of	man	as	male	and	female	in	relation	to	the
understanding	of	roles	appropriate	to	men	and	women	today.	Because	of	their
relevance	to	the	contemporary	situation,	doctrines	such	as	these	have	received
more	emphasis	in	the	present	volume	than	in	most	traditional	textbooks	of
systematic	theology.
Finally,	what	is	the	difference	between	systematic	theology	and
Christian	ethics?	
Although	there	is	inevitably	some	overlap
between	the	study	of	theology	and	the	study	of	ethics,	I	have	tried
to	maintain	a	distinction	in	emphasis.	The	emphasis	of	systematic
theology	is	on	what	God	wants	us	to	
believe	
and	to	
know,	
while	the
emphasis	in	Christian	ethics	is	on	what	God	wants	us	to	
do	
and
what	
attitudes	
he	wants	us	to	have.	Such	a	distinction	is	reflected	in
the	following	definition:	
Christian	ethics	is	any	study	that	answers
the	question,	“What	does	God	require	us	to	do	and	what	attitudes
does	he	require	us	to	have	today?”	with	regard	to	any	given
situation.	
Thus	theology	focuses	on	ideas	while	ethics	focuses	on
situations	in	life.	Theology	tells	us	how	we	should	think	while
ethics	tells	us	how	we	should	live.	A	textbook	on	ethics,	for
example,	would	discuss	topics	such	as	marriage	and	divorce,	lying
and	telling	the	truth,	stealing	and	ownership	of	property,	abortion,
birth	control,	homosexuality,	the	role	of	civil	government,
discipline	of	children,	capital	punishment,	war,	care	for	the	poor,
racial	discrimination,	and	so	forth.	Of	course	there	is	some	overlap:
theology	must	be	applied	to	life	(therefore	it	is	often	ethical	to	some
degree).	And	ethics	must	be	based	on	proper	ideas	of	God	and	his
world	(therefore	it	is	theological	to	some	degree).
This	book	will	emphasize	systematic	theology,	though	it	will	not
hesitate	to	apply	theology	to	life	where	such	application	comes
readily.	Still,	for	a	thorough	treatment	of	Christian	ethics,	another
textbook	similar	to	this	in	scope	would	be	necessary.
B.	Initial	Assumptions	of	This	Book
We	begin	with	two	assumptions	or	presuppositions:	(1)	that	the
Bible	is	true	and	that	it	is,	in	fact,	our	only	absolute	standard	of
truth;	(2)	that	the	God	who	is	spoken	of	in	the	Bible	exists,	and	that
he	is	who	the	Bible	says	he	is:	the	Creator	of	heaven	and	earth	and
all	things	in	them.	These	two	presuppositions,	of	course,	are	always
open	to	later	adjustment	or	modification	or	deeper	confirmation,	but
at	this	point,	these	two	assumptions	form	the	point	at	which	we
begin.
C.	Why	Should	Christians	Study	Theology?
Why	should	Christians	study	systematic	theology?	That	is,	why
should	we	engage	in	the	process	of	collecting	and	summarizing	the
teachings	of	many	individual	Bible	passages	on	particular	topics?
Why	is	it	not	sufficient	simply	to	continue	reading	the	Bible
regularly	every	day	of	our	lives?
1.
	The	Basic	Reason.
	Many	answers	have	been	given	to	this	question,	but	too
often	they	leave	the	impression	that	systematic	theology	somehow	can
“improve”	on	the	Bible	by	doing	a	better	job	of	organizing	its	teachings	or
explaining	them	more	clearly	than	the	Bible	itself	has	done.	Thus	we	may
begin	implicitly	to	deny	the	clarity	of	Scripture	(
see	chapter	6
)	or	the
sufficiency	of	Scripture	(
see	chapter	8
).
However,	Jesus	commanded	his	disciples	and	now	commands	us
also	to	
teach	
believers	to	observe	all	that	he	commanded:
Go	therefore	and	make	disciples	of	all	nations,	baptizing	them	in	the
name	of	the	Father	and	of	the	Son	and	of	the	Holy	Spirit,	
teaching
them	
to	observe	all	that	I	have	commanded	you;	and	lo,	I	am	with	you
always,	to	the	close	of	the	age.	(Matt.	28:19–20)
Now	to	teach	all	that	Jesus	commanded,	in	a	narrow	sense,	is	simply	to	teach
the	content	of	the	oral	teaching	of	Jesus	as	it	is	recorded	in	the	gospel
narratives.	However,	in	a	broader	sense,	“all	that	Jesus	commanded”	includes
the	interpretation	and	application	of	his	life	and	teachings,	because	in	the
book	of	Acts	it	is	implied	that	it	contains	a	narrative	of	what	Jesus	
continued
to	do	and	teach	through	the	apostles	after	his	resurrection	(note	that	1:1
speaks	of	“all	that	Jesus	
began	
to	do	and	teach”).	“All	that	Jesus	commanded”
can	also	include	the	Epistles,	since	they	were	written	under	the	supervision	of
the	Holy	Spirit	and	were	also	considered	to	be	a	“command	of	the	Lord”	(1
Cor.	14:37;	see	also	John	14:26;	16:13;	1	Thess.	4:15;	2	Peter	3:2;	and	Rev.
1:1–3).	Thus	in	a	larger	sense,	“all	that	Jesus	commanded”	includes	all	of	the
New	Testament.
Furthermore,	when	we	consider	that	the	New	Testament	writings
endorse	the	absolute	confidence	Jesus	had	in	the	authority	and
reliability	of	the	Old	Testament	Scriptures	as	God’s	words	(see
chapter	4
),	and	when	we	realize	that	the	New	Testament	epistles
also	endorse	this	view	of	the	Old	Testament	as	absolutely
authoritative	words	of	God,	then	it	becomes	evident	that	we	cannot
teach	“all	that	Jesus	commanded”	without	including	all	of	the	Old
Testament	(rightly	understood	in	the	various	ways	in	which	it
applies	to	the	new	covenant	age	in	the	history	of	redemption)	as
well.
The	task	of	fulfilling	the	Great	Commission	includes	therefore	not
only	evangelism	but	also	
teaching.	
And	the	task	of	teaching	all	that
Jesus	commanded	us	is,	in	a	broad	sense,	the	task	of	teaching	what
the	whole	Bible	says	to	us	today.	To	effectively	teach	ourselves	and
to	teach	others	what	the	whole	Bible	says,	it	is	necessary	to	
collect
and	
summarize	
all	the	Scripture	passages	on	a	particular	subject.
For	example,	if	someone	asks	me,	“What	does	the	Bible	teach
about	Christ’s	return?”	I	could	say,	“Just	keep	reading	your	Bible
and	you’ll	find	out.”	But	if	the	questioner	begins	reading	at	Genesis
1:1	it	will	be	a	long	time	before	he	or	she	finds	the	answer	to	his
question.	By	that	time	many	other	questions	will	have	needed
answers,	and	his	list	of	unanswered	questions	will	begin	to	grow
very	long	indeed.	What	does	the	Bible	teach	about	the	work	of	the
Holy	Spirit?	What	does	the	Bible	teach	about	prayer?	What	does
the	Bible	teach	about	sin?	There	simply	is	not	time	in	our	lifetimes
to	read	through	the	entire	Bible	looking	for	an	answer	for	ourselves
every	time	a	doctrinal	question	arises.	Therefore,	for	us	to	learn
what	the	Bible	says,	it	is	very	helpful	to	have	the	benefit	of	the
work	of	others	who	have	searched	through	Scripture	and	found
answers	to	these	various	topics.
We	can	teach	others	most	effectively	if	we	can	direct	them	to	the
most	relevant	passages	and	suggest	an	appropriate	summary	of	the
teachings	of	those	passages.	Then	the	person	who	questions	us	can
inspect	those	passages	quickly	for	himself	or	herself	and	learn
much	more	rapidly	what	the	teaching	of	the	Bible	is	on	a	particular
subject.	Thus	the	necessity	of	systematic	theology	for	teaching	what
the	Bible	says	comes	about	primarily	because	we	are	finite	in	our
memory	and	in	the	amount	of	time	at	our	disposal.
The	basic	reason	for	studying	systematic	theology,	then,	is	that	it
enables	us	to	teach	ourselves	and	others	what	the	whole	Bible	says,
thus	fulfilling	the	second	part	of	the	Great	Commission.
2.	The	Benefits	to	Our	Lives.
	Although	the	basic	reason	for	studying
systematic	theology	is	that	it	is	a	means	of	obedience	to	our	Lord’s	command,
there	are	some	additional	specific	benefits	that	come	from	such	study.
First,	studying	theology	helps	us	
overcome	our	wrong	ideas.	
If
there	were	no	sin	in	our	hearts,	we	could	read	the	Bible	from	cover
to	cover	and,	although	we	would	not	immediately	learn	everything
in	the	Bible,	we	would	most	likely	learn	only	true	things	about	God
and	his	creation.	Every	time	we	read	it	we	would	learn	more	true
things	and	we	would	not	rebel	or	refuse	to	accept	anything	we
found	written	there.	But	with	sin	in	our	hearts	we	retain	some
rebelliousness	against	God.	At	various	points	there	are—for	all	of
us—biblical	teachings	which	for	one	reason	or	another	we	do	not
want	to	accept.	The	study	of	systematic	theology	is	of	help	in
overcoming	those	rebellious	ideas.
For	example,	suppose	there	is	someone	who	does	not	want	to
believe	that	Jesus	is	personally	coming	back	to	earth	again.	We
could	show	this	person	one	verse	or	perhaps	two	that	speak	of
Jesus’	return	to	earth,	but	the	person	might	still	find	a	way	to	evade
the	force	of	those	verses	or	read	a	different	meaning	into	them.	But
if	we	collect	twenty-five	or	thirty	verses	that	say	that	Jesus	is
coming	back	to	earth	personally	and	write	them	all	out	on	paper,
our	friend	who	hesitated	to	believe	in	Christ’s	return	is	much	more
likely	to	be	persuaded	by	the	breadth	and	diversity	of	biblical
evidence	for	this	doctrine.	Of	course,	we	all	have	areas	like	that,
areas	where	our	understanding	of	the	Bible’s	teaching	is	inadequate.
In	these	areas,	it	is	helpful	for	us	to	be	confronted	with	the	
total
weight	of	the	teaching	of	Scripture	
on	that	subject,	so	that	we	will
more	readily	be	persuaded	even	against	our	initial	wrongful
inclinations.
Second,	studying	systematic	theology	helps	us	to	be	
able	to	make
better	decisions	later	
on	new	questions	of	doctrine	that	may	arise.
We	cannot	know	what	new	doctrinal	controversies	will	arise	in	the
churches	in	which	we	will	live	and	minister	ten,	twenty,	or	thirty
years	from	now,	if	the	Lord	does	not	return	before	then.	These	new
doctrinal	controversies	will	sometimes	include	questions	that	no
one	has	faced	very	carefully	before.	Christians	will	be	asking,
“What	does	the	whole	Bible	say	about	this	subject?”	(The	precise
nature	of	biblical	inerrancy	and	the	appropriate	understanding	of
biblical	teaching	on	gifts	of	the	Holy	Spirit	are	two	examples	of
questions	that	have	arisen	in	our	century	with	much	more
forcefulness	than	ever	before	in	the	history	of	the	church.)
Whatever	the	new	doctrinal	controversies	are	in	future	years,	those
who	have	learned	systematic	theology	well	will	be	much	better	able
to	answer	the	new	questions	that	arise.	The	reason	for	this	is	that
everything	that	the	Bible	says	is	somehow	related	to	everything	else
the	Bible	says	(for	it	all	fits	together	in	a	consistent	way,	at	least
within	God’s	own	understanding	of	reality,	and	in	the	nature	of	God
and	creation	as	they	really	are).	Thus	the	new	question	will	be
related	to	much	that	has	already	been	learned	from	Scripture.	The
more	thoroughly	that	earlier	material	has	been	learned,	the	better
able	we	will	be	to	deal	with	those	new	questions.
This	benefit	extends	even	more	broadly.	We	face	problems	of
applying	Scripture	to	life	in	many	more	contexts	than	formal
doctrinal	discussions.	What	does	the	Bible	teach	about	husband-
wife	relationships?	About	raising	children?	About	witnessing	to	a
friend	at	work?	What	principles	does	Scripture	give	us	for	studying
psychology,	or	economics,	or	the	natural	sciences?	How	does	it
guide	us	in	spending	money,	or	in	saving,	or	in	tithing?	In	every
area	of	inquiry	certain	theological	principles	will	come	to	bear,	and
those	who	have	learned	well	the	theological	teachings	of	the	Bible
will	be	much	better	able	to	make	decisions	that	are	pleasing	to	God.
A	helpful	analogy	at	this	point	is	that	of	a	jigsaw	puzzle.	If	the
puzzle	represents	“what	the	whole	Bible	teaches	us	today	about
everything”	then	a	course	in	systematic	theology	would	be	like
filling	in	the	border	and	some	of	the	major	items	pictured	in	the
puzzle.	But	we	will	never	know	everything	that	the	Bible	teaches
about	everything,	so	our	jigsaw	puzzle	will	have	many	gaps,	many
pieces	that	remain	to	be	put	in.	Solving	a	new	real-life	problem	is
analogous	to	filling	in	another	section	of	the	jigsaw	puzzle:	the
more	pieces	one	has	in	place	correctly	to	begin	with,	the	easier	it	is
to	fit	new	pieces	in,	and	the	less	apt	one	is	to	make	mistakes.	In	this
book	the	goal	is	to	enable	Christians	to	put	into	their	“theological
jigsaw	puzzle”	as	many	pieces	with	as	much	accuracy	as	possible,
and	to	encourage	Christians	to	go	on	putting	in	more	and	more
correct	pieces	for	the	rest	of	their	lives.	The	Christian	doctrines
studied	here	will	act	as	guidelines	to	help	in	the	filling	in	of	all
other	areas,	areas	that	pertain	to	all	aspects	of	truth	in	all	aspects	of
life.
Third,	studying	systematic	theology	will	
help	us	grow	as
Christians.	
The	more	we	know	about	God,	about	his	Word,	about
his	relationships	to	the	world	and	mankind,	the	better	we	will	trust
him,	the	more	fully	we	will	praise	him,	and	the	more	readily	we
will	obey	him.	Studying	systematic	theology	rightly	will	make	us
more	mature	Christians.	If	it	does	not	do	this,	we	are	not	studying	it
in	the	way	God	intends.
In	fact,	the	Bible	often	connects	sound	doctrine	with	maturity	in
Christian	living:	Paul	speaks	of	“
the	teaching	which	accords	with
godliness
”	(1	Tim.	6:3)	and	says	that	his	work	as	an	apostle	is	“to
further	the	faith	of	God’s	elect	and	their	knowledge	of	
the	truth
which	accords	with	godliness
”	(Titus	1:1).	By	contrast,	he	indicates
that	all	kinds	of	disobedience	and	immorality	are	“contrary	to	sound
doctrine”	(1	Tim.	1:10).
In	connection	with	this	idea	it	is	appropriate	to	ask	what	the
difference	is	between	a	“major	doctrine”	and	a	“minor	doctrine.”
Christians	often	say	they	want	to	seek	agreement	in	the	church	on
major	doctrines	but	also	to	allow	for	differences	on	minor	doctrines.
I	have	found	the	following	guideline	useful:
A	major	doctrine	is	one	that	has	a	significant	impact	on	our	thinking
about	other	doctrines,	or	that	has	a	significant	impact	on	how	we	live
the	Christian	life.	A	minor	doctrine	is	one	that	has	very	little	impact
on	how	we	think	about	other	doctrines,	and	very	little	impact	on	how
we	live	the	Christian	life.
By	this	standard	doctrines	such	as	the	authority	of	the	Bible
(chapter	4),	the	Trinity	(chapter	14),	the	deity	of	Christ	(chapter
26),	justification	by	faith	(chapter	36),	and	many	others	would
rightly	be	considered	major	doctrines.	People	who	disagree	with	the
historic	evangelical	understanding	of	any	of	these	doctrines	will
have	wide	areas	of	difference	with	evangelical	Christians	who
affirm	these	doctrines.	By	contrast,	it	seems	to	me	that	differences
over	forms	of	church	government	(chapter	47)	or	some	details
about	the	Lord’s	Supper	(chapter	50)	or	the	timing	of	the	great
tribulation	(chapter	55)	concern	minor	doctrines.	Christians	who
differ	over	these	things	can	agree	on	perhaps	every	other	area	of
doctrine,	can	live	Christian	lives	that	differ	in	no	important	way,
and	can	have	genuine	fellowship	with	one	another.
Of	course,	we	may	find	doctrines	that	fall	somewhere	between
“major”	and	“minor”	according	to	this	standard.	For	example,
Christians	may	differ	over	the	degree	of	significance	that	should
attach	to	the	doctrine	of	baptism	(chapter	49)	or	the	millennium
(chapter	55)	or	the	extent	of	the	atonement	(chapter	27).	That	is
only	natural,	because	many	doctrines	have	
some	
influence	on	other
doctrines	or	on	life,	but	we	may	differ	over	whether	we	think	it	to
be	a	“significant”	influence.	We	could	even	recognize	that	there
will	be	a	range	of	significance	here	and	just	say	that	the	more
influence	a	doctrine	has	on	other	doctrines	and	on	life,	the	more
“major”	it	becomes.	This	amount	of	influence	may	even	vary
according	to	the	historical	circumstances	and	needs	of	the	church	at
any	given	time.	In	such	cases,	Christians	will	need	to	ask	God	to
give	them	mature	wisdom	and	sound	judgment	as	they	try	to
determine	to	what	extent	a	doctrine	should	be	considered	“major”
in	their	particular	circumstances.
D.	A	Note	on	Two	Objections	to	the	Study	of	Systematic	Theology
1.
	“The	Conclusions	Are	‘Too	Neat’	to	be	True.”
	Some	scholars	look	with
suspicion	at	systematic	theology	when—or	even	because—its	teachings	fit
together	in	a	noncontradictory	way.	They	object	that	the	results	are	“too	neat”
and	that	systematic	theologians	must	therefore	be	squeezing	the	Bible’s
teachings	into	an	artificial	mold,	distorting	the	true	meaning	of	Scripture	to
get	an	orderly	set	of	beliefs.
To	this	objection	two	responses	can	be	made:	(1)	We	must	first	ask
the	people	making	the	objection	to	tell	us	at	what	specific	points
Scripture	has	been	misinterpreted,	and	then	we	must	deal	with	the
understanding	of	those	passages.	Perhaps	mistakes	have	been	made,
and	in	that	case	there	should	be	corrections.
Yet	it	is	also	possible	that	the	objector	will	have	no	specific
passages	in	mind,	or	no	clearly	erroneous	interpretations	to	point	to
in	the	works	of	the	most	responsible	evangelical	theologians.	Of
course,	incompetent	exegesis	can	be	found	in	the	writings	of	the
less	competent	scholars	in	
any	
field	of	biblical	studies,	not	just	in
systematic	theology,	but	those	“bad	examples”	constitute	an
objection	not	against	the	scholar’s	field	but	against	the	incompetent
scholar	himself.
It	is	very	important	that	the	objector	be	specific	at	this	point
because	this	objection	is	sometimes	made	by	those	who—perhaps
unconsciously—have	adopted	from	our	culture	a	skeptical	view	of
the	possibility	of	finding	universally	true	conclusions	about
anything,	even	about	God	from	his	Word.	This	kind	of	skepticism
regarding	theological	truth	is	especially	common	in	the	modern
university	world	where	“systematic	theology”—if	it	is	studied	at	all
—is	studied	only	from	the	perspectives	of	philosophical	theology
and	historical	theology	(including	perhaps	a	historical	study	of	the
various	ideas	that	were	believed	by	the	early	Christians	who	wrote
the	New	Testament,	and	by	other	Christians	at	that	time	and
throughout	church	history).	In	this	kind	of	intellectual	climate	the
study	of	“systematic	theology”	as	defined	in	this	chapter	would	be
considered	impossible,	because	the	Bible	would	be	assumed	to	be
merely	the	work	of	many	human	authors	who	wrote	out	of	diverse
cultures	and	experiences	over	the	course	of	more	than	one	thousand
years:	trying	to	find	“what	the	whole	Bible	teaches”	about	any
subject	would	be	thought	nearly	as	hopeless	as	trying	to	find	“what
all	philosophers	teach”	about	some	question,	for	the	answer	in	both
cases	would	be	thought	to	be	not	one	view	but	many	diverse	and
often	conflicting	views.	This	skeptical	viewpoint	must	be	rejected
by	evangelicals	who	see	Scripture	as	the	product	of	human	
and
divine	authorship,	and	therefore	as	a	collection	of	writings	that
teach	noncontradictory	truths	about	God	and	about	the	universe	he
created.
(2)	Second,	it	must	be	answered	that	in	God’s	own	mind,	and	in	the
nature	of	reality	itself,	
true	
facts	and	ideas	are	all	consistent	with
one	another.	Therefore	if	we	have	accurately	understood	the
teachings	of	God	in	Scripture	we	should	expect	our	conclusions	to
“fit	together”	and	be	mutually	consistent.	Internal	consistency,	then,
is	an	argument	for,	not	against,	any	individual	results	of	systematic
theology.
2.	“The	Choice	of	Topics	Dictates	the	Conclusions.”
	Another	general
objection	to	systematic	theology	concerns	the	choice	and	arrangement	of
topics,	and	even	the	fact	that	such	topically	arranged	study	of	Scripture,	using
categories	sometimes	different	from	those	found	in	Scripture	itself,	is	done	at
all.	Why	are	
these	
theological	topics	treated	rather	than	just	the	topics
emphasized	by	the	biblical	authors,	and	why	are	the	topics	
arranged	in	this
way	
rather	than	in	some	other	way?	Perhaps—this	objection	would	say—our
traditions	and	our	cultures	have	determined	the	topics	we	treat	and	the
arrangement	of	topics,	so	that	the	results	of	this	systematic-theological	study
of	Scripture,	though	acceptable	in	our	own	theological	tradition,	will	in	fact
be	untrue	to	Scripture	itself.
A	variant	of	this	objection	is	the	statement	that	our	starting	point
often	determines	our	conclusions	on	controversial	topics:	if	we
decide	to	start	with	an	emphasis	on	the	divine	authorship	of
Scripture,	for	example,	we	will	end	up	believing	in	biblical
inerrancy,	but	if	we	start	with	an	emphasis	on	the	human	authorship
of	Scripture,	we	will	end	up	believing	there	are	some	errors	in	the
Bible.	Similarly,	if	we	start	with	an	emphasis	on	God’s	sovereignty,
we	will	end	up	as	Calvinists,	but	if	we	start	with	an	emphasis	on
man’s	ability	to	make	free	choices,	we	will	end	up	as	Arminians,
8
and	so	forth.	This	objection	makes	it	sound	as	if	the	most	important
theological	questions	could	probably	be	decided	by	flipping	a	coin
to	decide	where	to	start,	since	
different	
and	
equally	valid
conclusions	will	inevitably	be	reached	from	the	different	starting
points.
Those	who	make	such	an	objection	often	suggest	that	the	best	way
to	avoid	this	problem	is	not	to	study	or	teach	systematic	theology	at
all,	but	to	limit	our	topical	studies	to	the	field	of	biblical	theology,
treating	only	the	topics	and	themes	the	biblical	authors	themselves
emphasize	and	describing	the	historical	development	of	these
biblical	themes	through	the	Bible.
In	response	to	this	objection,	much	of	the	discussion	in	this	chapter
about	the	necessity	to	teach	Scripture	will	be	relevant.	Our	choice
of	topics	need	not	be	restricted	to	the	main	concerns	of	the	biblical
authors,	for	our	goal	is	to	find	out	what	God	requires	of	us	in	all
areas	of	concern	to	us	today.
For	example,	it	was	not	the	
main	
concern	of	any	New	Testament
author	to	explain	such	topics	as	“baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit,”	or
women’s	roles	in	the	church,	or	the	doctrine	of	the	Trinity,	but	these
are	valid	areas	of	concern	for	us	today,	and	we	must	look	at	all	the
places	in	Scripture	that	have	relevance	for	those	topics	(whether
those	specific	terms	are	mentioned	or	not,	and	whether	those
themes	are	of	primary	concern	to	each	passage	we	examine	or	not)
if	we	are	going	to	be	able	to	understand	and	explain	to	others	“what
the	whole	Bible	teaches”	about	them.
The	only	alternative—for	we	
will	
think	
something	
about	those
subjects—is	to	form	our	opinions	haphazardly	from	a	general
impression	of	what	we	feel	to	be	a	“biblical”	position	on	each
subject,	or	perhaps	to	buttress	our	positions	with	careful	analysis	of
one	or	two	relevant	texts,	yet	with	no	guarantee	that	those	texts
present	a	balanced	view	of	“the	whole	counsel	of	God”	(Acts
20:27)	on	the	subject	being	considered.	In	fact	this	approach—one
all	too	common	in	evangelical	circles	today—could,	I	suppose,	be
called	“unsystematic	theology”	or	even	“disorderly	and	random
theology”!	Such	an	alternative	is	too	subjective	and	too	subject	to
cultural	pressures.	It	tends	toward	doctrinal	fragmentation	and
widespread	doctrinal	uncertainty,	leaving	the	church	theologically
immature,	like	“children,	tossed	to	and	fro	and	carried	about	with
every	wind	of	doctrine”	(Eph.	4:14).
Concerning	the	objection	about	the	choice	and	sequence	of	topics,
there	is	nothing	to	prevent	us	from	going	to	Scripture	to	look	for
answers	to	
any	
doctrinal	questions,	considered	in	
any	sequence.
The	sequence	of	topics	in	this	book	is	a	very	common	one	and	has
been	adopted	because	it	is	orderly	and	lends	itself	well	to	learning
and	teaching.	But	the	chapters	could	be	read	in	any	sequence	one
wanted	and	the	conclusions	should	not	be	different,	nor	should	the
persuasiveness	of	the	arguments—if	they	are	rightly	derived	from
Scripture—be	significantly	diminished.	In	fact,	I	suspect	that	most
readers	of	this	book	will	not	read	it	through	from	chapter	1	to
chapter	57,	but	will	begin	with	the	chapters	of	most	interest	to
them,	and	read	others	later.	That	does	not	really	matter,	because	I
have	tried	to	write	the	chapters	so	that	they	can	be	read	as
independent	units,	and	I	have	added	cross-references	to	sections	in
other	chapters	where	relevant.	Whether	one	reads	the	chapter	on	the
new	heavens	and	new	earth	(chapter	57)	first	or	last	or	somewhere
in	between,	the	arguments	will	be	the	same,	the	Scripture	passages
quoted	for	support	will	be	the	same,	and	the	conclusions	should	be
the	same.
E.	How	Should	Christians	Study	Systematic	Theology?
How	then	should	we	study	systematic	theology?	The	Bible	provides
some	guidelines	for	answering	this	question.
1.
	We	Should	Study	Systematic	Theology	With	Prayer.
	If	studying
systematic	theology	is	simply	a	certain	way	of	studying	the	Bible,	then	the
passages	in	Scripture	that	talk	about	the	way	in	which	we	should	study	God’s
Word	give	guidance	to	us	in	this	task.	Just	as	the	psalmist	prays	in	Psalm
119:18,	“Open	my	eyes,	that	I	may	behold	wondrous	things	out	of	your	law,”
so	we	should	pray	and	seek	God’s	help	in	understanding	his	Word.	Paul	tells
us	in	1	Corinthians	2:14	that	“the	unspiritual	man	does	not	receive	the	gifts	of
the	Spirit	of	God,	for	they	are	folly	to	him,	and	he	is	not	able	to	understand
them	because	they	are	spiritually	discerned.”	Studying	theology	is	therefore	a
spiritual	activity	in	which	we	need	the	help	of	the	Holy	Spirit.
No	matter	how	intelligent,	if	the	student	does	not	continue	to	pray
for	God	to	give	him	or	her	an	understanding	mind	and	a	believing
and	humble	heart,	and	the	student	does	not	maintain	a	personal
walk	with	the	Lord,	then	the	teachings	of	Scripture	will	be
misunderstood	and	disbelieved,	doctrinal	error	will	result,	and	the
mind	and	heart	of	the	student	will	not	be	changed	for	the	better	but
for	the	worse.	Students	of	systematic	theology	should	resolve	at	the
beginning	to	keep	their	lives	free	from	any	disobedience	to	God	or
any	known	sin	that	would	disrupt	their	relationship	with	him.	They
should	resolve	to	maintain	with	great	regularity	their	own	personal
devotional	lives.	They	should	continually	pray	for	wisdom	and
understanding	of	Scripture.
Since	it	is	the	Holy	Spirit	who	gives	us	the	ability	rightly	to
understand	Scripture,	we	need	to	realize	that	the	proper	thing	to	do,
particularly	when	we	are	unable	to	understand	some	passage	or
some	doctrine	of	Scripture,	is	to	pray	for	God’s	help.	Often	what	we
need	is	not	more	data	but	more	insight	into	the	data	we	already
have	available.	This	insight	is	given	only	by	the	Holy	Spirit	(cf.	1
Cor.	2:14;	Eph.	1:17–19).
2.	We	Should	Study	Systematic	Theology	With	Humility.
	Peter	tells	us,
“Clothe	yourselves,	all	of	you,	with	humility	toward	one	another,	for	‘God
opposes	the	proud,	but	gives	grace	to	the	humble’	”	(1	Peter	5:5).	Those	who
study	systematic	theology	will	learn	many	things	about	the	teachings	of
Scripture	that	are	perhaps	not	known	or	not	known	well	by	other	Christians	in
their	churches	or	by	relatives	who	are	older	in	the	Lord	than	they	are.	They
may	also	find	that	they	understand	things	about	Scripture	that	some	of	their
church	officers	do	not	understand,	and	that	even	their	pastor	has	perhaps
forgotten	or	never	learned	well.
In	all	of	these	situations	it	would	be	very	easy	to	adopt	an	attitude
of	pride	or	superiority	toward	others	who	have	not	made	such	a
study.	But	how	ugly	it	would	be	if	anyone	were	to	use	this
knowledge	of	God’s	Word	simply	to	win	arguments	or	to	put	down
a	fellow	Christian	in	conversation,	or	to	make	another	believer	feel
insignificant	in	the	Lord’s	work.	James’	counsel	is	good	for	us	at
this	point:	“Let	every	man	be	quick	to	hear,	slow	to	speak,	slow	to
anger,	for	the	anger	of	man	does	not	work	the	righteousness	of
God”	(James	1:19–20).	He	tells	us	that	one’s	understanding	of
Scripture	is	to	be	imparted	in	humility	and	love:
Who	is	wise	and	understanding	among	you?	By	his	good	life	let	him
show	his	works	in	the	meekness	of	wisdom.	.	.	.	But	the	wisdom	from
above	is	first	pure,	then	peaceable,	gentle,	open	to	reason,	full	of
mercy	and	good	fruits,	without	uncertainty	or	insincerity.	And	the
harvest	of	righteousness	is	sown	in	peace	by	those	who	make	peace.
(James	3:13,	17–18)
Systematic	theology	rightly	studied	will	not	lead	to	the	knowledge	that	“puffs
up”	(1	Cor.	8:1)	but	to	humility	and	love	for	others.
3.	We	Should	Study	Systematic	Theology	With	Reason.
	We	find	in	the
New	Testament	that	Jesus	and	the	New	Testament	authors	will	often	quote	a
verse	of	Scripture	and	then	draw	logical	conclusions	from	it.	They	
reason
from	Scripture.	It	is	therefore	not	wrong	to	use	human	understanding,	human
logic,	and	human	reason	to	draw	conclusions	from	the	statements	of
Scripture.	Nevertheless,	when	we	reason	and	draw	what	we	think	to	be
correct	logical	deductions	from	Scripture,	we	sometimes	make	mistakes.	The
deductions	we	draw	from	the	statements	of	Scripture	are	not	equal	to	the
statements	of	Scripture	themselves	in	certainty	or	authority,	for	our	ability	to
reason	and	draw	conclusions	is	not	the	ultimate	standard	of	truth—only
Scripture	is.
What	then	are	the	limits	on	our	use	of	our	reasoning	abilities	to
draw	deductions	from	the	statements	of	Scripture?	The	fact	that
reasoning	to	conclusions	that	go	beyond	the	mere	statements	of
Scripture	is	appropriate	and	even	necessary	for	studying	Scripture,
and	the	fact	that	Scripture	itself	is	the	ultimate	standard	of	truth,
combine	to	indicate	to	us	that	
we	are	free	to	use	our	reasoning
abilities	to	draw	deductions	from	any	passage	of	Scripture	so	long
as	these	deductions	do	not	contradict	the	clear	teaching	of	some
other	passage	of	Scripture.
9
This	principle	puts	a	safeguard	on	our	use	of	what	we	think	to	be
logical	deductions	from	Scripture.	Our	supposedly	logical
deductions	may	be	erroneous,	but	Scripture	itself	cannot	be
erroneous.	Thus,	for	example,	we	may	read	Scripture	and	find	that
God	the	Father	is	called	God	(1	Cor.	1:3),	that	God	the	Son	is	called
God	(John	20:28;	Titus	2:13),	and	that	God	the	Holy	Spirit	is	called
God	(Acts	5:3–4).	We	might	deduce	from	this	that	there	are	three
Gods.	But	then	we	find	the	Bible	explicitly	teaching	us	that	God	is
one	(Deut.	6:4;	James	2:19).	Thus	we	conclude	that	what	we
thought	
to	be	a	valid	logical	deduction	about	three	Gods	was	wrong
and	that	Scripture	teaches	both	(a)	that	there	are	three	separate
persons	(the	Father,	the	Son,	and	the	Holy	Spirit),	each	of	whom	is
fully	God,	and	(b)	that	there	is	one	God.
We	cannot	understand	exactly	how	these	two	statements	can	both
be	true,	so	together	they	constitute	a	
paradox	
(“a	seemingly
contradictory	statement	that	may	nonetheless	be	true”).
10
	We	can
tolerate	a	paradox	(such	as	“God	is	three	persons	and	one	God”)
because	we	have	confidence	that	ultimately	God	knows	fully	the
truth	about	himself	and	about	the	nature	of	reality,	and	that	in	his
understanding	the	different	elements	of	a	paradox	are	fully
reconciled,	even	though	at	this	point	God’s	thoughts	are	higher	than
our	thoughts	(Isa.	55:8–9).	But	a	true	contradiction	(such	as,	“God
is	three	persons	and	God	is	not	three	persons”)	would	imply
ultimate	contradiction	in	God’s	own	understanding	of	himself	or	of
reality,	and	this	cannot	be.
When	the	psalmist	says,	“The	sum	of	your	word	is	truth;	and	every
one	of	your	righteous	ordinances	endures	for	ever”	(Ps.	119:160),
he	implies	that	God’s	words	are	not	only	true	individually	but	also
viewed	together	as	a	whole.	Viewed	collectively,	their	“sum”	is	also
“truth.”	Ultimately,	there	is	no	internal	contradiction	either	in
Scripture	or	in	God’s	own	thoughts.
4.	We	Should	Study	Systematic	Theology	With	Help	From	Others.
	We
need	to	be	thankful	that	God	has	put	teachers	in	the	church	(“And	God	has
appointed	in	the	church	first	apostles,	second	prophets,	third	
teachers	
.	.	.”	[1
Cor.	12:28].	We	should	allow	those	with	gifts	of	teaching	to	help	us
understand	Scripture.	This	means	that	we	should	make	use	of	systematic
theologies	and	other	books	that	have	been	written	by	some	of	the	teachers	that
God	has	given	to	the	church	over	the	course	of	its	history.	It	also	means	that
our	study	of	theology	should	include	
talking	with	other	Christians	
about	the
things	we	study.	Among	those	with	whom	we	talk	will	often	be	some	with
gifts	of	teaching	who	can	explain	biblical	teachings	clearly	and	help	us	to
understand	more	easily.	In	fact,	some	of	the	most	effective	learning	in
systematic	theology	courses	in	colleges	and	seminaries	often	occurs	outside
the	classroom	in	informal	conversations	among	students	who	are	attempting
to	understand	Bible	doctrines	for	themselves.
5.	We	Should	Study	Systematic	Theology	by	Collecting	and
Understanding	All	the	Relevant	Passages	of	Scripture	on	Any	Topic.
	This
point	was	mentioned	in	our	definition	of	systematic	theology	at	the	beginning
of	the	chapter,	but	the	actual	process	needs	to	be	described	here.	How	does
one	go	about	making	a	doctrinal	summary	of	what	all	the	passages	of
Scripture	teach	on	a	certain	topic?	For	topics	covered	in	this	book,	many
people	will	think	that	studying	the	chapters	in	this	book	and	reading	the	Bible
verses	noted	in	the	chapters	is	enough.	But	some	people	will	want	to	do
further	study	of	Scripture	on	a	particular	topic	or	study	some	new	topic	not
covered	here.	How	could	a	student	go	about	using	the	Bible	to	research	its
teachings	on	some	new	subject,	perhaps	one	not	discussed	explicitly	in	any	of
his	or	her	systematic	theology	textbooks?
The	process	would	look	like	this:	(1)	Find	all	the	relevant	verses.
The	best	help	in	this	step	is	a	good	concordance,	which	enables	one
to	look	up	key	words	and	find	the	verses	in	which	the	subject	is
treated.	For	example,	in	studying	what	it	means	that	man	is	created
in	the	image	and	likeness	of	God,	one	needs	to	find	all	the	verses	in
which	“image”	and	“likeness”	and	“create”	occur.	(The	words
“man”	and	“God”	occur	too	often	to	be	useful	for	a	concordance
search.)	In	studying	the	doctrine	of	prayer,	many	words	could	be
looked	up	(
pray,	prayer,	intercede,	petition,	supplication,	confess,
confession,	praise,	thanks,	thanksgiving,	
et	al.)—and	perhaps	the
list	of	verses	would	grow	too	long	to	be	manageable,	so	that	the
student	would	have	to	skim	the	concordance	entries	without
looking	up	the	verses,	or	the	search	would	probably	have	to	be
divided	into	sections	or	limited	in	some	other	way.	Verses	can	also
be	found	by	thinking	through	the	overall	history	of	the	Bible	and
then	turning	to	sections	where	there	would	be	information	on	the
topic	at	hand—for	example,	a	student	studying	prayer	would	want
to	read	passages	like	the	one	about	Hannah’s	prayer	for	a	son	(in	1
Sam.	1),	Solomon’s	prayer	at	the	dedication	of	the	temple	(in	1
Kings	8),	Jesus’	prayer	in	the	Garden	of	Gethsemane	(in	Matt.	26
and	parallels),	and	so	forth.	Then	in	addition	to	concordance	work
and	reading	other	passages	that	one	can	find	on	the	subject,
checking	the	relevant	sections	in	some	systematic	theology	books
will	often	bring	to	light	other	verses	that	had	been	missed,
sometimes	because	none	of	the	key	words	used	for	the	concordance
were	in	those	verses.
11
(2)	The	second	step	is	to	read,	make	notes	on,	and	try	to	summarize
the	points	made	in	the	relevant	verses.	Sometimes	a	theme	will	be
repeated	often	and	the	summary	of	the	various	verses	will	be
relatively	easy.	At	other	times,	there	will	be	verses	difficult	to
understand,	and	the	student	will	need	to	take	some	time	to	study	a
verse	in	depth	(just	by	reading	the	verse	in	context	over	and	over,	or
by	using	specialized	tools	such	as	commentaries	and	dictionaries)
until	a	satisfactory	understanding	is	reached.
(3)	Finally,	the	teachings	of	the	various	verses	should	be
summarized	into	one	or	more	points	that	the	Bible	affirms	about
that	subject.	The	summary	does	not	have	to	take	the	exact	form	of
anyone	else’s	conclusions	on	the	subject,	because	we	each	may	see
things	in	Scripture	that	others	have	missed,	or	we	may	organize	the
subject	differently	or	emphasize	different	things.
On	the	other	hand,	at	this	point	it	is	also	helpful	to	read	related
sections,	if	any	can	be	found,	in	several	systematic	theology	books.
This	provides	a	useful	check	against	error	and	oversight,	and	often
makes	one	aware	of	alternative	perspectives	and	arguments	that
may	cause	us	to	modify	or	strengthen	our	position.	If	a	student
finds	that	others	have	argued	for	strongly	differing	conclusions,
then	these	other	views	need	to	be	stated	fairly	and	then	answered.
Sometimes	other	theology	books	will	alert	us	to	historical	or
philosophical	considerations	that	have	been	raised	before	in	the
history	of	the	church,	and	these	will	provide	additional	insight	or
warnings	against	error.
The	process	outlined	above	is	possible	for	any	Christian	who	can
read	his	or	her	Bible	and	can	look	up	words	in	a	concordance.	Of
course	people	will	become	faster	and	more	accurate	in	this	process
with	time	and	experience	and	Christian	maturity,	but	it	would	be	a
tremendous	help	to	the	church	if	Christians	generally	would	give
much	more	time	to	searching	out	topics	in	Scripture	for	themselves
and	drawing	conclusions	in	the	way	outlined	above.	The	joy	of
discovery	of	biblical	themes	would	be	richly	rewarding.	Especially
pastors	and	those	who	lead	Bible	studies	would	find	added
freshness	in	their	understanding	of	Scripture	and	in	their	teaching.
6.	We	Should	Study	Systematic	Theology	With	Rejoicing	and	Praise.
	The
study	of	theology	is	not	merely	a	theoretical	exercise	of	the	intellect.	It	is	a
study	of	the	living	God,	and	of	the	wonders	of	all	his	works	in	creation	and
redemption.	We	cannot	study	this	subject	dispassionately!	We	must	love	all
that	God	is,	all	that	he	says	and	all	that	he	does.	“You	shall	love	the	L
ORD
your	God	with	all	your	heart”	(Deut.	6:5).	Our	response	to	the	study	of	the
theology	of	Scripture	should	be	that	of	the	psalmist	who	said,	“How	precious
to	me	are	your	thoughts,	O	God!”	(Ps.	139:17).	In	the	study	of	the	teachings
of	God’s	Word,	it	should	not	surprise	us	if	we	often	find	our	hearts
spontaneously	breaking	forth	in	expressions	of	praise	and	delight	like	those	of
the	psalmist:
The	precepts	of	the	L
ORD
	are	right,
rejoicing	the	heart.	(Ps.	19:8)
In	the	way	of	your	testimonies	I	delight
as	much	as	in	all	riches.	(Ps.	119:14)
How	sweet	are	your	words	to	my	taste,
sweeter	than	honey	to	my	mouth!	(Ps.	119:103)
Your	testimonies	are	my	heritage	for	ever;
yea,	they	are	the	joy	of	my	heart.	(Ps.	119:111)
I	rejoice	at	your	word
like	one	who	finds	great	spoil.	(Ps.	119:162)
Often	in	the	study	of	theology	the	response	of	the	Christian	should	be	similar
to	that	of	Paul	in	reflecting	on	the	long	theological	argument	that	he	has	just
completed	at	the	end	of	Romans	11:32.	He	breaks	forth	into	joyful	praise	at
the	richness	of	the	doctrine	which	God	has	enabled	him	to	express:
O	the	depth	of	the	riches	and	wisdom	and	knowledge	of	God!	How
unsearchable	are	his	judgments	and	how	inscrutable	his	ways!
“For	who	has	known	the	mind	of	the	Lord,
or	who	has	been	his	counselor?”
“Or	who	has	given	a	gift	to	him
that	he	might	be	repaid?”
For	from	him	and	through	him	and	to	him	are	all	things.	To	him	be
glory	for	ever.	Amen.	(Rom.	11:33–36).
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
These	questions	at	the	end	of	each	chapter	focus	on	application	to
life.	Because	I	think	doctrine	is	to	be	felt	at	the	emotional	level	as
well	as	understood	at	the	intellectual	level,	in	many	chapters	I	have
included	some	questions	about	how	a	reader	
feels	
regarding	a	point
of	doctrine.	I	think	these	questions	will	prove	quite	valuable	for
those	who	take	the	time	to	reflect	on	them.
1
.	
In	what	ways	(if	any)	has	this	chapter	changed	your	understanding	of
what	systematic	theology	is?	What	was	your	attitude	toward	the	study	of
systematic	theology	before	reading	this	chapter?	What	is	your	attitude
now?
2
.	
What	is	likely	to	happen	to	a	church	or	denomination	that	gives	up
learning	systematic	theology	for	a	generation	or	longer?	Has	that	been
true	of	your	church?
3
.	
Are	there	any	doctrines	listed	in	the	Contents	for	which	a	fuller
understanding	would	help	to	solve	a	personal	difficulty	in	your	life	at	the
present	time?	What	are	the	spiritual	and	emotional	dangers	that	you
personally	need	to	be	aware	of	in	studying	systematic	theology?
4
.	
Pray	for	God	to	make	this	study	of	basic	Christian	doctrines	a	time	of
spiritual	growth	and	deeper	fellowship	with	him,	and	a	time	in	which
you	understand	and	apply	the	teachings	of	Scripture	rightly.
SPECIAL	TERMS
apologetics
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
minor	doctrine
biblical	theology
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
New	Testament	theology
Christian	ethics
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
Old	Testament	theology
contradiction
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
paradox
doctrine
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
philosophical	theology
dogmatic	theology
	
	
	
	
presupposition
historical	theology
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
systematic	theology
major	doctrine
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
In	these	bibliographies	I	have	usually	listed	only	works	written
from	what	would	today	be	called	a	conservative	evangelical
position.	This	is	because	the	purpose	of	this	section	is	to	give	the
student	ready	access	to	other	treatments	of	each	topic	by
theologians	who	share	with	this	book	the	same	general	convictions
about	the	nature	of	Scripture—that	all	of	it	is	totally	truthful	and
that	it	is	God’s	unique	and	absolutely	authoritative	Word	to	us.
Once	we	step	outside	of	that	conviction,	the	variety	of	theological
positions	becomes	amazingly	large,	and	sufficient	bibliographies
are	easily	found	in	the	more	recent	works	cited	below.	(However,	I
have	also	included	two	representative	Roman	Catholic	works
because	of	the	great	influence	of	the	Roman	Catholic	Church	in
almost	every	society	in	the	world.)
Writers	are	grouped	according	to	broad	denominational	categories,
and	the	writers	within	the	groups	are	arranged	chronologically.	Of
course,	the	categories	below	are	not	airtight,	for	there	is	often
overlap—many	Anglicans	and	many	Baptists	are	theologically
“Reformed”	while	others	in	those	groups	are	theologically
“Arminian”;	many	Dispensationalists	are	also	Baptists,	while	others
are	Presbyterians,	and	so	forth.	Yet	the	categories	are	fairly
representative	of	distinguishable	theological	traditions	within
evangelicalism.
Dates	given	are	the	dates	of	publication	of	the	final	edition	of	each
author’s	systematic	theology	or	major	theological	writing.	Where
no	single	major	theological	work	was	published,	the	dates	represent
the	years	during	which	the	author	was	actively	teaching	and	writing
about	systematic	theology.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be
found	in	
Appendix	4
.
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92			Litton,	1–8
1930			Thomas,	xvii–xxviii,	146–52
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1875–76			Pope,	1:3–32,	42–46
1892–94			Miley,	1:2–54
1940			Wiley,	1:13–123
1960			Purkiser,	19–38
1983			Carter,	1:19–101
1987–90			Oden,	1:11–14,	375–406
3.			Baptist
1767			Gill,	1:vii–xxx
1887			Boyce,	1–8
1907			Strong,	1–51
1917			Mullins,	1–136
1976–83			Henry,	1:13–411;	6:7–34
1983–85			Erickson,	9–149
1987–94			Lewis/Demarest,	1:13–123
4.			Dispensational
1947			Chafer,	1:3–17
1949			Thiessen,	1–20
1986			Ryrie,	9–22
5.			Lutheran
1917–24			Pieper,	1:3–190
1934			Mueller,	1–89
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
12
1559			Calvin,	1:3–33,	35–43	(prefaces	and	1.1–2)
1724–58			Edwards,	2:157–63
1861			Heppe,	1–11,	42–47
1871–73			Hodge,	1:1–150
1878			Dabney,	133–44
1887–1921			Warfield,	
SSW,	
2:207–320
1889			Shedd,	1:3–58;	3:1–26
1937–66			Murray,	
CW,	
1:3–8,	169–73;	
CW,	
4:1–21
1938			Berkhof,	
Intro.,	
15–128,	170–86
1962			Buswell,	1:13–26
7.			Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988–92			Williams,	1:11–28
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955			Ott,	1–10
2.			Roman	Catholic:	Post-Vatican	II
1980			McBrien,	1:3–78,	183–200
Other	Works
Baker,	D.	L.	“Biblical	Theology.”	In	
NDT,	
p.	671.
Berkhof,	Louis.	
Introduction	to	Systematic	Theology.	
Grand	Rapids:
Eerdmans,	1982,	pp.	15–75	(first	published	1932).
Bray,	Gerald	L.,	ed.	
Contours	of	Christian	Theology.	
Downers	Grove,
Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,	1993.
_____.	“Systematic	Theology,	History	of.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	671–72.
Cameron,	Nigel	M.,	ed.	
The	Challenge	of	Evangelical	Theology:	Essays
in	Approach	and	Method.	
Edinburgh:	Rutherford	House,	1987.
Carson,	D.	A.	“Unity	and	Diversity	in	the	New	Testament:	The
Possibility	of	Systematic	Theology.”	In	
Scripture	and	Truth.	
Ed.	by	D.	A.
Carson	and	John	Woodbridge.	Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1983,	pp.	65–
95.
Davis,	John	Jefferson.	
Foundations	of	Evangelical	Theology.	
Grand
Rapids:	Baker,	1984.
_____.	
The	Necessity	of	Systematic	Theology.	
Grand	Rapids:	Baker,
1980.
_____.	
Theology	Primer:	Resources	for	the	Theological	Student.	
Grand
Rapids:	Baker,	1981.
Demarest,	Bruce.	“Systematic	Theology.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	1064–66.
Erickson,	Millard.	
Concise	Dictionary	of	Christian	Theology.	
Grand
Rapids:	Baker,	1986.
Frame,	John.	
Van	Til	the	Theologian.	
Phillipsburg,	N.J.:	Pilgrim,	1976.
Geehan,	E.	R.,	ed.	
Jerusalem	and	Athens.	
Nutley,	N.J.:	Craig	Press,
1971.
Grenz,	Stanley	J.	
Revisioning	Evangelical	Theology:	A	Fresh	Agenda	for
the	21st	Century.	
Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,	1993.
House,	H.	Wayne.	
Charts	of	Christian	Theology	and	Doctrine.	
Grand
Rapids:	Zondervan,	1992.
Kuyper,	Abraham.	
Principles	of	Sacred	Theology.	
Trans.	by	J.	H.
DeVries.	Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1968	(reprint;	first	published	as
Encyclopedia	of	Sacred	Theology	
in	1898).
Machen,	J.	Gresham.	
Christianity	and	Liberalism.	
Grand	Rapids:
Eerdmans,	1923.	(This	180-page	book	is,	in	my	opinion,	one	of	the	most
significant	theological	studies	ever	written.	It	gives	a	clear	overview	of
major	biblical	doctrines	and	shows	the	vital	differences	with	Protestant
liberal	theology	at	every	point,	differences	that	still	confront	us	today.	It
is	required	reading	in	all	my	introductory	theology	classes.)
Morrow,	T.	W.	“Systematic	Theology.”	In	
NDT,	
p.	671.
Poythress,	Vern.	
Symphonic	Theology:	The	Validity	of	Multiple
Perspectives	in	Theology.	
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1987.
Preus,	Robert	D.	
The	Theology	of	Post-Reformation	Lutheranism:	A
Study	of	Theological	Prolegomena.	
2	vols.	St.	Louis:	Concordia,	1970.
Van	Til,	Cornelius.	
In	Defense	of	the	Faith,	
vol.	5:	
An	Introduction	to
Systematic	Theology.	
n.p.:	Presbyterian	and	Reformed,	1976,	pp.	1–61,
253–62.
_____.	
The	Defense	of	the	Faith.	
Philadelphia:	Presbyterian	and
Reformed,	1955.
Vos,	Geerhardus.	“The	Idea	of	Biblical	Theology	as	a	Science	and	as	a
Theological	Discipline.”	In	
Redemptive	History	and	Biblical
Interpretation,	
pp.	3–24.	Ed.	by	Richard	Gaffin.	Phillipsburg,	N.J.:
Presbyterian	and	Reformed,	1980	(article	first	published	1894).
Warfield,	B.	B.	“The	Indispensableness	of	Systematic	Theology	to	the
Preacher.”	In	
Selected	Shorter	Writings	of	Benjamin	B.	Warfield,	
2:280–
88.	Ed.	by	John	E.	Meeter.	Nutley,	N.J.:	Presbyterian	and	Reformed,
1973	(article	first	published	1897).
_____.	“The	Right	of	Systematic	Theology.”	In	
Selected	Shorter	Writings
of	Benjamin	B.	Warfield,	
2:21–279.	Ed.	by	John	E.	Meeter.	Nutley,	N.J.:
Presbyterian	and	Reformed,	1973	(article	first	published	1896).
Wells,	David.	
No	Place	for	Truth,	or,	Whatever	Happened	to	Evangelical
Theology?	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1993.
Woodbridge,	John	D.,	and	Thomas	E.	McComiskey,	eds.	
Doing	Theology
in	Today’s	World:	Essays	in	Honor	of	Kenneth	S.	Kantzer.	
Grand	Rapids:
Zondervan,	1991.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
Students	have	repeatedly	mentioned	that	one	of	the	most	valuable
parts	of	any	of	their	courses	in	college	or	seminary	has	been	the
Scripture	passages	they	were	required	to	memorize.	“I	have	hidden
your	word	in	my	heart	that	I	might	not	sin	against	you”	(Ps.	119:11
NIV).	In	each	chapter,	therefore,	I	have	included	an	appropriate
memory	passage	so	that	instructors	may	incorporate	Scripture
memory	into	the	course	requirements	wherever	possible.	(Scripture
memory	passages	at	the	end	of	each	chapter	are	taken	from	the
RSV.	These	same	passages	in	the	NIV	and	NASB	may	be	found	in
appendix	2
.)
Matthew	28:18–20:	
And	Jesus	came	and	said	to	them,	“All	authority	in
heaven	and	on	earth	has	been	given	to	me.	Go	therefore	and	make	disciples	of
all	nations,	baptizing	them	in	the	name	of	the	Father	and	of	the	Son	and	of	the
Holy	Spirit,	teaching	them	to	observe	all	that	I	have	commanded	you;	and	lo,
I	am	with	you	always,	to	the	close	of	the	age.”
HYMN
Systematic	theology	at	its	best	will	result	in	praise.	It	is	appropriate
therefore	at	the	end	of	each	chapter	to	include	a	hymn	related	to	the
subject	of	that	chapter.	In	a	classroom	setting,	the	hymn	can	be	sung
together	at	the	beginning	or	end	of	class.	Alternatively,	an
individual	reader	can	sing	it	privately	or	simply	meditate	quietly	on
the	words.
For	almost	every	chapter	the	words	of	the	hymns	were	found	in
Trinity	Hymnal	
(Philadelphia:	Great	Commission	Publications,
1990),
13
	the	hymnal	of	the	Presbyterian	Church	in	America	and	the
Orthodox	Presbyterian	Church,	but	most	of	them	are	found	in	many
other	common	hymnals.	Unless	otherwise	noted,
14
	the	words	of
these	hymns	are	now	in	public	domain	and	no	longer	subject	to
copyright	restrictions:	therefore	they	may	be	freely	copied	for
overhead	projector	use	or	photocopied.
Why	have	I	used	so	many	old	hymns?	Although	I	personally	like
many	of	the	more	recent	worship	songs	that	have	come	into	wide
use,	when	I	began	to	select	hymns	that	would	correspond	to	the
great	doctrines	of	the	Christian	faith,	I	realized	that	the	great	hymns
of	the	church	throughout	history	have	a	doctrinal	richness	and
breadth	that	is	still	unequaled.	For	several	of	the	chapters	in	this
book,	I	know	of	no	modern	worship	song	that	covers	the	same
subject	in	an	extended	way—perhaps	this	can	be	a	challenge	to
modern	songwriters	to	study	these	chapters	and	then	write	songs
reflecting	the	teaching	of	Scripture	on	the	respective	subjects.
15
For	this	chapter,	however,	I	found	no	hymn	ancient	or	modern	that
thanked	God	for	the	privilege	of	studying	systematic	theology	from
the	pages	of	Scripture.	Therefore	I	have	selected	a	hymn	of	general
praise,	which	is	always	appropriate.
“O	for	a	Thousand	Tongues	to	Sing”
This	hymn	by	Charles	Wesley	(1707–88)	begins	by	wishing	for	“a
thousand	tongues”	to	sing	God’s	praise.	Verse	2	is	a	prayer	that	God
would	“assist	me”	in	singing	his	praise	throughout	the	earth.	The
remaining	verses	give	praise	to	Jesus	(vv.	3–6)	and	to	God	the
Father	(v.	
7).
O	for	a	thousand	tongues	to	sing
My	great	Redeemer’s	praise,
The	glories	of	my	God	and	King,
The	triumphs	of	His	grace.
My	gracious	Master	and	my	God,
Assist	me	to	proclaim,
To	spread	through	all	the	earth	abroad,
The	honors	of	Thy	name.
Jesus!	the	name	that	charms	our	fears,
That	bids	our	sorrows	cease;
’Tis	music	in	the	sinner’s	ears,
’Tis	life	and	health	and	peace.
He	breaks	the	pow’r	of	reigning	sin,
He	sets	the	prisoner	free;
His	blood	can	make	the	foulest	clean;
His	blood	availed	for	me.
He	speaks	and,	list’ning	to	His	voice,
New	life	the	dead	receive;
The	mournful,	broken	hearts	rejoice;
The	humble	poor	believe.
Hear	him,	ye	deaf;	his	praise,	ye	dumb,
Your	loosened	tongues	employ,
Ye	blind,	behold	your	Savior	come;
And	leap,	ye	lame,	for	joy.
Glory	to	God	and	praise	and	love
Be	ever,	ever	giv’n
By	saints	below	and	saints	above—
The	church	in	earth	and	heav’n.
AUTHOR:	CHARLES	WESLEY,	1739,	ALT.
NOTES
1
This	definition	of	systematic	theology	is	taken	from	Professor	John	Frame,	now	of	Westminster	Seminary	in	Escondido,
California,	under	whom	I	was	privileged	to	study	in	1971–73	(at	Westminster	Seminary,	Philadelphia).	Though	it	is	impossible	to
acknowledge	my	indebtedness	to	him	at	every	point,	it	is	appropriate	to	express	gratitude	to	him	at	this	point,	and	to	say	that	he
has	probably	influenced	my	theological	thinking	more	than	anyone	else,	especially	in	the	crucial	areas	of	the	nature	of	systematic
theology	and	the	doctrine	of	the	Word	of	God.	Many	of	his	former	students	will	recognize	echoes	of	his	teaching	in	the	following
pages,	especially	in	those	two	areas.
2
Gordon	Lewis	and	Bruce	Demarest	have	coined	a	new	phrase,	“integrative	theology,”	to	refer	to	systematic	theology	in	this
broader	sense:	see	their	excellent	three-volume	work,	
Integrative	Theology	
(Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1987–94).	For	each
doctrine,	they	analyze	historical	alternatives	and	relevant	biblical	passages,	give	a	coherent	summary	of	the	doctrine,	answer
philosophical	objections,	and	give	practical	application.
3
Charles	Hodge	says,	“The	Scriptures	contain	all	the	Facts	of	Theology”	(section	heading	in	
Systematic	Theology,	
1:15).	He
argues	that	ideas	gained	from	intuition	or	observation	or	experience	are	valid	in	theology	only	if	they	are	supported	by	the
teaching	of	Scripture.
4
The	term	“biblical	theology”	might	seem	to	be	a	natural	and	appropriate	one	for	the	process	I	have	called	“systematic	theology.”
However,	its	usage	in	theological	studies	to	refer	to	tracing	the	historical	development	of	doctrines	throughout	the	Bible	is	too
well	established,	so	that	starting	now	to	use	the	term	
biblical	theology	
to	refer	to	what	I	have	called	
systematic	theology	
would
only	result	in	confusion.
5
Robert	L.	Reymond,	“The	Justification	of	Theology	with	a	Special	Application	to	Contemporary	Christology,”	in	Nigel	M.
Cameron,	ed.,	
The	Challenge	of	Evangelical	Theology:	Essays	in	Approach	and	Method	
(Edinburgh:	Rutherford	House,	1987),
pp.	82–104,	cites	several	examples	from	the	New	Testament	of	this	kind	of	searching	through	all	of	Scripture	to	demonstrate
doctrinal	conclusions:	Jesus	in	Luke	24:25–27	(and	elsewhere);	Apollos	in	Acts	18:28;	the	Jerusalem	Council	in	Acts	15;	and	Paul
in	Acts	17:2–3;	20:27;	and	all	of	Romans.	To	this	list	could	be	added	Heb.	1	(on	Christ’s	divine	Sonship),	Heb.	11	(on	the	nature
of	true	faith),	and	many	other	passages	from	the	Epistles.
6
See	
chapter	35
	on	saving	faith.
7
The	word	
dogma	
is	an	approximate	synonym	for	
doctrine,	
but	I	have	not	used	it	in	this	book.	
Dogma	
is	a	term	more	often	used
by	Roman	Catholic	and	Lutheran	theologians,	and	the	term	frequently	refers	to	doctrines	that	have	official	church	endorsement.
Dogmatic	theology	
is	another	term	for	
systematic	theology.
8
See	
chapter	16
,	for	a	discussion	of	the	terms	
Calvinist	
and	
Arminian.
9
This	guideline	is	also	adopted	from	Professor	John	Frame	at	Westminster	Seminary	(see	above).
10
The	
American	Heritage	Dictionary	of	the	English	Language,	
ed.	William	Morris	(Boston:	Houghton-Mifflin,	1980),	p.	
950
(first	definition).	Essentially	the	same	meaning	is	adopted	by	the	
Oxford	English	Dictionary	
(1913	ed.,	7:450),	the	
Concise	Oxford
Dictionary	
(1981	ed.,	p.	
742),	the	
Random	House	College	Dictionary	
(1979	ed.,	p.	
964),	and	the	
Chambers	Twentieth	Century
Dictionary	
(p.	780),	though	all	note	that	
paradox	
can	also	mean	“contradiction”	(though	less	commonly);	compare	the
Encyclopedia	of	Philosophy,	
ed.	Paul	Edwards	(New	York:	Macmillan	and	The	Free	Press,	1967),	5:45,	and	the	entire	article
“Logical	Paradoxes”	by	John	van	Heijenoort	on	pp.	45–51	of	the	same	volume,	which	proposes	solutions	to	many	of	the	classical
paradoxes	in	the	history	of	philosophy.	(If	
paradox	
meant	“contradiction,”	such	solutions	would	be	impossible.)
When	I	use	the	word	
paradox	
in	the	primary	sense	defined	by	these	dictionaries	today	I	realize	that	I	am	differing	somewhat	with
the	article	“Paradox”	by	K.	S.	Kantzer	in	the	
EDT,	
ed.	Walter	Elwell,	pp.	826–27	(which	takes	
paradox	
to	mean	essentially
“contradiction”).	However,	I	am	using	
paradox	
in	an	ordinary	English	sense	and	one	also	familiar	in	philosophy.	There	seems	to
me	to	be	available	no	better	word	than	
paradox	
to	refer	to	an	apparent	but	not	real	contradiction.
There	is,	however,	some	lack	of	uniformity	in	the	use	of	the	term	
paradox	
and	a	related	term,	
antinomy,	
in	contemporary
evangelical	discussion.	The	word	
antinomy	
has	sometimes	been	used	to	apply	to	what	I	here	call	
paradox,	
that	is,	“seemingly
contradictory	statements	that	may	nonetheless	both	be	true”	(see,	for	example,	John	Jefferson	Davis,	
Theology	Primer	
[Grand
Rapids:	Baker,	1981],	p.	
18).	Such	a	sense	for	
antinomy	
gained	support	in	a	widely	read	book,	
Evangelism	and	the	Sovereignty	of
God,	
by	J.	I.	Packer	(London:	Inter-Varsity	Press,	1961).	On	pp.	18–22	Packer	defines	
antinomy	
as	“an	appearance	of
contradiction”	(but	admits	on	p.	
18	that	his	definition	differs	with	the	
Shorter	Oxford	Dictionary
).	My	problem	with	using
antinomy	
in	this	sense	is	that	the	word	is	so	unfamiliar	in	ordinary	English	that	it	just	increases	the	stock	of	technical	terms
Christians	have	to	learn	in	order	to	understand	theologians,	and	moreover	such	a	sense	is	unsupported	by	any	of	the	dictionaries
cited	above,	all	of	which	define	
antinomy	
to	mean	“contradiction”	(e.g.,	
Oxford	English	Dictionary,	
1:371).	The	problem	is	not
serious,	but	it	would	help	communication	if	evangelicals	could	agree	on	uniform	senses	for	these	terms.
A	paradox	is	certainly	acceptable	in	systematic	theology,	and	paradoxes	are	in	fact	inevitable	so	long	as	we	have	finite
understanding	of	any	theological	topic.	However,	it	is	important	to	recognize	that	Christian	theology	should	never	affirm	a
contradiction	
(a	set	of	two	statements,	one	of	which	denies	the	other).	A	contradiction	would	be,	“God	is	three	persons	and	God	is
not	three	persons”	(where	the	term	
persons	
has	the	same	sense	in	both	halves	of	the	sentence).
11
I	have	read	a	number	of	student	papers	telling	me	that	John’s	gospel	says	nothing	about	how	Christians	should	pray,	for
example,	because	they	looked	at	a	concordance	and	found	that	the	word	
prayer	
was	not	in	John,	and	the	word	
pray	
only	occurs
four	times	in	reference	to	Jesus	praying	in	John	14,	16,	and	17.	They	overlooked	the	fact	that	John	contains	several	important
verses	where	the	word	
ask	
rather	than	the	word	
pray	
is	used	(John	14:13–14;	15:7,	16;	et	al.).
12
In	the	Reformed	category	I	have	cross-referenced	eleven	systematic	theologies	(those	listed	in	this	chapter	plus	Bavinck	in
some	chapters).	Two	other	very	well-written	Reformed	works	are	
Foundations	of	the	Christian	Faith	
by	James	Montgomery
Boice	(Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,	1986)	and	
Concise	Theology	
by	J.	I.	Packer	(Wheaton,	Ill.:	Tyndale	House,	1993),
but	I	have	not	cross-referenced	them	at	the	end	of	every	chapter,	because	they	are	written	for	more	popular	audiences	than	the
other	Reformed	works	listed	and	because	I	thought	that	eleven	Reformed	theologies	were	already	enough	to	give	a	sufficient
sampling	of	Reformed	thought.
13
This	hymn	book	is	completely	revised	from	a	similar	hymnal	of	the	same	title	published	by	the	Orthodox	Presbyterian	Church
in	1961.
14
Copyright	restrictions	still	apply	to	the	hymns	in	
chapters	21
,	
37
,	and	
51
,	and	these	may	not	be	reproduced	without	permission
from	the	owner	of	the	copyright.
15
	
appendix	3
	I	have	listed	the	first	lines	of	contemporary	worship	songs	that	correspond	to	twenty-six	of	the	fifty-seven	chapters
in	this	book.
OceanofPDF.com
Part	
1
The	Doctrine	of	the	Word	of	God
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	2
The	Word	3of	God
What	are	the	different	forms	of	the	Word	of	God?
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
What	is	meant	by	the	phrase	“the	Word	of	God”?	Actually,	there	are
several	different	meanings	taken	by	this	phrase	in	the	Bible.	It	is
helpful	to	distinguish	these	different	senses	clearly	at	the	beginning
of	this	study.
A.	“The	Word	of	God”	as	a	Person:	Jesus	Christ
Sometimes	the	Bible	refers	to	the	Son	of	God	as	“the	Word	of
God.”	In	Revelation	19:13,	John	sees	the	risen	Lord	Jesus	in	heaven
and	says,	“The	name	by	which	he	is	called	is	The	Word	of	God.”
Similarly,	in	the	beginning	of	John’s	gospel	we	read,	“In	the
beginning	was	the	Word,	and	the	Word	was	with	God,	and	the	Word
was	God”	(John	1:1).	It	is	clear	that	John	is	speaking	of	the	Son	of
God	here,	because	in	verse	14	he	says,	“And	the	Word	became	flesh
and	dwelt	among	us,	full	of	grace	and	truth;	we	have	beheld	his
glory,	glory	as	of	the	only	Son	from	the	Father.”	These	verses	(and
perhaps	1	John	1:1)	are	the	only	instances	where	the	Bible	refers	to
God	the	Son	as	“the	Word”	or	“the	Word	of	God,”	so	this	usage	is
not	common.	But	it	does	indicate	that	among	the	members	of	the
Trinity	it	is	especially	God	the	Son	who	in	his	person	as	well	as	in
his	words	has	the	role	of	communicating	the	character	of	God	to	us
and	of	expressing	the	will	of	God	for	us.
B.	“The	Word	of	God”	as	Speech	by	God
1.
	God’s	Decrees.
	Sometimes	God’s	words	take	the	form	of	powerful	decrees
that	cause	events	to	happen	or	even	cause	things	to	come	into	being.	“And
God	said,	‘Let	there	be	light’;	and	there	was	light”	(Gen.	1:3).	God	even
created	the	animal	world	by	speaking	his	powerful	word:	“And	God	said,	‘Let
the	earth	bring	forth	living	creatures	according	to	their	kinds:	cattle	and
creeping	things	and	beasts	of	the	earth	according	to	their	kinds.’	And	it	was
so”	(Gen.	1:24).	Thus,	the	psalmist	can	say,	“
By	the	word	of	the	Lord	
the
heavens	were	made,	and	all	their	host	by	the	breath	of	his	mouth”	(Ps.	33:6).
These	powerful,	creative	words	from	God	are	often	called	God’s
decrees.	A	
decree	
of	God	is	a	word	of	God	that	causes	something	to
happen.	These	decrees	of	God	include	not	only	the	events	of	the
original	creation	but	also	the	continuing	existence	of	all	things,	for
Hebrews	1:3	tells	us	that	Christ	is	continually	“upholding	the
universe	by	his	word	of	power.”
2.	God’s	Words	of	Personal	Address.
	God	sometimes	communicates	with
people	on	earth	by	speaking	directly	to	them.	These	can	be	called	instances	of
God’s	Word	of	
personal	address.	
Examples	are	found	throughout	Scripture.
At	the	very	beginning	of	creation	God	speaks	to	Adam:	“And	the	L
ORD
	God
commanded	the	man,	saying,	‘You	may	freely	eat	of	every	tree	of	the	garden;
but	of	the	tree	of	the	knowledge	of	good	and	evil	you	shall	not	eat,	for	in	the
day	that	you	eat	of	it	you	shall	die’	”	(Gen.	2:16–17).	After	the	sin	of	Adam
and	Eve,	God	still	comes	and	speaks	directly	and	personally	to	them	in	the
words	of	the	curse	(Gen.	3:16–19).	Another	prominent	example	of	God’s
direct	personal	address	to	people	on	earth	is	found	in	the	giving	of	the	Ten
Commandments:	“And	
God	spoke	all	these	words,	
saying,	‘I	am	the	L
ORD
your	God,	who	brought	you	out	of	the	land	of	Egypt,	out	of	the	house	of
bondage.	You	shall	have	no	other	gods	before	me	.	.	.’	”	(Ex.	20:1–3).	In	the
New	Testament,	at	Jesus’	baptism,	God	the	Father	spoke	with	a	voice	from
heaven,	saying,	“This	is	my	beloved	Son,	with	whom	I	am	well	pleased”
(Matt.	3:17).
In	these	and	several	other	instances	where	God	spoke	words	of
personal	address	to	individual	people	it	was	clear	to	the	hearers	that
these	were	the	actual	words	of	God:	they	were	hearing	God’s	very
voice,	and	they	were	therefore	hearing	words	that	had	absolute
divine	authority	and	that	were	absolutely	trustworthy.	To	disbelieve
or	disobey	any	of	these	words	would	have	been	to	disbelieve	or
disobey	God	and	therefore	would	have	been	sin.
Though	the	words	of	God’s	personal	address	are	always	seen	in
Scripture	to	be	the	actual	words	of	God,	they	are	
also	“human”
words	
in	that	they	are	spoken	in	ordinary	human	language	that	is
immediately	understandable.	The	fact	that	these	words	are	spoken
in	human	language	does	not	limit	their	divine	character	or	authority
in	any	way:	they	are	still	entirely	the	words	of	God,	spoken	by	the
voice	of	God	himself.
Some	theologians	have	argued	that	since	human	language	is	always
in	some	sense	“imperfect,”	any	message	that	God	addresses	to	us	in
human	language	must	also	be	limited	in	its	authority	or
truthfulness.	But	these	passages	and	many	others	that	record
instances	of	God’s	words	of	personal	address	to	individuals	give	no
indication	of	any	limitation	of	the	authority	or	truthfulness	of	God’s
words	when	they	are	spoken	in	human	language.	Quite	the	contrary
is	true,	for	the	words	always	place	an	absolute	obligation	upon	the
hearers	to	believe	them	and	to	obey	them	fully.	To	disbelieve	or
disobey	any	part	of	them	is	to	disbelieve	or	disobey	God	himself.
3.	God’s	Words	as	Speech	Through	Human	Lips.
	Frequently	in	Scripture
God	raises	up	prophets	through	whom	he	speaks.	Once	again,	it	is	evident	that
although	these	are	human	words,	spoken	in	ordinary	human	language	by
ordinary	human	beings,	the	authority	and	truthfulness	of	these	words	is	in	no
way	diminished:	they	are	still	completely	God’s	words	as	well.
In	Deuteronomy	18,	God	says	to	Moses:
I	will	raise	up	for	them	a	prophet	like	you	from	among	their	brethren;
and	
I	will	put	my	words	in	his	mouth,	
and	he	shall	speak	to	them	all
that	I	command	him.	And	whoever	will	not	give	heed	to	my	words
which	he	shall	speak	in	my	name,	I	myself	will	require	it	of	him.	But
the	prophet	who	presumes	to	speak	a	word	in	my	name	which	I	have
not	commanded	him	to	speak,	or	who	speaks	in	the	name	of	other
gods,	that	same	prophet	shall	die.	(Deut.	18:18–20)
God	made	a	similar	statement	to	Jeremiah:	“Then	the	L
ORD
	put
forth	his	hand	and	touched	my	mouth;	and	the	L
ORD
	said	to	me,
‘Behold,	
I	have	put	my	words	in	your	mouth’	”	
(Jer.	1:9).	God	tells
Jeremiah,	“Whatever	I	command	you	you	shall	speak”	(Jer.	1:7;	see
also	Ex.	4:12;	Num.	22:38;	1	Sam.	15:3,	18,	23;	1	Kings	20:36;	2
Chron.	20:20;	25:15–16;	Isa.	30:12–14;	Jer.	6:10–12;	36:29–31;	et
al.).	Anyone	who	claimed	to	be	speaking	for	the	Lord	but	who	had
not	received	a	message	from	him	was	severely	punished	(Ezek.
13:1–7;	Deut.	18:20–22).
Thus	God’s	words	spoken	through	human	lips	were	considered	to
be	just	as	authoritative	and	just	as	true	as	God’s	words	of	personal
address.	There	was	no	diminishing	of	the	authority	of	these	words
when	they	were	spoken	through	human	lips.	To	disbelieve	or
disobey	any	of	them	was	to	disbelieve	or	disobey	God	himself.
4.	God’s	Words	in	Written	Form	(the	Bible).
	In	addition	to	God’s	words	of
decree,	God’s	words	of	personal	address,	and	God’s	words	spoken	through	the
lips	of	human	beings,	we	also	find	in	Scripture	several	instances	where	God’s
words	were	put	in	
written	form.	
The	first	of	these	is	found	in	the	narrative	of
the	giving	of	the	two	tablets	of	stone	on	which	were	written	the	Ten
Commandments:	“And	he	gave	to	Moses,	when	he	had	made	an	end	of
speaking	with	him	upon	Mount	Sinai,	the	two	tables	of	the	testimony,	tables
of	stone,	
written	with	the	finger	of	God”	
(Ex.	31:18).	“And	the	tables	were	the
work	of	God,	and	
the	writing	was	the	writing	of	God,	graven	upon	the	tables”
(Ex.	32:16;	34:1,	28).
Further	writing	was	done	by	Moses:
And	Moses	wrote	this	law,	
and	gave	it	to	the	priests	the	sons	of	Levi,
who	carried	the	ark	of	the	covenant	of	the	L
ORD
,	and	to	all	the	elders
of	Israel.	And	Moses	commanded	them,	“At	the	end	of	every	seven
years	.	.	.	you	shall	read	this	law	before	all	Israel	in	their	hearing	.	.	.
that	they	may	hear	and	learn	to	fear	the	L
ORD
	your	God,	and	be
careful	to	do	all	the	words	of	this	law,	and	that	their	children,	who
have	not	known	it,	may	hear	and	learn	to	fear	the	L
ORD
	your
God.	.	.	.”	(Deut.	31:9–13)
This	book	which	Moses	wrote	was	then	deposited	by	the	side	of	the	ark	of	the
covenant:	“When	Moses	had	finished	
writing	the	words	of	this	law	in	a	book,
to	the	very	end,	Moses	commanded	the	Levites	who	carried	the	ark	of	the
covenant	of	the	L
ORD
,	‘Take	this	book	of	the	law,	and	put	it	by	the	side	of	the
ark	of	the	covenant	of	the	Lord	your	God,	that	it	may	be	there	for	a	witness
against	you’	”	(Deut.	31:24–26).
Further	additions	were	made	to	this	book	of	God’s	words.	“And
Joshua	wrote	these	words	
in	the	book	of	the	law	of	God”	(Josh.
24:26).	God	commanded	Isaiah,	“And	now,	go,	
write	it	before	them
on	a	tablet,	and	inscribe	it	in	a	book,	
that	it	may	be	for	the	time	to
come	as	a	witness	for	ever”	(Isa.	30:8).	Once	again,	God	said	to
Jeremiah,	“
Write	in	a	book	
all	the	words	that	I	have	spoken	to	you”
(Jer.	30:2;	cf.	Jer.	36:2–4,	27–31;	51:60).	In	the	New	Testament,
Jesus	promises	his	disciples	that	the	Holy	Spirit	would	bring	to
their	remembrance	the	words	which	he,	Jesus,	had	spoken	(John
14:26;	cf.	16:12–13).	Paul	can	say	that	the	very	words	he	writes	to
the	Corinthians	are	“a	command	of	the	Lord”	(1	Cor.	14:37;	cf.	2
Peter	3:2).
Once	again	it	must	be	noted	that	these	words	are	still	considered	to
be	God’s	own	words,	even	though	they	are	written	down	mostly	by
human	beings	and	always	in	human	language.	Still,	they	are
absolutely	authoritative	and	absolutely	true:	to	disobey	them	or
disbelieve	them	is	a	serious	sin	and	brings	judgment	from	God	(1
Cor.	14:37;	Jer.	36:29–31).
Several	benefits	come	from	the	writing	down	of	God’s	words.	First,
there	is	a	much	
more	accurate	preservation	
of	God’s	words	for
subsequent	generations.	To	depend	on	memory	and	the	repeating	of
oral	tradition	is	a	less	reliable	method	of	preserving	these	words
throughout	history	than	is	their	recording	in	writing	(cf.	Deut.
31:12–13).	Second,	the	
opportunity	for	repeated	inspection	
of
words	that	are	written	down	permits	careful	study	and	discussion,
which	leads	to	better	understanding	and	more	complete	obedience.
Third,	God’s	words	in	writing	are	
accessible	to	many	more	people
than	they	are	when	preserved	merely	through	memory	and	oral
repetition.	They	can	be	inspected	at	any	time	by	any	person	and	are
not	limited	in	accessibility	to	those	who	have	memorized	them	or
those	who	are	able	to	be	present	when	they	are	recited	orally.	Thus,
the	reliability,	permanence,	and	accessibility	of	the	form	in	which
God’s	words	are	preserved	are	all	greatly	enhanced	when	they	are
written	down.	Yet	there	is	no	indication	that	their	authority	or
truthfulness	is	diminished.
C.	The	Focus	of	Our	Study
Of	all	the	forms	of	the	Word	of	God,
1
	the	focus	of	our	study	in
systematic	theology	is	God’s	Word	in	written	form,	that	is,	the
Bible.	This	is	the	form	of	God’s	Word	that	is	available	for	study,	for
public	inspection,	for	repeated	examination,	and	as	a	basis	for
mutual	discussion.	It	tells	us	about	and	points	us	to	the	Word	of
God	as	a	person,	namely	Jesus	Christ,	whom	we	do	not	now	have
present	in	bodily	form	on	earth.	Thus,	we	are	no	longer	able	to
observe	and	imitate	his	life	and	teachings	firsthand.
The	other	forms	of	the	Word	of	God	are	not	suitable	as	the	primary
basis	for	the	study	of	theology.	We	do	not	hear	God’s	words	of
decree	and	thus	cannot	study	them	directly	but	only	through
observation	of	their	effects.	God’s	words	of	personal	address	are
uncommon,	even	in	Scripture.	Furthermore,	even	if	we	did	hear
some	words	of	personal	address	from	God	to	ourselves	today,	we
would	not	have	certainty	that	our	understanding	of	it,	our	memory
of	it,	and	our	subsequent	report	of	it	was	wholly	accurate.	Nor
would	we	be	readily	able	to	convey	to	others	the	certainty	that	the
communication	was	from	God,	even	if	it	was.	God’s	words	as
spoken	through	human	lips	ceased	to	be	given	when	the	New
Testament	canon	was	completed.
2
	Thus,	these	other	forms	of	God’s
words	are	inadequate	as	a	primary	basis	for	study	in	theology.
It	is	most	profitable	for	us	to	study	God’s	words	as	written	in	the
Bible.	It	is	God’s	written	Word	that	he	commands	us	to	study.	The
man	is	“blessed”	who	“meditates”	on	God’s	law	“day	and	night”
(Ps.	1:1–2).	God’s	words	to	Joshua	are	also	applicable	to	us:	“This
book	of	the	law	shall	not	depart	out	of	your	mouth,	but	
you	shall
meditate	on	it	day	and	night,	
that	you	may	be	careful	to	do	all	that
is	written	in	it;	for	then	you	shall	make	your	way	prosperous,	and
then	you	shall	have	good	success”	(Josh.	1:8).	It	is	the	Word	of	God
in	the	form	of	written	Scripture	that	is	“God-breathed”	and	“useful
for	teaching,	rebuking,	correcting,	and	training	in	righteousness”	(2
Tim.	3:16	NIV).
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
Do	you	think	you	would	pay	more	attention	if	God	spoke	to	you	from
heaven	or	through	the	voice	of	a	living	prophet	than	if	he	spoke	to	you
from	the	written	words	of	Scripture?	Would	you	believe	or	obey	such
words	more	readily	than	you	do	Scripture?	Do	you	think	your	present
level	of	response	to	the	written	words	of	Scripture	is	an	appropriate	one?
What	positive	steps	can	you	take	to	make	your	attitude	toward	Scripture
more	like	the	kind	of	attitude	God	wants	you	to	have?
2
.	
When	you	think	about	the	many	ways	in	which	God	speaks	and	the
frequency	with	which	God	communicates	with	his	creatures	through
these	means,	what	conclusions	might	you	draw	concerning	the	nature	of
God	and	the	things	that	bring	delight	to	him?
SPECIAL	TERMS
decree
	
	
	
personal	address
Word	of	God
	
	
	
	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the
bibliography	to	chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be
found	in	
Appendix	4
.)	The	subject	of	this	chapter	has	not	been
treated	explicitly	in	many	systematic	theologies,	but	similar
material	is	often	covered	in	the	section	on	the	authority	of	the	Word
of	God:	see	the	bibliography	at	the	end	of	
chapter	4
	for	that	subject.
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.		Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92		Litton,	9–10
2.		Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1940		Wiley,	1:124–65
3.		Baptist
1917		Mullins,	137–53
6.		Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1861		Heppe,	12–21
1889		Shedd,	1:61–70
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
No	explicit	treatment.
Other	Works
Kline,	Meredith.	
The	Structure	of	Biblical	Authority.	
Grand	Rapids:
Eerdmans,	1972.
Kuyper,	Abraham.	
Principles	of	Sacred	Theology.	
Trans.	by	J.	H.	de
Vries.	Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1968,	pp.	405–12	(originally	published
as	
Encyclopedia	of	Sacred	Theology	
in	1898).
McDonald,	H.	D.	
Theories	of	Revelation:	An	Historical	Study,	1860–
1960.	
Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1979.
_____.	“Word,	Word	of	God,	Word	of	the	Lord.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	1185–88.
Packer,	J.	I.	“Scripture.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	585–87.
Pinnock,	C.	H.	“Revelation.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	585–87.
Vos,	Geerhardus.	
Biblical	Theology:	Old	and	New	Testaments.	
Grand
Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1948,	pp.	28–55;	321–27.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
Ps.	
1:1
–2:		
Blessed	is	the	man
who	walks	not	in	the	counsel	of	the	wicked,
nor	stands	in	the	way	of	sinners,
nor	sits	in	the	seat	of	scoffers;
but	his	delight	is	in	the	law	of	the	L
ORD
,
and	on	his	law	he	meditates	day	and	night.
HYMN
“Break	Thou	the	Bread	of	Life”
This	hymn	is	a	prayer	asking	the	Lord	to	give	us	not	physical	bread
but	spiritual	nourishment	from	the	“bread	of	life,”	a	metaphor
referring	both	to	the	written	Word	of	God	(“the	sacred	page,”	v.	
1)
and	to	Christ	himself,	the	“Living	Word”	(see	vv.	1,	3).
Break	thou	the	bread	of	life,	dear	Lord,	to	me,
As	thou	didst	break	the	loaves	beside	the	sea;
Throughout	the	sacred	page	I	seek	thee,	Lord,
My	spirit	pants	for	thee,	O	Living	Word.
Bless	thou	the	truth,	dear	Lord,	to	me,	to	me,
As	thou	didst	bless	the	bread	by	Galilee;
Then	shall	all	bondage	cease,	all	fetters	fall;
And	I	shall	find	my	peace,	my	all	in	all.
Thou	art	the	bread	of	life,	O	Lord,	to	me,
Thy	holy	Word	the	truth	that	saveth	me;
Give	me	to	eat	and	live	with	thee	above;
Teach	me	to	love	thy	truth,	for	thou	art	love.
O	send	thy	Spirit,	Lord,	now	unto	me,
That	he	may	touch	mine	eyes,	and	make	me	see:
Show	me	the	truth	concealed	within	thy	Word,
And	in	thy	Book	revealed	I	see	the	Lord.
AUTHOR:	MARY	A.	LATHBURY,	1877
NOTES
1
In	addition	to	the	forms	of	God’s	Word	mentioned	above,	God	communicates
to	people	through	different	types	of	“general	revelation”—that	is,	revelation
that	is	given	not	just	to	certain	people	but	to	all	people	generally.	General
revelation	includes	both	the	revelation	of	God	that	comes	through	nature	(see
Ps.	19:1–6;	Acts	14:17)	and	the	revelation	of	God	that	comes	through	the
inner	sense	of	right	and	wrong	in	every	person’s	heart	(Rom.	2:15).	These
kinds	of	revelation	are	nonverbal	in	form,	and	I	have	not	included	them	in	the
list	of	various	forms	of	the	Word	of	God	discussed	in	this	chapter.	(See
chapter	7
,	for	further	discussion	of	general	revelation.)
2
See	chapter	3
,	on	the	canon	of	Scripture,	and,	for	a	discussion	of	the	nature
of	contemporary	Christian	prophecy,	see	
chapter	53
.
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	3
The	Canon	of	Scripture
What	belongs	in	the	Bible	and	what	does	not	belong?
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
The	previous	chapter	concluded	that	it	is	especially	the	written
words	of	God	in	the	Bible	to	which	we	are	to	give	our	attention.
Before	we	can	do	this,	however,	we	must	know	which	writings
belong	in	the	Bible	and	which	do	not.	This	is	the	question	of	the
canon	of	Scripture,	which	may	be	defined	as	follows:	
The	canon	of
Scripture	is	the	list	of	all	the	books	that	belong	in	the	Bible.
We	must	not	underestimate	the	importance	of	this	question.	The
words	of	Scripture	are	the	words	by	which	we	nourish	our	spiritual
lives.	Thus	we	can	reaffirm	the	comment	of	Moses	to	the	people	of
Israel	in	reference	to	the	words	of	God’s	law:	“For	it	is	no	trifle	for
you,	but	
it	is	your	life,	
and	thereby	you	shall	live	long	in	the	land
which	you	are	going	over	the	Jordan	to	possess”	(Deut.	32:47).
To	add	to	or	subtract	from	God’s	words	would	be	to	prevent	God’s
people	from	obeying	him	fully,	for	commands	that	were	subtracted
would	not	be	known	to	the	people,	and	words	that	were	added
might	require	extra	things	of	the	people	which	God	had	not
commanded.	Thus	Moses	warned	the	people	of	Israel,	“You	shall
not	
add	to	the	word	
which	I	command	you,	
nor	take	from	it;	
that
you	may	keep	the	commandments	of	the	L
ORD
	your	God	which	I
command	you”	(Deut.	4:2).
The	precise	determination	of	the	extent	of	the	canon	of	Scripture	is
therefore	of	the	utmost	importance.	If	we	are	to	trust	and	obey	God
absolutely	we	must	have	a	collection	of	words	that	we	are	certain
are	God’s	own	words	to	us.	If	there	are	any	sections	of	Scripture
about	which	we	have	doubts	whether	they	are	God’s	words	or	not,
we	will	not	consider	them	to	have	absolute	divine	authority	and	we
will	not	trust	them	as	much	as	we	would	trust	God	himself.
A.	The	Old	Testament	Canon
Where	did	the	idea	of	a	canon	begin—the	idea	that	the	people	of
Israel	should	preserve	a	collection	of	written	words	from	God?
Scripture	itself	bears	witness	to	the	historical	development	of	the
canon.	The	earliest	collection	of	written	words	of	God	was	the	Ten
Commandments.	The	Ten	Commandments	thus	form	the	beginning
of	the	biblical	canon.	God	himself	wrote	on	two	tablets	of	stone	the
words	which	he	commanded	his	people:	“And	he	gave	to	Moses,
when	he	had	made	an	end	of	speaking	with	him	upon	Mount	Sinai,
the	two	tables	of	the	testimony,	tables	of	stone,	
written	with	the
finger	of	God”	
(Ex.	31:18).	Again	we	read,	“And	the	tables	were
the	work	of	God,	and	
the	writing	was	the	writing	of	God,	
graven
upon	the	tables”	(Ex.	32:16;	cf.	Deut.	4:13;	10:4).	The	tablets	were
deposited	in	the	ark	of	the	covenant	(Deut.	10:5)	and	constituted	the
terms	of	the	covenant	between	God	and	his	people.
1
This	collection	of	absolutely	authoritative	words	from	God	grew	in
size	throughout	the	time	of	Israel’s	history.	Moses	himself	wrote
additional	words	to	be	deposited	beside	the	ark	of	the	covenant
(Deut.	31:24–26).	The	immediate	reference	is	apparently	to	the
book	of	Deuteronomy,	but	other	references	to	writing	by	Moses
indicate	that	the	first	four	books	of	the	Old	Testament	were	written
by	him	as	well	(see	Ex.	17:14;	24:4;	34:27;	Num.	33:2;	Deut.
31:22).	After	the	death	of	Moses,	Joshua	also	added	to	the
collection	of	written	words	of	God:	“Joshua	wrote	these	words	in
the	book	of	the	law	of	God”	(Josh.	24:26).	This	is	especially
surprising	in	light	of	the	command	not	to	add	to	or	take	away	from
the	words	which	God	gave	the	people	through	Moses:	“You	shall
not	add	to	the	word	which	I	command	you,	nor	take	from	it	.	.	.”
(Deut.	4:2;	cf.	12:32).	In	order	to	have	disobeyed	such	a	specific
command,	Joshua	must	have	been	convinced	that	he	was	not	taking
it	upon	himself	to	add	to	the	written	words	of	God,	but	that	God
himself	had	authorized	such	additional	writing.
Later,	others	in	Israel,	usually	those	who	fulfilled	the	office	of
prophet,	wrote	additional	words	from	God:
Samuel	told	the	people	the	rights	and	duties	of	the	kingship;	and	he
wrote	them	in	a	book	and	laid	it	up	before	the	L
ORD
.	(1	Sam.	10:25)
The	acts	of	King	David,	from	first	to	last,	are	written	in	the	Chronicles
of	Samuel	the	seer,	and	in	the	Chronicles	of	Nathan	the	prophet,	and	in
the	Chronicles	of	Gad	the	seer.	(1	Chron.	29:29)
Now	the	rest	of	the	acts	of	Jehoshaphat,	from	first	to	last,	are	written	in
the	chronicles	of	Jehu	the	son	of	Hanani,	which	are	recorded	in	the
Book	of	the	Kings	of	Israel.	(2	Chron.	20:34;	cf.	1	Kings	16:7	where
Jehu	the	son	of	Hanani	is	called	a	prophet)
Now	the	rest	of	the	acts	of	Uzziah,	from	first	to	last,	Isaiah	the	prophet
the	son	of	Amoz	wrote.	(2	Chron.	26:22)
Now	the	rest	of	the	acts	of	Hezekiah,	and	his	good	deeds,	behold,	they
are	written	in	the	vision	of	Isaiah	the	prophet	the	son	of	Amoz,	in	the
Book	of	the	Kings	of	Judah	and	Israel.	(2	Chron.	32:32)
Thus	says	the	L
ORD
,	the	God	of	Israel:	Write	in	a	book	all	the	words
that	I	have	spoken	to	you.
2
	(Jer.	30:2)
The	content	of	the	Old	Testament	canon	continued	to	grow	until	the
time	of	the	end	of	the	writing	process.	If	we	date	Haggai	to	520
B.C.,	Zechariah	to	520–518	B.C.	(with	perhaps	more	material
added	after	480	B.C.),	and	Malachi	around	435	B.C.,	we	have	an
idea	of	the	approximate	dates	of	the	last	Old	Testament	prophets.
Roughly	coinciding	with	this	period	are	the	last	books	of	Old
Testament	history—Ezra,	Nehemiah,	and	Esther.	Ezra	went	to
Jerusalem	in	458	B.C.,	and	Nehemiah	was	in	Jerusalem	from	445–
433	B.C.
3
	Esther	was	written	sometime	after	the	death	of	Xerxes	I
(=	Ahasuerus)	in	465	B.C.,	and	a	date	during	the	reign	of
Artaxerxes	I	(464–423	B.C.)	is	probable.	Thus,	after	approximately
435	B.C.	there	were	no	further	additions	to	the	Old	Testament
canon.	The	subsequent	history	of	the	Jewish	people	was	recorded	in
other	writings,	such	as	the	books	of	the	Maccabees,	but	these
writings	were	not	thought	worthy	to	be	included	with	the
collections	of	God’s	words	from	earlier	years.
When	we	turn	to	Jewish	literature	outside	the	Old	Testament,	we
see	that	the	belief	that	divinely	authoritative	words	from	God	had
ceased	is	clearly	attested	in	several	different	strands	of	extrabiblical
Jewish	literature.	In	1	Maccabees	(about	100	B.C.)	the	author
writes	of	the	defiled	altar,	“So	they	tore	down	the	altar	and	stored
the	stones	in	a	convenient	place	on	the	temple	hill	until	there	should
come	a	prophet	to	tell	what	to	do	with	them”	(1	Macc.	4:45–46).
They	apparently	knew	of	no	one	who	could	speak	with	the
authority	of	God	as	the	Old	Testament	prophets	had	done.	The
memory	of	an	authoritative	prophet	among	the	people	was	one	that
belonged	to	the	distant	past,	for	the	author	could	speak	of	a	great
distress	“such	as	had	not	been	since	the	time	that	prophets	ceased	to
appear	among	them”	
(1	Macc.	9:27;	cf.	14:41).
Josephus	(born	c.	A.D.	37/38)	explained,	“From	Artaxerxes	to	our
own	times	a	complete	history	has	been	written,	but	has	not	been
deemed	worthy	of	equal	credit	with	the	earlier	records,	because	of
the	failure	of	the	exact	succession	of	the	prophets”	(
Against	Apion
1.41).	This	statement	by	the	greatest	Jewish	historian	of	the	first
century	A.D.	shows	that	he	knew	of	the	writings	now	considered
part	of	the	“Apocrypha,”	but	that	he	(and	many	of	his
contemporaries)	considered	these	other	writings	“not	.	.	.	worthy	of
equal	credit”	with	what	we	now	know	as	the	Old	Testament
Scriptures.	There	had	been,	in	Josephus’s	viewpoint,	no	more
“words	of	God”	added	to	Scripture	after	about	435	B.C.
Rabbinic	literature	reflects	a	similar	conviction	in	its	repeated
statement	that	the	Holy	Spirit	(in	the	Spirit’s	function	of	inspiring
prophecy)	departed	from	Israel.	“After	the	latter	prophets	Haggai,
Zechariah,	and	Malachi	had	died,	the	Holy	Spirit	departed	from
Israel,	but	they	still	availed	themselves	of	the	
bath	qôl”
(
Babylonian	Talmud,	
Yomah	9b,	repeated	in	Sota	48b,	Sanhedrin
11a,	and	Midrash	Rabbah	on	Song	of	Songs,	8.9.3).
4
The	Qumran	community	(the	Jewish	sect	that	left	behind	the	Dead
Sea	Scrolls)	also	awaited	a	prophet	whose	words	would	have
authority	to	supersede	any	existing	regulations	(see	1	QS	9.11),	and
other	similar	statements	are	found	elsewhere	in	ancient	Jewish
literature	(see	2	Baruch	85.3	and	Prayer	of	Azariah	15).	Thus,
writings	subsequent	to	about	435	B.C.	were	not	accepted	by	the
Jewish	people	generally	as	having	equal	authority	with	the	rest	of
Scripture.
In	the	New	Testament,	we	have	no	record	of	any	dispute	between
Jesus	and	the	Jews	over	the	extent	of	the	canon.	Apparently	there
was	full	agreement	between	Jesus	and	his	disciples,	on	the	one
hand,	and	the	Jewish	leaders	or	Jewish	people,	on	the	other	hand,
that	additions	to	the	Old	Testament	canon	had	ceased	after	the	time
of	Ezra,	Nehemiah,	Esther,	Haggai,	Zechariah,	and	Malachi.	This
fact	is	confirmed	by	the	quotations	of	Jesus	and	the	New	Testament
authors	from	the	Old	Testament.	According	to	one	count,	Jesus	and
the	New	Testament	authors	quote	various	parts	of	the	Old
Testament	Scriptures	as	divinely	authoritative	over	295	times,
5
	but
not	once	do	they	cite	any	statement	from	the	books	of	the
Apocrypha	or	any	other	writings	as	having	divine	authority.
6
	The
absence	of	any	such	reference	to	other	literature	as	divinely
authoritative,	and	the	extremely	frequent	reference	to	hundreds	of
places	in	the	Old	Testament	as	divinely	authoritative,	gives	strong
confirmation	to	the	fact	that	the	New	Testament	authors	agreed	that
the	established	Old	Testament	canon,	no	more	and	no	less,	was	to
be	taken	as	God’s	very	words.
What	then	shall	be	said	about	the	Apocrypha,	the	collection	of
books	included	in	the	canon	by	the	Roman	Catholic	Church	but
excluded	from	the	canon	by	Protestantism?
7
	These	books	were
never	accepted	by	the	Jews	as	Scripture,	but	throughout	the	early
history	of	the	church	there	was	a	divided	opinion	on	whether	they
should	be	part	of	Scripture	or	not.	In	fact,	the	earliest	Christian
evidence	is	decidedly	against	viewing	the	Apocrypha	as	Scripture,
but	the	use	of	the	Apocrypha	gradually	increased	in	some	parts	of
the	church	until	the	time	of	the	Reformation.
8
	The	fact	that	these
books	were	included	by	Jerome	in	his	Latin	Vulgate	translation	of
the	Bible	(completed	in	A.D.	404)	gave	support	to	their	inclusion,
even	though	Jerome	himself	said	they	were	not	“books	of	the
canon”	but	merely	“books	of	the	church”	that	were	helpful	and
useful	for	believers.	The	wide	use	of	the	Latin	Vulgate	in
subsequent	centuries	guaranteed	their	continued	accessibility,	but
the	fact	that	they	had	no	Hebrew	original	behind	them,	and	their
exclusion	from	the	Jewish	canon,	as	well	as	the	lack	of	their
citation	in	the	New	Testament,	led	many	to	view	them	with
suspicion	or	to	reject	their	authority.	For	instance,	the	earliest
Christian	list	of	Old	Testament	books	that	exists	today	is	by	Melito,
bishop	of	Sardis,	writing	about	A.D.	170:
9
When	I	came	to	the	east	and	reached	the	place	where	these	things
were	preached	and	done,	and	learnt	accurately	the	books	of	the	Old
Testament,	I	set	down	the	facts	and	sent	them	to	you.	These	are	their
names:	five	books	of	Moses,	Genesis,	Exodus,	Numbers,	Leviticus,
Deuteronomy,	Joshua	the	son	of	Nun,	Judges,	Ruth,	four	books	of
Kingdoms,
10
	two	books	of	Chronicles,	the	Psalms	of	David,	the
Proverbs	of	Solomon	and	his	Wisdom,
11
	Ecclesiastes,	the	Song	of
Songs,	Job,	the	prophets	Isaiah,	Jeremiah,	the	Twelve	in	a	single
book,	Daniel,	Ezekiel,	Ezra.
12
It	is	noteworthy	here	that	Melito	names	none	of	the	books	of	the	Apocrypha,
but	he	includes	all	of	our	present	Old	Testament	books	except	Esther.
13
Eusebius	also	quotes	Origen	as	affirming	most	of	the	books	of	our	present
Old	Testament	canon	(including	Esther),	but	no	book	of	the	Apocrypha	is
affirmed	as	canonical,	and	the	books	of	Maccabees	are	explicitly	said	to	be
“outside	of	these	[canonical	books].”
14
	Similarly,	in	A.D.	367,	when	the	great
church	leader	Athanasius,	bishop	of	Alexandria,	wrote	his	Paschal	Letter,	he
listed	all	the	books	of	our	present	New	Testament	canon	and	all	the	books	of
our	present	Old	Testament	canon	except	Esther.	He	also	mentioned	some
books	of	the	Apocrypha	such	as	the	Wisdom	of	Solomon,	the	Wisdom	of
Sirach,	Judith,	and	Tobit,	and	said	these	are	“not	indeed	included	in	the
Canon,	but	appointed	by	the	Fathers	to	be	read	by	those	who	newly	join	us,
and	who	wish	for	instruction	in	the	word	of	godliness.”
15
	However,	other
early	church	leaders	did	quote	several	of	these	books	as	Scripture.
16
There	are	doctrinal	and	historical	inconsistencies	with	a	number	of
these	books.	E.	J.	Young	notes:
There	are	no	marks	in	these	books	which	would	attest	a	divine
origin.	.	.	.	both	Judith	and	Tobit	contain	historical,	chronological	and
geographical	errors.	The	books	justify	falsehood	and	deception	and
make	salvation	to	depend	upon	works	of	merit.	.	.	.	Ecclesiasticus	and
the	Wisdom	of	Solomon	inculcate	a	morality	based	upon	expediency.
Wisdom	teaches	the	creation	of	the	world	out	of	pre-existent	matter
(11:17).	Ecclesiasticus	teaches	that	the	giving	of	alms	makes
atonement	for	sin	(3:30).	In	Baruch	it	is	said	that	God	hears	the
prayers	of	the	dead	(3:4),	and	in	I	Maccabees	there	are	historical	and
geographical	errors.
17
It	was	not	until	1546,	at	the	Council	of	Trent,	that	the	Roman
Catholic	Church	officially	declared	the	Apocrypha	to	be	part	of	the
canon	(with	the	exception	of	1	and	2	Esdras	and	the	Prayer	of
Manasseh).	It	is	significant	that	the	Council	of	Trent	was	the
response	of	the	Roman	Catholic	Church	to	the	teachings	of	Martin
Luther	and	the	rapidly	spreading	Protestant	Reformation,	and	the
books	of	the	Apocrypha	contain	support	for	the	Catholic	teaching
of	prayers	for	the	dead	and	justification	by	faith	plus	works,	not	by
faith	alone.	In	affirming	the	Apocrypha	as	within	the	canon,	Roman
Catholics	would	hold	that	the	church	has	the	authority	to	constitute
a	literary	work	as	“Scripture,”	while	Protestants	have	held	that	the
church	cannot	make	something	to	be	Scripture,	but	can	only
recognize	what	God	has	already	caused	to	be	written	as	his	own
words.
18
	(One	analogy	here	would	be	to	say	that	a	police
investigator	can	recognize	counterfeit	money	as	counterfeit	and	can
recognize	genuine	money	as	genuine,	but	he	cannot	make
counterfeit	money	to	be	genuine,	nor	can	any	declaration	by	any
number	of	police	make	counterfeit	money	to	be	something	it	is	not.
Only	the	official	treasury	of	a	nation	can	make	money	that	is	real
money;	similarly,	only	God	can	make	words	to	be	his	very	words
and	worthy	of	inclusion	in	Scripture.)
Thus	the	writings	of	the	Apocrypha	should	not	be	regarded	as	part
of	Scripture:	(1)	they	do	not	claim	for	themselves	the	same	kind	of
authority	as	the	Old	Testament	writings;	(2)	they	were	not	regarded
as	God’s	words	by	the	Jewish	people	from	whom	they	originated;
(3)	they	were	not	considered	to	be	Scripture	by	Jesus	or	the	New
Testament	authors;	and	(4)	they	contain	teachings	inconsistent	with
the	rest	of	the	Bible.	We	must	conclude	that	they	are	merely	human
words,	not	God-breathed	words	like	the	words	of	Scripture.	They
do	have	value	for	historical	and	linguistic	research,	and	they
contain	a	number	of	helpful	stories	about	the	courage	and	faith	of
many	Jews	during	the	period	after	the	Old	Testament	ends,	but	they
have	never	been	part	of	the	Old	Testament	canon,	and	they	should
not	be	thought	of	as	part	of	the	Bible.	Therefore,	they	have	no
binding	authority	for	the	thought	or	life	of	Christians	today.
In	conclusion,	with	regard	to	the	canon	of	the	Old	Testament,
Christians	today	should	have	no	worry	that	anything	needed	has
been	left	out	or	that	anything	that	is	not	God’s	words	has	been
included.
B.	The	New	Testament	Canon
The	development	of	the	New	Testament	canon	begins	with	the
writings	of	the	apostles.	It	should	be	remembered	that	the	writing	of
Scripture	primarily	occurs	in	connection	with	God’s	great	acts	in
redemptive	history.	The	Old	Testament	records	and	interprets	for	us
the	calling	of	Abraham	and	the	lives	of	his	descendants,	the	exodus
from	Egypt	and	the	wilderness	wanderings,	the	establishment	of
God’s	people	in	the	land	of	Canaan,	the	establishment	of	the
monarchy,	and	the	Exile	and	return	from	captivity.	Each	of	these
great	acts	of	God	in	history	is	interpreted	for	us	in	God’s	own
words	in	Scripture.	The	Old	Testament	closes	with	the	expectation
of	the	Messiah	to	come	(Mal.	3:1–4;	4:1–6).	The	next	stage	in
redemptive	history	is	the	coming	of	the	Messiah,	and	it	is	not
surprising	that	no	further	Scripture	would	be	written	until	this	next
and	greatest	event	in	the	history	of	redemption	occurred.
This	is	why	the	New	Testament	consists	of	the	writings	of	the
apostles.
19
	It	is	primarily	the	apostles	who	are	given	the	ability
from	the	Holy	Spirit	to	recall	accurately	the	words	and	deeds	of
Jesus	and	to	interpret	them	rightly	for	subsequent	generations.
Jesus	promised	this	empowering	to	his	disciples	(who	were	called
apostles	after	the	resurrection)	in	John	14:26:	“But	the	Counselor,
the	Holy	Spirit,	whom	the	Father	will	send	in	my	name,	he	will
teach	you	all	things,	and	bring	to	your	remembrance	all	that	I	have
said	to	you.”	Similarly,	Jesus	promised	further	revelation	of	truth
from	the	Holy	Spirit	when	he	told	his	disciples,	“When	the	Spirit	of
truth	comes,	he	will	guide	you	into	all	the	truth;	for	he	will	not
speak	on	his	own	authority,	but	whatever	he	hears	he	will	speak,
and	he	will	declare	to	you	the	things	that	are	to	come.	He	will
glorify	me,	for	he	will	take	what	is	mine	and	declare	it	to	you”
(John	16:13–14).	In	these	verses	the	disciples	are	promised	amazing
gifts	to	enable	them	to	write	Scripture:	the	Holy	Spirit	would	teach
them	“all	things,”	would	cause	them	to	remember	“all”	that	Jesus
had	said,	and	would	guide	them	into	“all	the	truth.”
Furthermore,	those	who	have	the	office	of	apostle	in	the	early
church	are	seen	to	claim	an	authority	equal	to	that	of	the	Old
Testament	prophets,	an	authority	to	speak	and	write	words	that	are
God’s	very	words.	Peter	encourages	his	readers	to	remember	“the
commandment	of	the	Lord	and	Savior	through	your	apostles”	(2
Peter	3:2).	To	lie	to	the	apostles	(Acts	5:2)	is	equivalent	to	lying	to
the	Holy	Spirit	(Acts	5:3)	and	lying	to	God	(Acts	5:4).
This	claim	to	be	able	to	speak	words	that	were	the	words	of	God
himself	is	especially	frequent	in	the	writings	of	the	apostle	Paul.	He
claims	not	only	that	the	Holy	Spirit	has	revealed	to	him	“what	no
eye	has	seen,	nor	ear	heard,	nor	the	heart	of	man	conceived”	(1	Cor.
2:9),	but	also	that	when	he	declares	this	revelation,	he	speaks	it	“in
words	not	taught	by	human	wisdom	but	taught	by	the	Spirit,
interpreting	Spiritual	things	in	Spiritual	words”	(1	Cor.	2:13,
author’s	translation).
20
Similarly,	Paul	tells	the	Corinthians,	“If	any	one	thinks	that	he	is	a
prophet,	or	spiritual,	he	should	acknowledge	that	what	I	am	writing
to	you	is	a	command	of	the	Lord”	(1	Cor.	14:37).	The	word
translated	“what”	in	this	verse	is	a	plural	relative	pronoun	in	Greek
(
ha
)	and	more	literally	could	be	translated	“
the	things	
that	I	am
writing	to	you.”	Thus,	Paul	claims	that	his	directives	to	the	church
at	Corinth	are	not	merely	his	own	but	a	command	of	the	Lord.
Later,	in	defending	his	apostolic	office,	Paul	says	that	he	will	give
the	Corinthians	“proof	that	Christ	is	speaking	in	me”	(2	Cor.	13:3).
Other	similar	verses	could	be	mentioned	(for	example,	Rom.	2:16;
Gal.	1:8–9;	1	Thess.	2:13;	4:8,	15;	5:27;	2	Thess.	3:6,	14).
The	apostles,	then,	have	authority	to	write	words	that	are	God’s
own	words,	equal	in	truth	status	and	authority	to	the	words	of	the
Old	Testament	Scriptures.	They	do	this	to	record,	interpret,	and
apply	to	the	lives	of	believers	the	great	truths	about	the	life,	death,
and	resurrection	of	Christ.
It	would	not	be	surprising	therefore	to	find	some	of	the	New
Testament	writings	being	placed	with	the	Old	Testament	Scriptures
as	part	of	the	canon	of	Scripture.	In	fact,	this	is	what	we	find	in	at
least	two	instances.	In	2	Peter	3:16,	Peter	shows	not	only	an
awareness	of	the	existence	of	written	epistles	from	Paul,	but	also	a
clear	willingness	to	classify	“all	of	his	[Paul’s]	epistles”	with	“the
other	scriptures”:	Peter	says,	“So	also	our	beloved	brother	Paul
wrote	to	you	according	to	the	wisdom	given	him,	speaking	of	this
as	he	does	in	all	his	letters.	There	are	some	things	in	them	hard	to
understand,	which	the	ignorant	and	unstable	twist	to	their	own
destruction,	
as	they	do	the	other	scriptures”	
(2	Peter	3:15–16).	The
word	translated	“scriptures”	here	is	
graphē,	
a	word	that	occurs
fifty-one	times	in	the	New	Testament	and	that	refers	to	the	Old
Testament	Scriptures	in	every	one	of	those	occurrences.	Thus,	the
word	
Scripture	
was	a	technical	term	for	the	New	Testament	authors,
and	it	was	used	only	of	those	writings	that	were	thought	to	be	God’s
words	and	therefore	part	of	the	canon	of	Scripture.	But	in	this	verse,
Peter	classifies	Paul’s	writings	with	the	“other	Scriptures”	(meaning
the	Old	Testament	Scriptures).	Paul’s	writings	are	therefore
considered	by	Peter	also	to	be	worthy	of	the	title	“Scripture”	and
thus	worthy	of	inclusion	in	the	canon.
A	second	instance	is	found	in	1	Timothy	5:17–18.	Paul	says,	“Let
the	elders	who	rule	well	be	considered	worthy	of	double	honor,
especially	those	who	labor	in	preaching	and	teaching;	
for	the
scripture	
says,	‘You	shall	not	muzzle	an	ox	when	it	is	treading	out
the	grain,’	and,	‘The	laborer	deserves	his	wages.’	”	The	first
quotation	from	“Scripture”	is	found	in	Deuteronomy	25:4,	but	the
second	quotation,	“The	laborer	deserves	his	wages,”	is	found
nowhere	in	the	Old	Testament.	It	does	occur,	however,	in	Luke	10:7
(with	exactly	the	same	words	in	the	Greek	text).	So	here	we	have
Paul	apparently	quoting	a	portion	of	Luke’s	gospel
21
	and	calling	it
“Scripture,”	that	is,	something	that	is	to	be	considered	part	of	the
canon.
22
	In	both	of	these	passages	(2	Peter	3:16	and	1	Tim.	5.17–
18)	we	see	evidence	that	very	early	in	the	history	of	the	church	the
writings	of	the	New	Testament	began	to	be	accepted	as	part	of	the
canon.
Because	the	apostles,	by	virtue	of	their	apostolic	office,	had
authority	to	write	words	of	Scripture,	the	authentic	written
teachings	of	the	apostles	were	accepted	by	the	early	church	as	part
of	the	canon	of	Scripture.	If	we	accept	the	arguments	for	the
traditional	views	of	authorship	of	the	New	Testament	writings,
23
then	we	have	most	of	the	New	Testament	in	the	canon	because	of
direct	authorship	by	the	apostles.	This	would	include	Matthew;
John;	Romans	to	Philemon	(all	of	the	Pauline	epistles);	James;
24
	1
and	2	Peter;	1,	2,	and	3	John;	and	Revelation.
This	leaves	five	books,	Mark,	Luke,	Acts,	Hebrews,	and	Jude,
which	were	not	written	by	apostles.	The	details	of	the	historical
process	by	which	these	books	came	to	be	counted	as	part	of
Scripture	by	the	early	church	are	scarce,	but	Mark,	Luke,	and	Acts
were	commonly	acknowledged	very	early,	probably	because	of	the
close	association	of	Mark	with	the	apostle	Peter,	and	of	Luke	(the
author	of	Luke-Acts)	with	the	apostle	Paul.	Similarly,	Jude
apparently	was	accepted	by	virtue	of	the	author’s	connection	with
James	(see	Jude	1)	and	the	fact	that	he	was	the	brother	of	Jesus.
25
The	acceptance	of	Hebrews	as	canonical	was	urged	by	many	in	the
church	on	the	basis	of	an	assumed	Pauline	authorship.	But	from
very	early	times	there	were	others	who	rejected	Pauline	authorship
in	favor	of	one	or	another	of	several	different	suggestions.	Origen,
who	died	about	A.D.	254,	mentions	various	theories	of	authorship
and	concludes,	“But	who	actually	wrote	the	epistle,	only	God
knows.”
26
	Thus,	the	acceptance	of	Hebrews	as	canonical	was	not
entirely	due	to	a	belief	in	Pauline	authorship.	Rather,	the	intrinsic
qualities	of	the	book	itself	must	have	finally	convinced	early
readers,	as	they	continue	to	convince	believers	today,	that	whoever
its	human	author	may	have	been,	its	ultimate	author	can	only	have
been	God	himself.	The	majestic	glory	of	Christ	shines	forth	from
the	pages	of	the	epistle	to	the	Hebrews	so	brightly	that	no	believer
who	reads	it	seriously	should	ever	want	to	question	its	place	in	the
canon.
This	brings	us	to	the	heart	of	the	question	of	canonicity.	For	a	book
to	belong	in	the	canon,	it	is	absolutely	necessary	that	the	book	have
divine	authorship.	If	the	words	of	the	book	are	God’s	words
(through	human	authors),	and	if	the	early	church,	under	the
direction	of	the	apostles,	preserved	the	book	as	part	of	Scripture,
then	the	book	belongs	in	the	canon.	But	if	the	words	of	the	book	are
not	God’s	words,	it	does	not	belong	in	the	canon.	The	question	of
authorship	by	an	apostle	is	important	because	it	was	primarily	the
apostles	to	whom	Christ	gave	the	ability	to	write	words	with
absolute	divine	authority.	If	a	writing	can	be	shown	to	be	by	an
apostle,	then	its	absolute	divine	authority	is	automatically
established.
27
	Thus,	the	early	church	automatically	accepted	as	part
of	the	canon	the	written	teachings	of	the	apostles	which	the	apostles
wanted	preserved	as	Scripture.
But	the	existence	of	some	New	Testament	writings	that	were	not
authored	directly	by	apostles	shows	that	there	were	others	in	the
early	church	to	whom	Christ	also	gave	the	ability,	through	the	work
of	the	Holy	Spirit,	to	write	words	that	were	God’s	own	words	and
also	therefore	intended	to	be	part	of	the	canon.	In	these	cases,	the
early	church	had	the	task	of	recognizing	which	writings	had	the
characteristic	of	being	God’s	own	words	(through	human	authors).
For	some	books	(at	least	Mark,	Luke,	and	Acts,	and	perhaps
Hebrews	and	Jude	as	well),	the	church	had,	at	least	in	some	areas,
the	personal	testimony	of	some	living	apostles	to	affirm	the
absolute	divine	authority	of	these	books.	For	example,	Paul	would
have	affirmed	the	authenticity	of	Luke	and	Acts,	and	Peter	would
have	affirmed	the	authenticity	of	Mark	as	containing	the	gospel
which	he	himself	preached.	In	other	cases,	and	in	some
geographical	areas,	the	church	simply	had	to	decide	whether	it
heard	the	voice	of	God	himself	speaking	in	the	words	of	these
writings.	In	these	cases,	the	words	of	these	books	would	have	been
self-attesting;	
that	is,	the	words	would	have	borne	witness	to	their
own	divine	authorship	as	Christians	read	them.	This	seems	to	have
been	the	case	with	Hebrews.
It	should	not	surprise	us	that	the	early	church	should	have	been	able
to	recognize	Hebrews	and	other	writings,	not	written	by	apostles,	as
God’s	very	words.	Had	not	Jesus	said	“My	sheep	hear	my	voice”
(John	10:27)?	It	should	not	be	thought	impossible	or	unlikely,
therefore,	that	the	early	church	would	be	able	to	use	a	combination
of	factors,	including	apostolic	endorsement,	consistency	with	the
rest	of	Scripture,	and	the	perception	of	a	writing	as	“God-breathed”
on	the	part	of	an	overwhelming	majority	of	believers,	to	decide	that
a	writing	was	in	fact	God’s	words	(through	a	human	author)	and
therefore	worthy	of	inclusion	in	the	canon.	Nor	should	it	be	thought
unlikely	that	the	church	would	be	able	to	use	this	process	over	a
period	of	time—as	writings	were	circulated	to	various	parts	of	the
early	church—and	finally	to	come	to	a	completely	correct	decision,
without	excluding	any	writings	that	were	in	fact	“God-breathed”
and	without	including	any	that	were	not.
28
In	A.D.	367	the	Thirty-ninth	Paschal	Letter	of	Athanasius	contained
an	exact	list	of	the	twenty-seven	New	Testament	books	we	have
today.	This	was	the	list	of	books	accepted	by	the	churches	in	the
eastern	part	of	the	Mediterranean	world.	Thirty	years	later,	in	A.D.
397,	the	Council	of	Carthage,	representing	the	churches	in	the
western	part	of	the	Mediterranean	world,	agreed	with	the	eastern
churches	on	the	same	list.	These	are	the	earliest	final	lists	of	our
present-day	canon.
Should	we	expect	any	more	writings	to	be	added	to	the	canon?	The
opening	sentence	in	Hebrews	puts	this	question	in	the	proper
historical	perspective,	the	perspective	of	the	history	of	redemption:
“In	many	and	various	ways	God	spoke	of	old	to	our	fathers	by	the
prophets;	but	in	these	last	days	he	has	spoken	to	us	by	a	Son,	whom
he	appointed	the	heir	of	all	things,	through	whom	also	he	created
the	world”	(Heb.	1:1–2).
The	contrast	between	the	former	speaking	“of	old”	by	the	prophets
and	the	recent	speaking	“in	these	last	days”	suggests	that	God’s
speech	to	us	by	his	Son	is	the	culmination	of	his	speaking	to
mankind	and	is	his	greatest	and	final	revelation	to	mankind	in	this
period	of	redemptive	history.	The	exceptional	greatness	of	the
revelation	that	comes	through	the	Son,	far	exceeding	any	revelation
in	the	old	covenant,	is	emphasized	again	and	again	throughout
chapters	1	and	2	of	Hebrews.	These	facts	all	indicate	that	there	is	a
finality	to	the	revelation	of	God	in	Christ	and	that	once	this
revelation	has	been	completed,	no	more	is	to	be	expected.
But	where	do	we	learn	about	this	revelation	through	Christ?	The
New	Testament	writings	contain	the	final,	authoritative,	and
sufficient	interpretation	of	Christ’s	work	of	redemption.	The
apostles	and	their	close	companions	report	Christ’s	words	and
deeds	and	interpret	them	with	absolute	divine	authority.	When	they
have	finished	their	writing,	there	is	no	more	to	be	added	with	the
same	absolute	divine	authority.	Thus,	once	the	writings	of	the	New
Testament	apostles	and	their	authorized	companions	are	completed,
we	have	in	written	form	the	final	record	of	everything	that	God
wants	us	to	know	about	the	life,	death,	and	resurrection	of	Christ,
and	its	meaning	for	the	lives	of	believers	for	all	time.	Since	this	is
God’s	greatest	revelation	for	mankind,	no	more	is	to	be	expected
once	this	is	complete.	In	this	way,	then,	Hebrews	1:1–2	shows	us
why	no	more	writings	can	be	added	to	the	Bible	after	the	time	of
the	New	Testament.	The	canon	is	now	closed.
A	similar	kind	of	consideration	may	be	drawn	from	Revelation
22:18–19:
I	warn	every	one	who	hears	the	words	of	the	prophecy	of	this	book:	if
any	one	adds	to	them,	God	will	add	to	him	the	plagues	described	in
this	book,	and	if	any	one	takes	away	from	the	words	of	the	book	of
this	prophecy,	God	will	take	away	his	share	in	the	tree	of	life	and	in
the	holy	city,	which	are	described	in	this	book.
The	primary	reference	of	these	verses	is	clearly	to	the	book	of
Revelation	itself,	for	John	refers	to	his	writing	as	“the	words	of	the
prophecy	of	this	book”	in	verses	7	and	10	of	this	chapter	(and	the
entire	book	is	called	a	prophecy	in	Rev.	1:3).	Furthermore,	the
reference	to	“the	tree	of	life	and	.	.	.	the	holy	city,	which	are
described	in	this	book”	indicates	that	the	book	of	Revelation	itself
is	intended.
It	is,	however,	not	accidental	that	this	statement	comes	at	the	end	of
the	last	chapter	of	Revelation,	and	that	Revelation	is	the	last	book
in	the	New	Testament.	In	fact,	Revelation	has	to	be	placed	last	in
the	canon.	For	many	books,	their	placement	in	the	assembling	of
the	canon	is	of	little	consequence.	But	just	as	Genesis	must	be
placed	first	(for	it	tells	us	of	creation),	so	Revelation	must	be	placed
last	(for	its	focus	is	to	tell	us	of	the	future	and	God’s	new	creation).
The	events	described	in	Revelation	are	historically	subsequent	to
the	events	described	in	the	rest	of	the	New	Testament	and	require
that	Revelation	be	placed	where	it	is.	Thus,	it	is	not	inappropriate
for	us	to	understand	this	exceptionally	strong	warning	at	the	end	of
Revelation	as	applying	in	a	secondary	way	to	the	whole	of
Scripture.	Placed	here,	where	it	must	be	placed,	the	warning	forms
an	appropriate	conclusion	to	the	entire	canon	of	Scripture.	Along
with	Hebrews	1:1–2	and	the	history-of-redemption	perspective
implicit	in	those	verses,	this	broader	application	of	Revelation
22:18–19	also	suggests	to	us	that	we	should	expect	no	more
Scripture	to	be	added	beyond	what	we	already	have.
How	do	we	know,	then,	that	we	have	the	right	books	in	the	canon	of
Scripture	we	now	possess?	The	question	can	be	answered	in	two
different	ways.	First,	if	we	are	asking	upon	what	we	should	base
our	confidence,	the	answer	must	ultimately	be	that	our	confidence
is	based	on	the	faithfulness	of	God.	We	know	that	God	loves	his
people,	and	it	is	supremely	important	that	God’s	people	have	his
own	words,	for	they	are	our	life	(Deut.	32:47;	Matt.	4:4).	They	are
more	precious,	more	important	to	us	than	anything	else	in	this
world.	We	also	know	that	God	our	Father	is	in	control	of	all	history,
and	he	is	not	the	kind	of	Father	who	will	trick	us	or	fail	to	be
faithful	to	us	or	keep	from	us	something	we	absolutely	need.
The	severity	of	the	punishments	in	Revelation	22:18–19	that	come
to	those	who	add	to	or	take	from	God’s	words	also	confirms	the
importance	for	God’s	people	of	having	a	correct	canon.	There	could
be	no	greater	punishments	than	these,	for	they	are	the	punishments
of	eternal	judgment.	This	shows	that	God	himself	places	supreme
value	on	our	having	a	correct	collection	of	God-breathed	writings,
no	more	and	no	less.	In	the	light	of	this	fact,	could	it	be	right	for	us
to	believe	that	God	our	Father,	who	controls	all	history,	would
allow	all	of	his	church	for	almost	two	thousand	years	to	be	deprived
of	something	he	himself	values	so	highly	and	is	so	necessary	for
our	spiritual	lives?
29
The	preservation	and	correct	assembling	of	the	canon	of	Scripture
should	ultimately	be	seen	by	believers,	then,	not	as	part	of	church
history	subsequent	to	God’s	great	central	acts	of	redemption	for	his
people,	but	as	an	integral	part	of	the	history	of	redemption	itself.
Just	as	God	was	at	work	in	creation,	in	the	calling	of	his	people
Israel,	in	the	life,	death,	and	resurrection	of	Christ,	and	in	the	early
work	and	writings	of	the	apostles,	so	God	was	at	work	in	the
preservation	and	assembling	together	of	the	books	of	Scripture	for
the	benefit	of	his	people	for	the	entire	church	age.	Ultimately,	then,
we	base	our	confidence	in	the	correctness	of	our	present	canon	on
the	faithfulness	of	God.
The	question	of	how	we	know	that	we	have	the	right	books	can,
secondly,	be	answered	in	a	somewhat	different	way.	We	might	wish
to	focus	on	the	process	by	which	we	become	persuaded	that	the
books	we	have	now	in	the	canon	are	the	right	ones.	In	this	process
two	factors	are	at	work:	the	activity	of	the	Holy	Spirit	convincing
us	as	we	read	Scripture	for	ourselves,	and	the	historical	data	that	we
have	available	for	our	consideration.
As	we	read	Scripture	the	Holy	Spirit	works	to	convince	us	that	the
books	we	have	in	Scripture	are	all	from	God	and	are	his	words	to
us.	It	has	been	the	testimony	of	Christians	throughout	the	ages	that
as	they	read	the	books	of	the	Bible,	the	words	of	Scripture	speak	to
their	hearts	as	no	other	books	do.	Day	after	day,	year	after	year,
Christians	find	that	the	words	of	the	Bible	are	indeed	the	words	of
God	speaking	to	them	with	an	authority,	a	power,	and	a
persuasiveness	that	no	other	writings	possess.	Truly	the	Word	of
God	is	“living	and	active,	sharper	than	any	two-edged	sword,
piercing	to	the	division	of	soul	and	spirit,	of	joints	and	marrow,	and
discerning	the	thoughts	and	intentions	of	the	heart”	(Heb.	4:12).
Yet	the	process	by	which	we	become	persuaded	that	the	present
canon	is	right	is	also	helped	by	historical	data.	Of	course,	if	the
assembling	of	the	canon	was	one	part	of	God’s	central	acts	in	the
history	of	redemption	(as	was	stated	above),	then	Christians	today
should	not	presume	to	take	it	upon	themselves	to	attempt	to	add	to
or	subtract	from	the	books	of	the	canon:	the	process	was	completed
long	ago.	Nevertheless,	a	thorough	investigation	of	the	historical
circumstances	surrounding	the	assembling	of	the	canon	is	helpful	in
confirming	our	conviction	that	the	decisions	made	by	the	early
church	were	correct	decisions.	Some	of	this	historical	data	has	been
mentioned	in	the	preceding	pages.	Other,	more	detailed	data	is
available	for	those	who	wish	to	pursue	more	specialized
investigations.
30
Yet	one	further	historical	fact	should	be	mentioned.	Today	there
exist	no	strong	candidates	for	addition	to	the	canon	and	no	strong
objections	to	any	book	presently	in	the	canon.	Of	those	writings
that	some	in	the	early	church	wanted	to	include	in	the	canon,	it	is
safe	to	say	that	there	are	none	that	present-day	evangelicals	would
want	to	include.	Some	of	the	very	early	writers	distinguished
themselves	quite	clearly	from	the	apostles	and	their	writings	from
the	writings	of	the	apostles.	Ignatius,	for	example,	about	A.D.	110,
said,	“I	do	not	order	you	as	did	Peter	and	Paul;	
they	were	apostles,	
I
am	a	convict;	they	were	free,	I	am	even	until	now	a	slave”
(Ignatius,	
To	the	Romans,	
4.3;	compare	the	attitude	toward	the
apostles	in	1	Clement	42:1,	2;	44:1–2	[A.D.	95];	Ignatius,	
To	the
Magnesians,	
7:1;	13:1–2;	et	al.).
Even	those	writings	that	were	for	a	time	thought	by	some	to	be
worthy	of	inclusion	in	the	canon	contain	doctrinal	teaching	that	is
contradictory	to	the	rest	of	Scripture.	“The	Shepherd”	of	Hermas,
for	example,	teaches	“the	necessity	of	penance”	and	“the	possibility
of	the	forgiveness	of	sins	at	least	once	after	baptism.	.	.	.	The	author
seems	to	identify	the	Holy	Spirit	with	the	Son	of	God	before	the
Incarnation,	and	to	hold	that	the	Trinity	came	into	existence	only
after	the	humanity	of	Christ	had	been	taken	up	into	heaven”
(
Oxford	Dictionary	of	the	Christian	Church,	
p.	641).
The	
Gospel	of	Thomas,	
which	for	a	time	was	held	by	some	to
belong	to	the	canon,	ends	with	the	following	absurd	statement	(par.
114):
Simon	Peter	said	to	them:	“Let	Mary	go	away	from	us,	for	women	are
not	worthy	of	life.”	Jesus	said:	“Lo,	I	shall	lead	her,	so	that	I	may
make	her	a	male,	that	she	too	may	become	a	living	spirit,	resembling
you	males.	For	every	woman	who	makes	herself	a	male	will	enter	the
kingdom	of	heaven.”
31
All	other	existing	documents	that	had	in	the	early	church	any
possibility	of	inclusion	in	the	canon	are	similar	to	these	in	that	they
either	contain	explicit	disclaimers	of	canonical	status	or	include
some	doctrinal	aberrations	that	clearly	make	them	unworthy	of
inclusion	in	the	Bible.
32
On	the	other	hand,	there	are	no	strong	objections	to	any	book
currently	in	the	canon.	In	the	case	of	several	New	Testament	books
that	were	slow	to	gain	approval	by	the	whole	church	(books	such	as
2	Peter	or	2	and	3	John),	much	of	the	early	hesitancy	over	their
inclusion	can	be	attributed	to	the	fact	that	they	were	not	initially
circulated	very	widely,	and	that	full	knowledge	of	the	contents	of
all	the	New	Testament	writings	spread	through	the	church	rather
slowly.	(Martin	Luther’s	hesitancies	concerning	James	are	quite
understandable	in	view	of	the	doctrinal	controversy	in	which	he
was	engaged,	but	such	hesitancy	was	certainly	not	necessary.	The
apparent	doctrinal	conflict	with	Paul’s	teaching	is	easily	resolved
once	it	is	recognized	that	James	is	using	three	key	terms,
justification,	faith,	
and	
works	
in	senses	different	from	those	with
which	Paul	used	them.)
33
There	is	therefore	historical	confirmation	for	the	correctness	of	the
current	canon.	Yet	it	must	be	remembered	in	connection	with	any
historical	investigation	that	the	work	of	the	early	church	was	not	to
bestow	divine	authority	or	even	ecclesiastical	authority	upon	some
merely	human	writings,	but	rather	to	recognize	the	divinely
authored	characteristic	of	writings	that	already	had	such	a	quality.
This	is	because	the	ultimate	criterion	of	canonicity	is	divine
authorship,	not	human	or	ecclesiastical	approval.
At	this	point	someone	may	ask	a	hypothetical	question	about	what
we	should	do	if	another	one	of	Paul’s	epistles	were	discovered,	for
example.	Would	we	add	it	to	Scripture?	This	is	a	difficult	question,
because	two	conflicting	considerations	are	involved.	On	the	one
hand,	if	a	great	majority	of	believers	were	convinced	that	this	was
indeed	an	authentic	Pauline	epistle,	written	in	the	course	of	Paul’s
fulfillment	of	his	apostolic	office,	then	the	nature	of	Paul’s	apostolic
authority	would	guarantee	that	the	writing	would	be	God’s	very
words	(as	well	as	Paul’s),	and	that	its	teachings	would	be	consistent
with	the	rest	of	Scripture.	But	the	fact	that	it	was	not	preserved	as
part	of	the	canon	would	indicate	that	it	was	not	among	the	writings
the	apostles	wanted	the	church	to	preserve	as	part	of	Scripture.
Moreover,	it	must	immediately	be	said	that	such	a	hypothetical
question	is	just	that:	hypothetical.	It	is	exceptionally	difficult	to
imagine	what	kind	of	historical	data	might	be	discovered	that	could
convincingly	demonstrate	to	the	church	as	a	whole	that	a	letter	lost
for	over	1,900	years	was	genuinely	authored	by	Paul,	and	it	is	more
difficult	still	to	understand	how	our	sovereign	God	could	have
faithfully	cared	for	his	people	for	over	1,900	years	and	still	allowed
them	to	be	continually	deprived	of	something	he	intended	them	to
have	as	part	of	his	final	revelation	of	himself	in	Jesus	Christ.	These
considerations	make	it	so	highly	improbable	that	any	such
manuscript	would	be	discovered	at	some	time	in	the	future,	that
such	a	hypothetical	question	really	does	not	merit	further	serious
consideration.
In	conclusion,	are	there	any	books	in	our	present	canon	that	should
not	be	there?	No.	We	can	rest	our	confidence	in	this	fact	in	the
faithfulness	of	God	our	Father,	who	would	not	lead	all	his	people
for	nearly	two	thousand	years	to	trust	as	his	Word	something	that	is
not.	And	we	find	our	confidence	repeatedly	confirmed	both	by
historical	investigation	and	by	the	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in
enabling	us	to	hear	God’s	voice	in	a	unique	way	as	we	read	from
every	one	of	the	sixty-six	books	in	our	present	canon	of	Scripture.
But	are	there	any	missing	books,	books	that	should	have	been
included	in	Scripture	but	were	not?	The	answer	must	be	no.	In	all
known	literature	there	are	no	candidates	that	even	come	close	to
Scripture	when	consideration	is	given	both	to	their	doctrinal
consistency	with	the	rest	of	Scripture	and	to	the	type	of	authority
they	claim	for	themselves	(as	well	as	the	way	those	claims	of
authority	have	been	received	by	other	believers).	Once	again,	God’s
faithfulness	to	his	people	convinces	us	that	there	is	nothing	missing
from	Scripture	that	God	thinks	we	need	to	know	for	obeying	him
and	trusting	him	fully.	The	canon	of	Scripture	today	is	exactly	what
God	wanted	it	to	be,	and	it	will	stay	that	way	until	Christ	returns.
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
Why	is	it	important	to	your	Christian	life	to	know	which	writings	are
God’s	words	and	which	are	not?	How	would	your	relationship	with	God
be	different	if	you	had	to	look	for	his	words	that	were	scattered	among
all	the	writings	of	Christians	throughout	church	history?	How	would
your	Christian	life	be	different	if	God’s	words	were	contained	not	only	in
the	Bible	but	also	in	the	official	declarations	of	the	church	throughout
history?
2
.	
Have	you	had	doubts	or	questions	about	the	canonicity	of	any	of	the
books	of	the	Bible?	What	caused	those	questions?	What	should	one	do	to
resolve	them?
3
.	
Mormons,	Jehovah’s	Witnesses,	and	members	of	other	cults	have
claimed	present-day	revelations	from	God	that	they	count	equal	to	the
Bible	in	authority.	What	reasons	can	you	give	to	indicate	the	falsity	of
those	claims?	In	practice,	do	these	people	treat	the	Bible	as	an	authority
equal	to	these	other	“revelations”?
4
.	
If	you	have	never	read	any	parts	of	the	Old	Testament	Apocrypha,
perhaps	you	would	want	to	read	some	sections.
34
	Do	you	feel	you	can
trust	these	writings	in	the	same	way	you	trust	Scripture?	Compare	the
effect	these	writings	have	on	you	with	the	effect	Scripture	has	on	you.
You	might	want	to	make	a	similar	comparison	with	some	writings	from	a
collection	of	books	called	the	New	Testament	Apocrypha,
35
	or	perhaps
with	the	
Book	of	Mormon	
or	the	
Qur’an.	
Is	the	spiritual	effect	of	these
writings	on	your	life	positive	or	negative?	How	does	it	compare	with	the
spiritual	effect	the	Bible	has	on	your	life?
SPECIAL	TERMS
Apocrypha
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
covenant
apostle
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
God-breathed
canon
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
history	of	redemption
canonical
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
self-attesting
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the
bibliography	to	chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be
found	in	
Appendix	4
.)
In	the	“Other	Works”	section	of	this	chapter’s	bibliography	I	have
included	some	works	written	from	a	nonevangelical	perspective
because	of	their	importance	for	investigating	the	historical	data
relevant	to	the	question	of	canon.
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92			Litton,	10–18
1930			Thomas,	101–15
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1875–76			Pope,	1:193–230
1940			Wiley,	1:185–214
1983			Carter,	1:291–94
3.			Baptist
1907			Strong,	145–72;	236–40
1976–83			Henry,	2:69–76;	4:405–75
1987–94			Lewis/Demarest,	1:147–48
4.			Dispensational
1947			Chafer,	1:95–102,	124–28
1949			Thiessen,	50–61
1986			Ryrie,	105–9
5.			Lutheran
1917–24			Pieper,	1:330–48
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1861			Heppe,	12–21,	28–31
1871–73			Hodge,	1:152–53
1887–1921			Warfield,	
IAB,	
411–18
1889			Shedd,	1:134–47
1938			Berkhof,	
Intro.,	
116–43
1962			Buswell,	1:193–98
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955			Ott	(no	explicit	treatment)
2.			Roman	Catholic:	Post-Vatican	II
1980			McBrien,	1:50–62,	201–43;	2:817–42
Other	Works
Beckwith,	R.	T.	“Canon	of	the	Old	Testament.”	In	
IBD,	
1:235–38.
Beckwith,	Roger.	
The	Old	Testament	Canon	of	the	New	Testament
Church	and	Its	Background	in	Early	Judaism.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,
1985.
Birdsall,	J.	N.	“Apocrypha.”	In	
IBD,	
1:75–77.
_____.	“Canon	of	the	New	Testament.”	In	
IBD,	
1:240–45.
Bruce,	F.	F.	
The	Canon	of	Scripture.	
Downers	Grove,	Ill:	InterVarsity
Press,	1988.
Carson,	D.	A.,	and	John	D.	Woodbridge,	eds.	
Hermeneutics,	Authority,
and	Canon.	
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1986.
Dunbar,	David	G.	“The	Biblical	Canon.”	In	
Hermeneutics,	Authority,	and
Canon.	
Ed.	by	D.	A.	Carson	and	John	Woodbridge.	Grand	Rapids:
Zondervan,	1986.
Green,	William	Henry.	
General	Introduction	to	the	Old	Testament:	The
Canon.	
New	York:	Scribners,	1898.
Harris,	R.	Laird.	“Chronicles	and	the	Canon	in	New	Testament	Times.”
JETS.	
Vol.	33,	no.	1	(March	1990):	75–84.
_____.	
Inspiration	and	Canonicity	of	the	Bible:	An	Historical	and
Exegetical	Study.	
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1989.
Kline,	Meredith	G.	
The	Structure	of	Biblical	Authority.	
Grand	Rapids:
Eerdmans,	1972.
Leiman,	S.	Z.	
The	Canonization	of	Hebrew	Scripture:	The	Talmudic	and
Midrashic	Evidence.	
Hamden,	Conn.:	Archon,	1976.
McRay,	J.	R.	“Bible,	Canon	of.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	140–41.
Metzger,	Bruce	M.	
The	Canon	of	the	New	Testament:	Its	Origin,
Development,	and	Significance.	
Oxford:	Clarendon;	and	New	York:
Oxford	University	Press,	1987.
Packer,	J.	I.	“Scripture.”	
NDT,	
627–31.
Ridderbos,	Herman	N.	
Redemptive	History	and	the	New	Testament
Scriptures.	
Formerly,	
The	Authority	of	the	New	Testament	Scriptures.	
2d
rev.	ed.	Trans.	by	H.	D.	Jongste.	Rev.	by	Richard	B.	Gaffin,	Jr.
Phillipsburg,	N.J.:	Presbyterian	and	Reformed,	1988.
Westcott,	Brooke	Foss.	
The	Bible	in	the	Church:	A	Popular	Account	of
the	Collection	and	Reception	of	the	Holy	Scriptures	in	the	Christian
Churches.	
First	ed.	with	alterations.	London:	Macmillan,	1901.
Zahn,	Theodor.	
Geschichte	des	Neutestamentlichen	Kanons.	
2	vols.
Erlangen:	Deichert,	1888–90.	Reprint	ed.,	Hildesheim	and	New	York:
Olms,	1975.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
Hebrews	1:1–2:	
In	many	and	various	ways	God	spoke	of	old	to	our	fathers
by	the	prophets;	but	in	these	last	days	he	has	spoken	to	us	by	a	Son,	whom	he
appointed	the	heir	of	all	things,	through	whom	also	he	created	the	world.
HYMN
“O	Word	of	God	Incarnate”
O	Word	of	God	incarnate,	O	wisdom	from	on	high,
O	truth	unchanged,	unchanging,	O	light	of	our	dark	sky;
We	praise	thee	for	the	radiance	that	from	the	hallowed	page,
A	lantern	to	our	footsteps,	shines	on	from	age	to	age.
The	church	from	her	dear	Master	received	the	gift	divine,
And	still	that	light	she	lifteth	o’er	all	the	earth	to	shine.
It	is	the	golden	casket,	where	gems	of	truth	are	stored;
It	is	the	heav’n-drawn	picture	of	Christ,	the	Living	Word.
It	floateth	like	a	banner	before	God’s	host	unfurled;
It	shineth	like	a	beacon	above	the	darkling	world.
It	is	the	chart	and	compass	that	o’er	life’s	surging	sea,
’Mid	mists	and	rocks	and	quicksands,	still	guides,	O	Christ,	to	thee.
O	make	thy	church,	dear	Savior,	a	lamp	of	purest	gold,
To	bear	before	the	nations	thy	true	light,	as	of	old.
O	teach	thy	wand’ring	pilgrims	by	this	their	path	to	trace,
Till,	clouds	and	darkness	ended,	they	see	thee	face	to	face.
AUTHOR:	WILLIAM	WALSHAM	HOW,	1867
NOTES
1
See	Meredith	Kline,	
The	Structure	of	Biblical	Authority	
(Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1972),	esp.	pp.	48–53	and	113–30.
2
For	other	passages	that	illustrate	the	growth	in	the	collection	of	written	words	from	God	see	2	Chron.	9:29;	12:15;	13:22;	Isa.
30:8;	Jer.	29:1;	36:1–32;	45:1;	51:60;	Ezek.	43:11;	Dan.	7:1;	Hab.	2:2.	Additions	to	it	were	usually	through	the	agency	of	a
prophet.
3
See	“Chronology	of	the	Old	Testament,”	in	
IBD,	
1:277.
4
That	“the	Holy	Spirit”	is	primarily	a	reference	to	divinely	authoritative	prophecy	is	clear	both	from	the	fact	that	the	
bath	qôl	
(a
voice	from	heaven)	is	seen	as	a	substitute	for	it,	and	from	the	very	frequent	use	of	“the	Holy	Spirit”	to	refer	to	prophecy	elsewhere
in	Rabbinic	literature.
5
See	Roger	Nicole,	“New	Testament	Use	of	the	Old	Testament,”	in	
Revelation	and	the	Bible,	
ed.	Carl	F.	H.	Henry	(London:
Tyndale	Press,	1959),	pp.	137–41.
6
Jude	14–15	does	cite	1	Enoch	60.8	and	1.9,	and	Paul	at	least	twice	quotes	pagan	Greek	authors	(see	Acts	17:28;	Titus	1:12),	but
these	citations	are	more	for	purposes	of	illustration	than	proof.	Never	are	the	works	introduced	with	a	phrase	like,	“God	says,”	or
“Scripture	says,”	or	“it	is	written,”	phrases	that	imply	the	attribution	of	divine	authority	to	the	words	cited.	(It	should	be	noted	that
neither	1	Enoch	nor	the	authors	cited	by	Paul	are	part	of	the	Apocrypha.)	No	book	of	the	Apocrypha	is	even	mentioned	in	the	New
Testament.
7
The	Apocrypha	includes	the	following	writings:	1	and	2	Esdras,	Tobit,	Judith,	the	Rest	of	Esther,	the	Wisdom	of	Solomon,
Ecclesiasticus,	Baruch	(including	the	Epistle	of	Jeremiah),	the	Song	of	the	Three	Holy	Children,	Susanna,	Bel	and	the	Dragon,	the
Prayer	of	Manasseh,	and	1	and	2	Maccabees.	These	writings	are	not	found	in	the	Hebrew	Bible,	but	they	were	included	with	the
Septuagint	(the	translation	of	the	Old	Testament	into	Greek,	which	was	used	by	many	Greek-speaking	Jews	at	the	time	of	Christ).
A	good	modern	translation	is	
The	Oxford	Annotated	Apocrypha	(RSV),	
ed.	Bruce	M.	Metzger	(New	York:	Oxford	University
Press,	1965).	Metzger	includes	brief	introductions	and	helpful	annotations	to	the	books.
The	Greek	word	
apocrypha	
means	“things	that	are	hidden,”	but	Metzger	notes	(p.	
ix)	that	scholars	are	not	sure	why	this	word
came	to	be	applied	to	these	writings.
8
A	detailed	historical	survey	of	the	differing	views	of	Christians	regarding	the	Apocrypha	is	found	in	F.	F.	Bruce,	
The	Canon	of
Scripture	
(Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,	1988),	pp.	68–97.	An	even	more	detailed	study	is	found	in	Roger	Beckwith,
The	Old	Testament	Canon	of	the	New	Testament	Church	and	Its	Background	in	Early	Judaism	
(London:	SPCK,	1985,	and	Grand
Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1986),	esp.	pp.	338–433.	Beckwith’s	book	has	now	established	itself	as	the	definitive	work	on	the	Old
Testament	canon.	At	the	conclusion	of	his	study	Beckwith	says,	“The	inclusion	of	various	Apocrypha	and	Pseudepigrapha	in	the
canon	of	the	early	Christians	was	not	done	in	any	agreed	way	or	at	the	earliest	period,	but	occurred	in	Gentile	Christianity,	after
the	church’s	breach	with	the	synagogue,	among	those	whose	knowledge	of	the	primitive	Christian	canon	was	becoming	blurred.”
He	concludes,	“On	the	question	of	the	canonicity	of	the	Apocrypha	and	Pseudepigrapha	the	truly	primitive	Christian	evidence	is
negative”	(pp.	436–37).
9
From	Eusebius,	
Ecclesiastical	History	
4.26.14.	Eusebius,	writing	in	A.D.	325,	was	the	first	great	church	historian.	This	quotation
is	from	the	translation	by	Kirsopp	Lake,	
Eusebius:	The	Ecclesiastical	History,	
two	vols.	(London:	Heinemann;	and	Cambridge,
Mass.:	Harvard,	1975),	1:393.
10
That	is,	1	Samuel,	2	Samuel,	1	Kings,	and	2	Kings.
11
This	does	not	refer	to	the	apocryphal	book	called	the	Wisdom	of	Solomon	but	is	simply	a	fuller	description	of	Proverbs.
Eusebius	notes	in	4.22.9	that	Proverbs	was	commonly	called	Wisdom	by	ancient	writers.
12
Ezra	would	include	both	Ezra	and	Nehemiah,	according	to	a	common	Hebrew	way	of	referring	to	the	combined	books.
13
For	some	reason	there	was	doubt	about	the	canonicity	of	Esther	in	some	parts	of	the	early	church	(in	the	East	but	not	in	the
West),	but	the	doubts	were	eventually	resolved,	and	Christian	usage	eventually	became	uniform	with	the	Jewish	view,	which	had
always	counted	Esther	as	part	of	the	canon,	although	it	had	been	opposed	by	certain	rabbis	for	their	own	reasons.	(See	the
discussion	of	the	Jewish	view	in	Beckwith,	
Canon,	
pp.	288–97.)
14
Eusebius,	
Ecclesiastical	History	
6.15.2.	Origen	died	about	A.D.	254.	Origen	names	all	the	books	of	the	present	Old	Testament
canon	except	the	twelve	minor	prophets	(which	would	be	counted	as	one	book),	but	this	leaves	his	list	of	“twenty-two	books”
incomplete	at	twenty-one,	so	apparently	Eusebius’s	citation	is	incomplete,	at	least	in	the	form	we	have	it	today.
Eusebius	himself	elsewhere	repeats	the	statement	of	the	Jewish	historian	Josephus	that	the	Scriptures	contain	twenty-two	books,
but	nothing	since	the	time	of	Artaxerxes	(3.10.1–5),	and	this	would	exclude	all	of	the	Apocrypha.
15
Athanasius,	
Letter	39,	
in	
Nicene	and	Post	Nicene	Fathers,	
2d	ser.,	ed.	Philip	Schaff	and	Henry	Wace	(Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,
1978),	vol.	
4:	
Athanasius,	
pp.	551–52.
16
See	Metzger,	
Apocrypha,	
pp.	xii–xiii.	Metzger	notes	that	none	of	the	early	Latin	and	Greek	church	fathers	who	quoted	from	the
Apocrypha	as	Scripture	knew	any	Hebrew.	Beckwith,	
Canon,	
pp.	386–89,	argues	that	the	evidence	of	Christian	writers	quoting
the	Apocrypha	as	Scripture	is	considerably	less	extensive	and	less	significant	than	scholars	often	claim	it	to	be.
17
E.	J.	Young,	“The	Canon	of	the	Old	Testament,”	in	
Revelation	and	the	Bible,	
pp.	167–68.
18
It	should	be	noted	that	Roman	Catholics	use	the	term	
deuterocanonical	
rather	than	
apocryphal	
to	refer	to	these	books.	They
understand	this	to	mean	“later	added	to	the	canon”	(the	prefix	
deutero-	
means	“second”).
19
A	few	New	Testament	books	(Mark,	Luke,	Acts,	Hebrews,	and	Jude)	were	not	written	by	apostles	but	by	others	closely
associated	with	them	and	apparently	authorized	by	them:	see	the	discussion	below.
20
This	is	my	own	translation	of	the	last	phrase	of	1	Cor.	2:13:	see	Wayne	Grudem,	“Scripture’s	Self-Attestation,”	in	
Scripture	and
Truth,	
ed.	D.	A.	Carson	and	John	Woodbridge	(Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1983),	p.	
365,	n.	61.	But	this	translation	is	not	crucial	to
the	main	point:	namely,	that	Paul	speaks	words	taught	by	the	Holy	Spirit,	a	point	that	is	affirmed	in	the	first	part	of	the	verse,	no
matter	how	the	second	half	is	translated.
21
Someone	might	object	that	Paul	could	be	quoting	an	oral	tradition	of	Jesus’	words	rather	than	Luke’s	gospel,	but	it	is	doubtful
that	Paul	would	call	any	oral	tradition	“Scripture,”	since	the	word	(Gk.	
graphē,	
“writing”)	is	always	in	New	Testament	usage
applied	to	written	texts,	and	since	Paul’s	close	association	with	Luke	makes	it	very	possible	that	he	would	quote	Luke’s	written
gospel.
22
Luke	himself	was	not	an	apostle,	but	his	gospel	is	here	accorded	authority	equal	with	that	of	the	apostolic	writings.	Apparently
this	was	due	to	his	very	close	association	with	the	apostles,	especially	Paul,	and	the	endangerment	of	his	gospel	by	an	apostle.
23
For	a	defense	of	traditional	views	of	authorship	of	the	New	Testament	writings,	see	Donald	Guthrie,	
New	Testament
Introduction	
(Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,	1970).
24
James	seems	to	be	considered	an	apostle	in	1	Cor.	15:7	and	Gal.	1:19.	He	also	fulfills	functions	appropriate	to	an	apostle	in	Acts
12:17;	15:13;	21:18;	Gal.	2:9,	12:	see	
Chapter	47
.
25
The	acceptance	of	Jude	in	the	canon	was	slow,	primarily	because	of	doubts	concerning	his	quotation	of	the	noncanonical	book
of	1	Enoch.
26
Origen’s	statement	is	quoted	in	Eusebius,	
Ecclesiastical	History,	
6.25.14.
27
Of	course,	this	does	not	mean	that	everything	an	apostle	wrote,	including	even	grocery	lists	and	receipts	for	business
transactions,	would	be	considered	Scripture.	We	are	speaking	here	of	writings	done	when	acting	in	the	role	of	an	apostle	and
giving	apostolic	instructions	to	churches	and	to	individual	Christians	(such	as	Timothy	or	Philemon).
It	is	also	very	likely	that	the	living	apostles	themselves	gave	some	guidance	to	the	churches	concerning	which	works	they
intended	to	be	preserved	and	used	as	Scripture	in	the	churches	(see	Col.	4:16;	2	Thess.	3:14;	2	Peter	3:16).	There	were	apparently
some	writings	that	had	absolute	divine	authority	but	that	the	apostles	did	not	decide	to	preserve	as	“Scripture”	for	the	churches
(such	as	Paul’s	“previous	letter”	to	the	Corinthians:	see	1	Cor.	5:9).	Moreover,	the	apostles	did	much	more	oral	teaching,	which
had	divine	authority	(see	2	Thess.	2:15)	but	was	not	written	down	and	preserved	as	Scripture.	Thus,	in	addition	to	apostolic
authorship,	preservation	by	the	church	under	the	direction	of	the	apostles	was	necessary	for	a	work	to	be	included	in	the	canon.
28
I	am	not	discussing	at	this	point	the	question	of	textual	variants	(that	is,	differences	in	individual	words	and	phrases	that	are	to
be	found	among	the	many	ancient	copies	of	Scripture	that	still	exist).	This	question	is	treated	in	
chapter	5
.
29
This	is	of	course	not	to	affirm	the	impossible	notion	that	God	providentially	preserves	every	word	in	every	copy	of	every	text,
no	matter	how	careless	the	copyist,	or	that	he	must	miraculously	provide	every	believer	with	a	Bible	instantly.	Nevertheless,	this
consideration	of	God’s	faithful	care	of	his	children	should	certainly	cause	us	to	be	thankful	that	in	God’s	providence	there	is	no
significantly	attested	textual	variant	that	would	change	any	point	of	Christian	doctrine	or	ethics,	so	faithfully	has	the	text	been
transmitted	and	preserved.	However,	we	must	say	clearly	that	there	are	a	number	of	differing	words	in	the	different	ancient
manuscripts	of	the	Bible	that	are	preserved	today.	These	are	called	“textual	variants.”	The	question	of	textual	variants	within	the
surviving	manuscripts	of	the	books	that	belong	in	the	canon	is	discussed	in	
chapter	5
.
30
A	very	helpful	recent	survey	of	this	field	is	David	Dunbar,	“The	Biblical	Canon,”	in	
Hermeneutics,	Authority,	and	Canon,	
ed.
D.	A.	Carson	and	John	Woodbridge	(Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1986),	pp.	295–360.	In	addition,	three	recent	books	are	of	such
excellent	quality	that	they	will	define	the	discussion	of	canon	for	many	years	to	come:	Roger	Beckwith,	
The	Old	Testament	Canon
of	the	New	Testament	Church	and	Its	Background	in	Early	Judaism	
(London:	SPCK,	1985,	and	Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1986);
Bruce	Metzger,	
The	Canon	of	the	New	Testament:	Its	Origin,	Development,	and	Significance	
(Oxford:	Clarendon;	New	York:
Oxford	University	Press,	1987);	and	F.	F.	Bruce,	
The	Canon	of	Scripture	
(Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,	1988).
31
This	document	was	not	written	by	Thomas	the	apostle.	Current	scholarly	opinion	attributes	it	to	an	unknown	author	in	the
second	century	A.D.	who	used	Thomas’s	name.
32
It	is	appropriate	here	to	say	a	word	about	the	writing	called	the	
Didache.	
Although	this	document	was	not	considered	for
inclusion	in	the	canon	during	the	early	history	of	the	church,	many	scholars	have	thought	it	to	be	a	very	early	document	and	some
today	quote	it	as	if	it	were	an	authority	on	the	teaching	of	the	early	church	on	the	same	level	as	the	New	Testament	writings.	It
was	first	discovered	in	1875	at	a	library	in	Constantinople	but	probably	dates	from	the	first	or	second	century	A.D.	Yet	it
contradicts	or	adds	to	the	commands	of	the	New	Testament	at	many	points.	For	example,	Christians	are	told	to	let	alms	sweat	in
their	hands	until	they	know	to	whom	they	are	giving	(1.6);	food	offered	to	idols	is	forbidden	(6.3);	people	are	required	to	fast
before	baptism,	and	baptism	must	be	done	in	running	water	(7.1–4);	fasting	is	required	on	Wednesdays	and	Fridays	but	prohibited
on	Mondays	and	Thursdays	(8.1);	Christians	are	required	to	pray	the	Lord’s	Prayer	three	times	a	day	(8.3);	unbaptized	persons	are
excluded	from	the	Lord’s	Supper,	and	prayers	unknown	in	the	New	Testament	are	given	as	a	pattern	for	celebrating	the	Lord’s
Supper	(9.1–5);	apostles	are	prohibited	from	staying	in	a	city	more	than	two	days	(11.5;	but	note	that	Paul	stayed	a	year	and	a	half
in	Corinth	and	three	years	in	Ephesus!);	prophets	who	speak	in	the	Spirit	cannot	be	tested	or	examined	(11.7,	in	contradiction	to	1
Cor.	14:29	and	1	Thess.	5:20–21);	salvation	requires	perfection	at	the	last	time	(16.2).	Such	a	document,	of	unknown	authorship,
is	hardly	a	reliable	guide	for	the	teachings	and	practices	of	the	early	church.
33
See	R.	V.	G.	Tasker,	
The	General	Epistle	of	James,	
TNTC	(London:	Tyndale	Press,	1956),	pp.	67–71.	Although	Luther	placed
James	near	the	end	of	his	German	translation	of	the	New	Testament,	he	did	not	exclude	it	from	the	canon,	and	he	cited	over	half	of
the	verses	in	James	as	authoritative	in	various	parts	of	his	writings	(see	Douglas	Moo,	
The	Letter	of	James,	
TNTC	(Leicester	and
Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,	1985),	p.	
18;	see	also	pp.	100–117	on	faith	and	works	in	James.
34
A	good	recent	translation	is	
The	Oxford	Annotated	Apocrypha	
(RSV),	ed.	Bruce	M.	Metzger	(New	York:	Oxford	University
Press,	1965).	There	is	also	a	collection	of	nonbiblical	writings	from	the	time	of	the	New	Testament	called	“New	Testament
apocrypha”	(see	next	note),	but	these	are	much	less	commonly	read.	When	people	speak	of	“the	Apocrypha”	without	further
specification,	they	are	referring	only	to	the	Old	Testament	Apocrypha.
35
E.	Hennecke,	
New	Testament	Apocrypha,	
ed.	W.	Schneemelcher;	English	trans.	ed.	R.	McL.	Wilson	(2	vols.:	SCM	Press,	1965).
It	should	also	be	noted	that	some	other,	more	orthodox	literature	from	the	early	church	can	be	found	conveniently	in	a	collection
of	writings	referred	to	as	the	“Apostolic	Fathers.”	A	good	translation	is	found	in	Kirsopp	Lake,	trans.,	
The	Apostolic	Fathers,
Loeb	Classical	Library	(2	vols.:	Cambridge,	Mass.:	Harvard	University	Press,	1912,	1913),	but	other	useful	translations	are	also
available.
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	4
The	Four	Characteristics	of	Scripture:	(1)
Authority
How	do	we	know	that	the	Bible	is	God’s	Word?
In	the	previous	chapter	our	goal	was	to	determine	which	writings
belong	in	the	Bible	and	which	writings	do	not.	But	once	we	have
determined	what	the	Bible	is,	our	next	step	is	to	ask	what	it	is	like.
What	does	the	whole	Bible	teach	us	about	itself?
The	major	teachings	of	the	Bible	about	itself	can	be	classified	into
four	characteristics	(sometimes	termed	attributes):	(1)	the	authority
of	Scripture;	(2)	the	clarity	of	Scripture;	(3)	the	necessity	of
Scripture;	and	(4)	the	sufficiency	of	Scripture.
With	regard	to	the	first	characteristic,	most	Christians	would	agree
that	the	Bible	is	our	authority	in	some	sense.	But	in	exactly	what
sense	does	the	Bible	claim	to	be	our	authority?	And	how	do	we
become	persuaded	that	the	claims	of	Scripture	to	be	God’s	Word	are
true?	These	are	the	questions	addressed	in	this	chapter.
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
The	authority	of	Scripture	means	that	all	the	words	in	Scripture	are
God’s	words	in	such	a	way	that	to	disbelieve	or	disobey	any	word	of
Scripture	is	to	disbelieve	or	disobey	God.
This	definition	may	now	be	examined	in	its	various	parts.
A.	All	the	Words	in	Scripture	Are	God’s	Words
1.
	This	Is	What	the	Bible	Claims	for	Itself.
	There	are	frequent	claims	in	the
Bible	that	all	the	words	of	Scripture	are	God’s	words	(as	well	as	words	that
were	written	down	by	men).
1
	In	the	Old	Testament,	this	is	frequently	seen	in
the	introductory	phrase,	“Thus	says	the	L
ORD
,”	which	appears	hundreds	of
times.	In	the	world	of	the	Old	Testament,	this	phrase	would	have	been
recognized	as	identical	in	form	to	the	phrase,	“Thus	says	king	.	.	.	,”	which
was	used	to	preface	the	edict	of	a	king	to	his	subjects,	an	edict	that	could	not
be	challenged	or	questioned	but	that	simply	had	to	be	obeyed.
2
	Thus,	when
the	prophets	say,	“Thus	says	the	Lord,”	they	are	claiming	to	be	messengers
from	the	sovereign	King	of	Israel,	namely,	God	himself,	and	they	are	claiming
that	their	words	are	the	absolutely	authoritative	words	of	God.	When	a
prophet	spoke	in	God’s	name	in	this	way,	every	word	he	spoke	had	to	come
from	God,	or	he	would	be	a	false	prophet	(cf.	Num.	22:38;	Deut.	18:18–20;
Jer.	1:9;	14:14;	23:16–22;	29:31–32;	Ezek.	2:7;	13:1–16).
Furthermore,	God	is	often	said	to	speak	“through”	the	prophet	(1
Kings	14:18;	16:12,	34;	2	Kings	9:36;	14:25;	Jer.	37:2;	Zech.	7:7,
12).	Thus,	what	the	prophet	says	in	God’s	name,	God	says	(1	Kings
13:26	with	v.	
21;	1	Kings	21:19	with	2	Kings	9:25–26;	Hag.	1:12;
cf.	1	Sam.	15:3,	18).	In	these	and	other	instances	in	the	Old
Testament,	words	that	the	prophets	spoke	can	equally	be	referred	to
as	words	that	God	himself	spoke.	Thus,	to	disbelieve	or	disobey
anything	a	prophet	says	is	to	disbelieve	or	disobey	God	himself
(Deut.	18:19;	1	Sam.	10:8;	13:13–14;	15:3,	19,	23;	1	Kings	20:35,
36).
These	verses	of	course	do	not	claim	that	
all	
the	words	in	the	Old
Testament	are	God’s	words,	for	these	verses	themselves	are
referring	only	to	specific	sections	of	spoken	or	written	words	in	the
Old	Testament.	But	the	cumulative	force	of	these	passages,
including	the	hundreds	of	passages	that	begin	“Thus	says	the	Lord,”
is	to	demonstrate	that	within	the	Old	Testament	we	have	written
records	of	words	that	are	said	to	be	God’s	own	words.	These	words
when	written	down	constitute	large	sections	of	the	Old	Testament.
In	the	New	Testament,	a	number	of	passages	indicate	that	all	of	the
Old	Testament	writings	are	thought	of	as	God’s	words.	Second
Timothy	3:16	says,	“All	Scripture	is	God-breathed	and	is	useful	for
teaching,	rebuking,	correcting	and	training	in	righteousness”
(NIV).
3
	Here	“Scripture”	(
graphē
)	must	refer	to	the	Old	Testament
written	Scripture,	for	that	is	what	the	word	
graphē	
refers	to	in	every
one	of	its	fifty-one	occurrences	in	the	New	Testament.
4
Furthermore,	the	“sacred	writings”	of	the	Old	Testament	are	what
Paul
5
	has	just	referred	to	in	verse	15.
Paul	here	affirms	that	all	of	the	Old	Testament	writings	are
theopneustos,	
“breathed	out	by	God.”	Since	it	is	
writings	
that	are
said	to	be	“breathed	out,”	this	breathing	must	be	understood	as	a
metaphor	for	speaking	the	words	of	Scripture.	This	verse	thus	states
in	brief	form	what	was	evident	in	many	passages	in	the	Old
Testament:	the	Old	Testament	writings	are	regarded	as	God’s	Word
in	written	form.	For	every	word	of	the	Old	Testament,	God	is	the
one	who	spoke	(and	still	speaks)	it,	although	God	used	human
agents	to	write	these	words	down.
6
A	similar	indication	of	the	character	of	all	Old	Testament	writings
as	God’s	words	is	found	in	2	Peter	1:21.	Speaking	of	the	prophecies
of	Scripture	(v.	
20),	which	means	at	least	the	Old	Testament
Scriptures	to	which	Peter	encourages	his	readers	to	give	careful
attention	(v.	
19),	Peter	says	that	none	of	these	prophecies	ever	came
“by	the	impulse	of	man,”	but	that	“men	moved	by	the	Holy	Spirit
spoke	from	God.”	It	is	not	Peter’s	intention	to	deny	completely
human	volition	or	personality	in	the	writing	of	Scripture	(he	says
that	the	men	“spoke”),	but	rather	to	say	that	the	ultimate	source	of
every	prophecy	was	never	a	man’s	decision	about	what	he	wanted
to	write,	but	rather	the	Holy	Spirit’s	action	in	the	prophet’s	life,
carried	out	in	ways	unspecified	here	(or,	in	fact,	elsewhere	in
Scripture).	This	indicates	a	belief	that	all	of	the	Old	Testament
prophecies	(and,	in	light	of	vv.	19–20,	this	probably	includes	all	of
the	written	Scripture	of	the	Old	Testament)	are	spoken	“from	God”:
that	is,	they	are	God’s	own	words.
Many	other	New	Testament	passages	speak	in	similar	ways	about
sections	of	the	Old	Testament.	In	Matthew	1:22,	Isaiah’s	words	in
Isaiah	7:14	are	cited	as	“what	
the	Lord	had	spoken	
by	the	prophet.”
In	Matthew	4:4	Jesus	says	to	the	devil,	“Man	shall	not	live	by	bread
alone,	but	by	
every	word	that	proceeds	from	the	mouth	of	God.”	
In
the	context	of	Jesus’	repeated	citations	from	Deuteronomy	to
answer	every	temptation,	the	words	that	proceed	“from	the	mouth
of	God”	are	the	written	Scriptures	of	the	Old	Testament.
In	Matthew	19:5,	the	words	of	the	author	in	Genesis	2:24,	not
attributed	to	God	in	the	Genesis	narrative,	are	quoted	by	Jesus	as
words	that	God	“said.”	In	Mark	7:9–13,	the	same	Old	Testament
passage	can	be	called	interchangeably	“the	commandment	of	God,”
or	what	“Moses	said,”	or	“the	word	of	God.”	In	Acts	1:16,	the
words	of	Psalms	69	and	109	are	said	to	be	words	which	“
the	Holy
Spirit	spoke	
beforehand	by	the	mouth	of	David.”	Words	of
Scripture	are	thus	said	to	be	spoken	by	the	Holy	Spirit.	In	Acts
2:16–17,	in	quoting	“what	was	spoken	by	the	prophet	Joel”	in	Joel
2:28–32,	Peter	inserts	
“God	declares,”	
thus	attributing	to	God
words	written	by	Joel,	and	claiming	that	God	is	presently	saying
them.
Many	other	passages	could	be	cited	(see	Luke	1:70;	24:25;	John
5:45–47;	Acts	3:18,	21;	4:25;	13:47;	28:25;	Rom.	1:2;	3:2;	9:17;	1
Cor.	9:8–10;	Heb.	1:1–2,	6–7),	but	the	pattern	of	attributing	to	God
the	words	of	Old	Testament	Scripture	should	be	very	clear.
Moreover,	in	several	places	it	is	
all	
of	the	words	of	the	prophets	or
the	words	of	the	Old	Testament	Scriptures	that	are	said	to	compel
belief	or	to	be	from	God	(see	Luke	24:25,	27,	44;	Acts	3:18;	24:14;
Rom.	15:4).
But	if	Paul	meant	only	the	Old	Testament	writings	when	he	spoke
of	“Scripture”	in	2	Timothy	3:16,	how	can	this	verse	apply	to	the
New	Testament	writings	as	well?	Does	it	say	anything	about	the
character	of	the	New	Testament	writings?	To	answer	that	question,
we	must	realize	that	the	Greek	word	
graphē	
(“scripture”)	was	a
technical	term	for	the	New	Testament	writers	and	had	a	very
specialized	meaning.	Even	though	it	is	used	fifty-one	times	in	the
New	Testament,	every	one	of	those	instances	uses	it	to	refer	to	the
Old	Testament	writings,	not	to	any	other	words	or	writings	outside
the	canon	of	Scripture.	Thus,	everything	that	belonged	in	the
category	“scripture”	had	the	character	of	being	“God-breathed”:	its
words	were	God’s	very	words.
But	at	two	places	in	the	New	Testament	we	see	New	Testament
writings	also	being	called	“scripture”	along	with	the	Old	Testament
writings.	As	we	noted	in	chapter	3,	in	2	Peter	3:16,	Peter	shows	not
only	an	awareness	of	the	existence	of	written	epistles	from	Paul,	but
also	a	clear	willingness	to	classify	“all	of	his	[Paul’s]	epistles”	with
“the	other	scriptures.”	This	is	an	indication	that	very	early	in	the
history	of	the	church	all	of	Paul’s	epistles	were	considered	to	be
God’s	written	words	in	the	same	sense	as	the	Old	Testament	texts
were.	Similarly,	in	1	Timothy	5:18,	Paul	quotes	Jesus’	words	as
found	in	Luke	10:7	and	calls	them	“scripture.”
7
These	two	passages	taken	together	indicate	that	during	the	time	of
the	writing	of	the	New	Testament	documents	there	was	an
awareness	that	
additions	
were	being	made	to	this	special	category
of	writings	called	“scripture,”	writings	that	had	the	character	of
being	God’s	very	words.	Thus,	once	we	establish	that	a	New
Testament	writing	belongs	to	the	special	category	“scripture,”	then
we	are	correct	in	applying	2	Timothy	3:16	to	that	writing	as	well,
and	saying	that	that	writing	also	has	the	characteristic	Paul
attributes	to	“all	scripture”:	it	is	“God-breathed,”	and	all	its	words
are	the	very	words	of	God.
Is	there	further	evidence	that	the	New	Testament	writers	thought	of
their	own	writings	(not	just	the	Old	Testament)	as	being	words	of
God?	In	some	cases,	there	is.	In	1	Corinthians	14:37,	Paul	says,	“If
any	one	thinks	that	he	is	a	prophet,	or	spiritual,	he	should
acknowledge	that	
what	I	am	writing	to	you	is	a	command	of	the
Lord.”	
Paul	has	here	instituted	a	number	of	rules	for	church
worship	at	Corinth	and	has	claimed	for	them	the	status	of
“commands	of	the	Lord,”	for	the	phrase	translated	“what	I	am
writing	to	you”	contains	a	plural	relative	pronoun	in	Greek	(
ha
)	and
is	more	literally	translated	“
the	things	
I	am	writing	to	you	are	a
command	of	the	Lord.”
One	objection	to	seeing	the	words	of	New	Testament	writers	as
words	of	God	is	sometimes	brought	from	1	Corinthians	7:12,	where
Paul	distinguishes	his	words	from	words	of	the	Lord:	“To	the	rest	I
say,	not	the	Lord	.	.	.”	A	proper	understanding	of	this	passage	is
gained	from	verses	25	and	40,	however.	In	verse	25	Paul	says	he
has	no	command	of	the	Lord	concerning	the	unmarried	but	will
give	his	own	opinion.	This	must	mean	that	he	had	possession	of	
no
earthly	word	that	Jesus	had	spoken	on	this	subject	
and	probably
also	that	he	had	received	no	subsequent	revelation	about	it	from
Jesus.	This	is	unlike	the	situation	in	verse	10	where	he	could	simply
repeat	the	content	of	Jesus’	earthly	teaching,	“that	the	wife	should
not	separate	from	her	husband”	and	“that	the	husband	should	not
divorce	his	wife.”	Thus,	verse	12	must	mean	that	Paul	has	
no
record	of	any	earthly	teaching	of	Jesus	
on	the	subject	of	a	believer
who	is	married	to	an	unbelieving	spouse.	Therefore,	Paul	gives	his
own	instructions:	“To	the	rest	
I	say,	not	the	Lord,	
that	if	any	brother
has	a	wife	who	is	an	unbeliever,	and	she	consents	to	live	with	him,
he	should	not	divorce	her”	(1	Cor.	7:12).
It	is	remarkable	therefore	that	Paul	can	go	on	in	verses	12–15	to
give	several	specific	ethical	standards	for	the	Corinthians.	What
gave	him	the	right	to	make	such	moral	commands?	He	said	that	he
spoke	as	one	“who	by	the	Lord’s	mercy	is	trustworthy”	(1	Cor.
7:25).	He	seems	to	imply	here	that	his	considered	judgments	were
able	to	be	placed	on	the	same	authoritative	level	as	the	words	of
Jesus.	Thus,	1	Corinthians	7:12,	“To	the	rest	I	say,	not	the	Lord,”	is
an	amazingly	strong	affirmation	of	Paul’s	own	authority:	if	he	did
not	have	any	words	of	Jesus	to	apply	to	a	situation,	he	would
simply	use	his	own	words,	for	his	own	words	had	just	as	much
authority	as	the	words	of	Jesus!
Indications	of	a	similar	view	of	the	New	Testament	writings	are
found	in	John	14:26	and	16:13,	where	Jesus	promised	that	the	Holy
Spirit	would	bring	all	that	he	had	said	to	the	disciples’	remembrance
and	would	guide	them	into	all	the	truth.	This	indicates	a	special
superintending	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	whereby	the	disciples	would
be	able	to	remember	and	record	without	error	all	that	Jesus	had
said.	Similar	indications	are	also	found	in	2	Peter	3:2;	1	Corinthians
2:13;	1	Thessalonians	4:15;	and	Revelation	22:18–19.
2.	We	Are	Convinced	of	the	Bible’s	Claims	to	Be	God’s	Words	as	We
Read	the	Bible.
	It	is	one	thing	to	affirm	that	the	Bible	
claims	
to	be	the	words
of	God.	It	is	another	thing	to	be	convinced	that	those	claims	are	true.	Our
ultimate	conviction	that	the	words	of	the	Bible	are	God’s	words	comes	only
when	the	Holy	Spirit	speaks	
in	
and	
through	
the	words	of	the	Bible	to	our
hearts	and	gives	us	an	inner	assurance	that	these	are	the	words	of	our	Creator
speaking	to	us.	Just	after	Paul	has	explained	that	his	apostolic	speech	consists
of	words	taught	by	the	Holy	Spirit	(1	Cor.	2:13),	he	says,	“The	natural	man
does	not	receive	the	things
8
	of	the	Spirit	of	God,	for	they	are	folly	to	him,	and
he	is	not	able	to	understand	them	because	they	are	spiritually	discerned”	(1
Cor.	2:14).	Apart	from	the	work	of	the	Spirit	of	God,	a	person	will	not	receive
spiritual	truths	and	in	particular	will	not	receive	or	accept	the	truth	that	the
words	of	Scripture	are	in	fact	the	words	of	God.
But	for	those	in	whom	God’s	Spirit	is	working	there	is	a	recognition
that	the	words	of	the	Bible	are	the	words	of	God.	This	process	is
closely	analogous	to	that	by	which	those	who	believed	in	Jesus
knew	that	his	words	were	true.	He	said,	“My	sheep	hear	my	voice,
and	I	know	them,	and	they	follow	me”	(John	10:27).	Those	who	are
Christ’s	sheep	hear	the	words	of	their	great	Shepherd	as	they	read
the	words	of	Scripture,	and	they	are	convinced	that	these	words	are
in	fact	the	words	of	their	Lord.
It	is	important	to	remember	that	this	conviction	that	the	words	of
Scripture	are	the	words	of	God	does	
not	
come	
apart	from	
the	words
of	Scripture	or	
in	addition	to	
the	words	of	Scripture.	It	is	not	as	if
the	Holy	Spirit	one	day	whispers	in	our	ear,	“Do	you	see	that	Bible
sitting	on	your	desk?	I	want	you	to	know	that	the	words	of	that
Bible	are	God’s	words.”	It	is	rather	as	people	read	Scripture	that
they	hear	their	Creator’s	voice	speaking	to	them	in	the	words	of
Scripture	and	realize	that	the	book	they	are	reading	is	unlike	any
other	book,	that	it	is	indeed	a	book	of	God’s	own	words	speaking	to
their	hearts.
3.	Other	Evidence	Is	Useful	but	Not	Finally	Convincing.
	The	previous
section	is	not	meant	to	deny	the	validity	of	other	kinds	of	arguments	that	may
be	used	to	support	the	claim	that	the	Bible	is	God’s	words.	It	is	helpful	for	us
to	learn	that	the	Bible	is	historically	accurate,	that	it	is	internally	consistent,
that	it	contains	prophecies	that	have	been	fulfilled	hundreds	of	years	later,	that
it	has	influenced	the	course	of	human	history	more	than	any	other	book,	that	it
has	continued	changing	the	lives	of	millions	of	individuals	throughout	its
history,	that	through	it	people	come	to	find	salvation,	that	it	has	a	majestic
beauty	and	a	profound	depth	of	teaching	unmatched	by	any	other	book,	and
that	it	claims	hundreds	of	times	over	to	be	God’s	very	words.	All	of	these
arguments	and	others	are	useful	to	us	and	remove	obstacles	that	might
otherwise	come	in	the	way	of	our	believing	Scripture.	But	all	of	these
arguments	taken	individually	or	together	cannot	finally	be	convincing.	As	the
Westminster	Confession	of	Faith	said	in	1643–46,
We	may	be	moved	and	induced	by	the	testimony	of	the	Church	to	an
high	and	reverent	esteem	of	the	Holy	Scripture.	And	the	heavenliness
of	the	matter,	the	efficacy	of	the	doctrine,	the	majesty	of	the	style,	the
consent	of	all	the	parts,	the	scope	of	the	whole	(which	is,	to	give	all
glory	to	God),	the	full	discovery	it	makes	of	the	only	way	of	man’s
salvation,	the	many	other	incomparable	excellencies,	and	the	entire
perfection	thereof,	are	arguments	whereby	it	doth	abundantly
evidence	itself	to	be	the	Word	of	God:	yet	notwithstanding,	our	full
persuasion	and	assurance	of	the	infallible	truth	and	divine	authority
thereof,	is	from	the	inward	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	bearing	witness	by
and	with	the	Word	in	our	hearts.	(chap.	1,	para.	5)
4.	The	Words	of	Scripture	Are	Self-Attesting.
	Thus,	the	words	of	Scripture
are	“self-attesting.”	They	cannot	be	“proved”	to	be	God’s	words	by	appeal	to
any	higher	authority.	For	if	an	appeal	to	some	higher	authority	(say,	historical
accuracy	or	logical	consistency)	were	used	to	prove	that	the	Bible	is	God’s
Word,	then	the	Bible	itself	would	not	be	our	highest	or	absolute	authority:	it
would	be	subordinate	in	authority	to	the	thing	to	which	we	appealed	to	prove
it	to	be	God’s	Word.	If	we	ultimately	appeal	to	human	reason,	or	to	logic,	or
to	historical	accuracy,	or	to	scientific	truth,	as	the	authority	by	which
Scripture	is	shown	to	be	God’s	words,	then	we	have	assumed	the	thing	to
which	we	appealed	to	be	a	higher	authority	than	God’s	words	and	one	that	is
more	true	or	more	reliable.
5.	Objection:	This	Is	a	Circular	Argument.
	Someone	may	object	that	to	say
Scripture	proves	itself	to	be	God’s	words	is	to	use	a	circular	argument:	we
believe	that	Scripture	is	God’s	Word	because	it	claims	to	be	that.	And	we
believe	its	claims	because	Scripture	is	God’s	Word.	And	we	believe	that	it	is
God’s	Word	because	it	claims	to	be	that,	and	so	forth.
It	should	be	admitted	that	this	is	a	kind	of	circular	argument.
However,	that	does	not	make	its	use	invalid,	for	all	arguments	for
an	absolute	authority	must	ultimately	appeal	to	that	authority	for
proof:	otherwise	the	authority	would	not	be	an	absolute	or	highest
authority.	This	problem	is	not	unique	to	the	Christian	who	is
arguing	for	the	authority	of	the	Bible.	Everyone	either	implicitly	or
explicitly	uses	some	kind	of	circular	argument	when	defending	his
or	her	ultimate	authority	for	belief.
Although	these	circular	arguments	are	not	always	made	explicit	and
are	sometimes	hidden	beneath	lengthy	discussions	or	are	simply
assumed	without	proof,	arguments	for	an	ultimate	authority	in	their
most	basic	form	take	on	a	similar	circular	appeal	to	that	authority
itself,	as	some	of	the	following	examples	show:
“My	reason	is	my	ultimate	authority	because	it	seems	reasonable	to
me	to	make	it	so.”
“Logical	consistency	is	my	ultimate	authority	because	it	is	logical	to
make	it	so.”
“The	findings	of	human	sensory	experiences	are	the	ultimate	authority
for	discovering	what	is	real	and	what	is	not,	because	our	human
senses	have	never	discovered	anything	else:	thus,	human	sense
experience	tells	me	that	my	principle	is	true.”
“I	know	there	can	be	no	ultimate	authority	because	I	do	not	know	of
any	such	ultimate	authority.”
In	all	of	these	arguments	for	an	ultimate	standard	of	truth,	an	absolute
authority	for	what	to	believe,	there	is	an	element	of	circularity	involved.
9
How	then	does	a	Christian,	or	anyone	else,	choose	among	the
various	claims	for	absolute	authorities?	Ultimately	the	truthfulness
of	the	Bible	will	commend	itself	as	being	far	more	persuasive	than
other	religious	books	(such	as	the	
Book	of	Mormon	
or	the	
Qur’an
),
or	than	any	other	intellectual	constructions	of	the	human	mind
(such	as	logic,	human	reason,	sense	experience,	scientific
methodology,	etc.).	It	will	be	more	persuasive	because	in	the	actual
experience	of	life,	all	of	these	other	candidates	for	ultimate
authority	are	seen	to	be	inconsistent	or	to	have	shortcomings	that
disqualify	them,	while	the	Bible	will	be	seen	to	be	fully	in	accord
with	all	that	we	know	about	the	world	around	us,	about	ourselves,
and	about	God.
The	Bible	will	commend	itself	as	being	persuasive	in	this	way,	that
is,	if	we	are	thinking	rightly	about	the	nature	of	reality,	our
perception	of	it	and	of	ourselves,	and	our	perception	of	God.	The
trouble	is	that	because	of	sin	our	perception	and	analysis	of	God
and	creation	is	faulty.	Sin	is	ultimately	irrational,	and	sin	makes	us
think	incorrectly	about	God	and	about	creation.	Thus,	in	a	world
free	from	sin,	the	Bible	would	commend	itself	convincingly	to	all
people	as	God’s	Word.	But	because	sin	distorts	people’s	perception
of	reality,	they	do	not	recognize	Scripture	for	what	it	really	is.
Therefore	it	requires	the	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit,	overcoming	the
effects	of	sin,	to	enable	us	to	be	persuaded	that	the	Bible	is	indeed
the	Word	of	God	and	that	the	claims	it	makes	for	itself	are	true.
Thus,	in	another	sense,	the	argument	for	the	Bible	as	God’s	Word
and	our	ultimate	authority	is	
not	
a	typical	circular	argument.	The
process	of	persuasion	is	perhaps	better	likened	to	a	spiral	in	which
increasing	knowledge	of	Scripture	and	increasingly	correct
understanding	of	God	and	creation	tend	to	supplement	one	another
in	a	harmonious	way,	each	tending	to	confirm	the	accuracy	of	the
other.	This	is	not	to	say	that	our	knowledge	of	the	world	around	us
serves	as	a	higher	authority	than	Scripture,	but	rather	that	such
knowledge,	if	it	is	correct	knowledge,	continues	to	give	greater	and
greater	assurance	and	deeper	conviction	that	the	Bible	is	the	only
truly	ultimate	authority	and	that	other	competing	claims	for
ultimate	authority	are	false.
6.	This	Does	Not	Imply	Dictation	From	God	as	the	Sole	Means	of
Communication.
	The	entire	preceding	part	of	this	chapter	has	argued	that	all
the	words	of	the	Bible	are	God’s	words.	At	this	point	a	word	of	caution	is
necessary.	The	fact	that	all	the	words	of	Scripture	are	God’s	words	should	not
lead	us	to	think	that	God	dictated	every	word	of	Scripture	to	the	human
authors.
When	we	say	that	all	the	words	of	the	Bible	are	God’s	words,	we
are	talking	about	the	
result	
of	the	process	of	bringing	Scripture	into
existence.	To	raise	the	question	of	dictation	is	to	ask	about	the
process	
that	led	to	that	result	or	the	manner	by	which	God	acted	in
order	to	ensure	the	result	that	he	intended.
10
	It	must	be	emphasized
that	the	Bible	does	not	speak	of	only	one	type	of	process	or	one
manner	by	which	God	communicated	to	the	biblical	authors	what
he	wanted	to	be	said.	In	fact,	there	is	indication	of	
a	wide	variety	of
processes	
God	used	to	bring	about	the	desired	result.
A	few	scattered	instances	of	dictation	are	explicitly	mentioned	in
Scripture.	When	the	apostle	John	saw	the	risen	Lord	in	a	vision	on
the	island	of	Patmos,	Jesus	spoke	to	him	as	follows:	“To	the	angel
of	the	church	in	Ephesus	
write	
.	.	.”	(Rev.	2:1);	“And	to	the	angel	of
the	church	in	Smyrna	
write	
.	.	.”	(Rev.	2:8);	“And	to	the	angel	of	the
church	in	Pergamum	
write	
.	.	.”	(Rev.	2:12).	These	are	examples	of
dictation	pure	and	simple.	The	risen	Lord	tells	John	what	to	write,
and	John	writes	the	words	he	hears	from	Jesus.
Something	akin	to	this	process	is	probably	also	seen	occasionally	in
the	Old	Testament	prophets.	We	read	in	Isaiah,	“Then	the	word	of
the	Lord	came	to	Isaiah:	‘Go	and	say	to	Hezekiah,	Thus	says	the
Lord,	the	God	of	David	your	father:	I	have	heard	your	prayer,	I
have	seen	your	tears;	behold,	I	will	add	fifteen	years	to	your	life.	I
will	deliver	you	and	this	city	out	of	the	hand	of	the	king	of	Assyria,
and	defend	this	city’	”	(Isa.	38:4–6).	The	picture	given	us	in	this
narrative	is	that	Isaiah	heard	(whether	with	his	physical	ear	or	with
a	very	forceful	impression	made	upon	his	mind	is	difficult	to	say)
the	words	God	wanted	him	to	say	to	Hezekiah,	and	Isaiah,	acting	as
God’s	messenger,	then	took	those	words	and	
spoke	
them	as	he	had
been	instructed.
But	in	many	other	sections	of	Scripture	such	direct	dictation	from
God	is	certainly	not	the	manner	by	which	the	words	of	Scripture
were	caused	to	come	into	being.	The	author	of	Hebrews	says	that
God	spoke	to	our	fathers	by	the	prophets	“in	many	and	various
ways”	(Heb.	1:1).	On	the	opposite	end	of	the	spectrum	from
dictation	we	have,	for	instance,	Luke’s	ordinary	historical	research
for	writing	his	gospel.	He	says:
Inasmuch	as	many	have	undertaken	to	compile	a	narrative	of	the
things	which	have	been	accomplished	among	us,	just	as	they	were
delivered	to	us	by	those	who	from	the	beginning	were	eyewitnesses
and	ministers	of	the	word,	it	seemed	good	to	me	also,	having	followed
all	things	closely	for	some	time	past,	to	write	an	orderly	account	for
you,	most	excellent	Theophilus.	.	.	.”	(Luke	1:1–3)
This	is	clearly	not	a	process	of	dictation.	Luke	used	ordinary
processes	of	speaking	to	eyewitnesses	and	gathering	historical	data
in	order	that	he	might	write	an	accurate	account	of	the	life	and
teachings	of	Jesus.	He	did	his	historical	research	thoroughly,
listening	to	the	reports	of	many	eyewitnesses	and	evaluating	his
evidence	carefully.	The	gospel	he	wrote	emphasizes	what	he
thought	important	to	emphasize	and	reflects	his	own	characteristic
style	of	writing.
In	between	these	two	extremes	of	dictation	pure	and	simple	on	the
one	hand,	and	ordinary	historical	research	on	the	other	hand,	we
have	many	indications	of	various	ways	by	which	God
communicated	with	the	human	authors	of	Scripture.	In	some	cases
Scripture	gives	us	hints	of	these	various	processes:	it	speaks	of
dreams,	of	visions,	of	hearing	the	Lord’s	voice	or	standing	in	the
council	of	the	Lord;	it	also	speaks	of	men	who	were	with	Jesus	and
observed	his	life	and	listened	to	his	teaching,	men	whose	memory
of	these	words	and	deeds	was	made	completely	accurate	by	the
working	of	the	Holy	Spirit	as	he	brought	things	to	their
remembrance	(John	14:26).	Yet	in	many	other	cases	the	manner
used	by	God	to	bring	about	the	result	that	the	words	of	Scripture
were	his	words	is	simply	not	disclosed	to	us.	Apparently	many
different	methods	were	used,	but	it	is	not	important	that	we
discover	precisely	what	these	were	in	each	case.
In	cases	where	the	ordinary	human	personality	and	writing	style	of
the	author	were	prominently	involved,	as	seems	the	case	with	the
major	part	of	Scripture,	all	that	we	are	able	to	say	is	that	God’s
providential	oversight	and	direction	of	the	life	of	each	author	was
such	that	their	personalities,	their	backgrounds	and	training,	their
abilities	to	evaluate	events	in	the	world	around	them,	their	access	to
historical	data,	their	judgment	with	regard	to	the	accuracy	of
information,	and	their	individual	circumstances	when	they	wrote,
11
were	all	exactly	what	God	wanted	them	to	be,	so	that	when	they
actually	came	to	the	point	of	putting	pen	to	paper,	the	words	were
fully	their	own	words	but	also	fully	the	words	that	God	wanted
them	to	write,	words	that	God	would	also	claim	as	his	own.
B.	Therefore	to	Disbelieve	or	Disobey	Any	Word	of	Scripture	Is	to	Disbelieve	or	Disobey	God
The	preceding	section	has	argued	that	all	the	words	in	Scripture	are
God’s	words.	Consequently,	to	disbelieve	or	disobey	any	word	of
Scripture	is	to	disbelieve	or	disobey	God	himself.	Thus,	Jesus	can
rebuke	his	disciples	for	not	believing	the	Old	Testament	Scriptures
(Luke	24:25).	Believers	are	to	keep	or	obey	the	disciples’	words
(John	15:20:	“If	they	kept	my	word,	they	will	keep	yours	also”).
Christians	are	encouraged	to	remember	“the	commandment	of	the
Lord	and	Savior	through	your	apostles”	(2	Peter	3:2).	To	disobey
Paul’s	writings	was	to	make	oneself	liable	to	church	discipline,
such	as	excommunication	(2	Thess.	3:14)	and	spiritual	punishment
(2	Cor.	13:2–3),	including	punishment	from	God	(this	is	the
apparent	sense	of	the	passive	verb	“he	is	not	recognized”	in	1	Cor.
14:38).	By	contrast,	God	delights	in	everyone	who	“trembles”	at	his
word	(Isa.	66:2).
Throughout	the	history	of	the	church	the	greatest	preachers	have
been	those	who	have	recognized	that	they	have	no	authority	in
themselves	and	have	seen	their	task	as	being	to	explain	the	words	of
Scripture	and	apply	them	clearly	to	the	lives	of	their	hearers.	Their
preaching	has	drawn	its	power	not	from	the	proclamation	of	their
own	Christian	experiences	or	the	experiences	of	others,	nor	from
their	own	opinions,	creative	ideas,	or	rhetorical	skills,	but	from
God’s	powerful	words.
12
	Essentially	they	stood	in	the	pulpit,
pointed	to	the	biblical	text,	and	said	in	effect	to	the	congregation,
“This	is	what	this	verse	means.	Do	you	see	that	meaning	here	as
well?	Then	you	must	believe	it	and	obey	it	with	all	your	heart,	for
God	himself,	your	Creator	and	your	Lord,	is	saying	this	to	you
today!”	Only	the	written	words	of	Scripture	can	give	this	kind	of
authority	to	preaching.
C.	The	Truthfulness	of	Scripture
1.
	God	Cannot	Lie	or	Speak	Falsely.
	The	essence	of	the	authority	of
Scripture	is	its	ability	to	compel	us	to	believe	and	to	obey	it	and	to	make	such
belief	and	obedience	equivalent	to	believing	and	obeying	God	himself.
Because	this	is	so,	it	is	needful	to	consider	the	truthfulness	of	Scripture,	since
to	believe	all	the	words	of	Scripture	implies	confidence	in	the	complete
truthfulness	of	the	Scripture	that	we	believe.	Although	this	issue	will	be	dealt
with	more	fully	when	we	consider	the	inerrancy	of	Scripture	(see	
chapter	5
),	a
brief	treatment	is	given	here.
Since	the	biblical	writers	repeatedly	affirm	that	the	words	of	the
Bible,	though	human,	are	God’s	own	words,	it	is	appropriate	to	look
at	biblical	texts	that	talk	about	
the	character	of	God’s	words	
and	to
apply	these	to	the	character	of	the	words	of	Scripture.	Specifically,
there	are	a	number	of	biblical	passages	that	talk	about	the
truthfulness	of	God’s	speech.	Titus	1:2	speaks	of	“God,	who	never
lies,”	or	(more	literally	translated),	“the	unlying	God.”	Because
God	is	a	God	who	cannot	speak	a	“lie,”	his	words	can	always	be
trusted.	Since	all	of	Scripture	is	spoken	by	God,	all	of	Scripture
must	be	“unlying,”	just	as	God	himself	is:	there	can	be	no
untruthfulness	in	Scripture.
13
Hebrews	6:18	mentions	two	unchangeable	things	(God’s	oath	and
his	promise)	“in	which	
it	is	impossible	for	God	to	lie	
(author’s
translation).”	Here	the	author	says	not	merely	that	God	does	not	lie,
but	that	it	is	not	possible	for	him	to	lie.	Although	the	immediate
reference	is	only	to	oaths	and	promises,	if	it	is	impossible	for	God
to	lie	in	these	utterances,	then	certainly	it	is	impossible	for	him	ever
to	lie	(for	Jesus	harshly	rebukes	those	who	tell	the	truth	only	when
under	oath:	Matt.	5:33–37;	23:16–22).	Similarly,	David	says	to
God,	“You	are	God,	and	
your	words	are	true
”	(2	Sam.	7:28).
2.	Therefore	All	the	Words	in	Scripture	Are	Completely	True	and
Without	Error	in	Any	Part.
	Since	the	words	of	the	Bible	are	God’s	words,
and	since	God	cannot	lie	or	speak	falsely,	it	is	correct	to	conclude	that	there	is
no	untruthfulness	or	error	in	any	part	of	the	words	of	Scripture.	We	find	this
affirmed	several	places	in	the	Bible.	“The	words	of	the	L
ORD
	are	
words	that
are	pure,	
silver	refined	in	a	furnace	on	the	ground,	purified	seven	times”	(Ps.
12:6,	author’s	translation).	Here	the	psalmist	uses	vivid	imagery	to	speak	of
the	undiluted	purity	of	God’s	words:	there	is	no	imperfection	in	them.	Also	in
Proverbs	30:5,	we	read,	“
Every	word	of	God	proves	true;	
he	is	a	shield	to
those	who	take	refuge	in	him.”	It	is	not	just	some	of	the	words	of	Scripture
that	are	true,	but	every	word.	In	fact,	God’s	Word	is	fixed	in	heaven	for	all
eternity:	“For	ever,	O	L
ORD
,	
your	word	is	firmly	fixed	in	the	heavens
”	(Ps.
119:89).	Jesus	can	speak	of	the	eternal	nature	of	his	own	words:	“Heaven	and
earth	will	pass	away,	but	my	words	will	not	pass	away”	(Matt.	24:35).	God’s
speech	is	placed	in	marked	contrast	to	all	human	speech,	for	“God	is	not	man,
that	he	should	lie,	or	a	son	of	man,	that	he	should	repent”	(Num.	23:19).
These	verses	affirm	explicitly	what	was	implicit	in	the	requirement	that	we
believe	all	of	the	words	of	Scripture,	namely,	that	there	is	no	untruthfulness	or
falsehood	affirmed	in	any	of	the	statements	of	the	Bible.
3.	God’s	Words	Are	the	Ultimate	Standard	of	Truth.
	In	John	17	Jesus
prays	to	the	Father,	“Sanctify	them	in	the	truth;	
your	word	is	truth
”	(John
17:17).	This	verse	is	interesting	because	Jesus	does	not	use	the	adjectives
alēthinos	
or	
alēthēs	
(“true”),	which	we	might	have	expected,	to	say,	“Your
word	is	true.”	Rather,	he	uses	a	noun,	
alētheia	
(“truth”),	to	say	that	God’s
Word	is	not	simply	“true,”	but	it	is	truth	itself.
The	difference	is	significant,	for	this	statement	encourages	us	to
think	of	the	Bible	not	simply	as	being	“true”	in	the	sense	that	it
conforms	to	some	higher	standard	of	truth,	but	rather	to	think	of	the
Bible	as	being	itself	the	final	standard	of	truth.	The	Bible	is	God’s
Word,	and	God’s	Word	is	the	ultimate	definition	of	what	is	true	and
what	is	not	true:	God’s	Word	is	itself	
truth.	
Thus	we	are	to	think	of
the	Bible	as	the	ultimate	standard	of	truth,	the	reference	point	by
which	every	other	claim	to	truthfulness	is	to	be	measured.	Those
assertions	that	conform	with	Scripture	are	“true”	while	those	that	do
not	conform	with	Scripture	are	not	true.
What	then	is	truth?	Truth	is	what	God	says,	and	we	have	what	God
says	(accurately	but	not	exhaustively)	in	the	Bible.
4.	Might	Some	New	Fact	Ever	Contradict	the	Bible?
	Will	any	new
scientific	or	historical	fact	ever	be	discovered	that	will	contradict	the	Bible?
Here	we	can	say	with	confidence	that	this	will	never	happen—it	is	in	fact
impossible.	If	any	supposed	“fact”	is	ever	discovered	that	is	said	to	contradict
Scripture,	then	(if	we	have	understood	Scripture	rightly)	that	“fact”	must	be
false,	because	God,	the	author	of	Scripture,	knows	all	true	facts	(past,	present,
and	future).	No	fact	will	ever	turn	up	that	God	did	not	know	about	ages	ago
and	take	into	account	when	he	caused	Scripture	to	be	written.	Every	true	fact
is	something	that	God	has	known	already	from	all	eternity	and	is	something
that	therefore	cannot	contradict	God’s	speech	in	Scripture.
Nevertheless,	it	must	be	remembered	that	scientific	or	historical
study	(as	well	as	other	kinds	of	study	of	creation)	can	cause	us	to
reexamine	Scripture	to	see	if	it	really	teaches	what	we	thought	it
taught.	The	Bible	certainly	does	not	teach	that	the	earth	was	created
in	the	year	4004	B.C.,	as	some	once	thought	(for	the	genealogical
lists	in	Scripture	have	gaps	in	them).
14
	Yet	it	was	in	part	historical,
archaeological,	astronomical,	and	geological	study	that	caused
Christians	to	reexamine	Scripture	to	see	if	it	really	taught	such	a
recent	origin	for	the	earth.	Careful	analysis	of	the	biblical	text
showed	that	it	did	not	teach	this.
Similarly,	the	Bible	does	not	teach	that	the	sun	goes	around	the
earth,	for	it	only	uses	descriptions	of	phenomena	as	we	see	them
from	our	vantage	point	and	does	not	purport	to	be	describing	the
workings	of	the	universe	from	some	arbitrary	“fixed”	point
somewhere	out	in	space.	Yet	until	the	study	of	astronomy	advanced
enough	to	demonstrate	the	rotation	of	the	earth	on	its	axis,	people
assumed	
that	the	Bible	taught	that	the	sun	goes	around	the	earth.
Then	the	study	of	scientific	data	prompted	a	reexamination	of	the
appropriate	biblical	texts.	Thus,	whenever	confronted	with	some
“fact”	that	is	said	to	contradict	Scripture,	we	must	not	only	examine
the	data	adduced	to	demonstrate	the	fact	in	question;	we	must	also
reexamine	the	appropriate	biblical	texts	to	see	if	the	Bible	really
teaches	what	we	thought	it	to	teach.
We	should	never	fear	but	always	welcome	any	new	facts	that	may
be	discovered	in	any	legitimate	area	of	human	research	or	study.
For	example,	discoveries	by	archaeologists	working	in	Syria	have
brought	to	light	the	Ebla	Tablets.	These	extensive	written	records
from	the	period	around	2000	B.C.	will	eventually	throw	great	light
on	our	understanding	of	the	world	of	the	patriarchs	and	the	events
connected	with	the	lives	of	Abraham,	Isaac,	and	Jacob.	Should
Christians	entertain	any	lingering	apprehension	that	the	publication
of	such	data	will	prove	some	fact	in	Genesis	to	be	incorrect?
Certainly	not!	We	should	eagerly	anticipate	the	publication	of	all
such	data	with	the	absolute	confidence	that	if	it	is	correctly
understood	it	will	all	be	consistent	with	Scripture	and	will	all
confirm	the	accuracy	of	Scripture.	No	true	fact	will	ever	contradict
the	words	of	the	God	who	knows	all	facts	and	who	never	lies.
D.	Written	Scripture	Is	Our	Final	Authority
It	is	important	to	realize	that	the	final	form	in	which	Scripture
remains	authoritative	is	its	
written	
form.	It	was	the	words	of	God
written	
on	the	tablets	of	stone	that	Moses	deposited	in	the	ark	of	the
covenant.	Later,	God	commanded	Moses	and	subsequent	prophets
to	write	their	words	in	a	book.	And	it	was	
written	
Scripture
(
graphē
)	that	Paul	said	was	“God-breathed”	(2	Tim.	3:16).
Similarly,	it	is	Paul’s	
writings	
that	are	“a	command	of	the	Lord”	(1
Cor.	14:37)	and	that	could	be	classified	with	“the	other	scriptures”
(2	Peter	3:16).
This	is	important	because	people	sometimes	(intentionally	or
unintentionally)	attempt	to	substitute	some	other	final	standard	than
the	written	words	of	Scripture.	For	example,	people	will	sometimes
refer	to	“what	Jesus	really	said”	and	claim	that	when	we	translate
the	Greek	words	of	the	Gospels	back	into	the	Aramaic	language
Jesus	spoke,	we	can	gain	a	better	understanding	of	Jesus’	words
than	was	given	by	the	writers	of	the	Gospels.	In	fact,	it	is
sometimes	said	that	this	work	of	reconstructing	Jesus’	words	in
Aramaic	enables	us	to	correct	the	erroneous	translations	made	by
the	gospel	authors.
In	other	cases,	people	have	claimed	to	know	“what	Paul	really
thought”	even	when	that	is	different	from	the	meaning	of	the	words
he	wrote.	Or	they	have	spoken	of	“what	Paul	should	have	said	if	he
had	been	consistent	with	the	rest	of	his	theology.”	Similarly,	others
have	spoken	of	“the	church	situation	to	which	Matthew	was
writing”	and	have	attempted	to	give	normative	force	either	to	that
situation	or	to	the	solution	they	think	Matthew	was	attempting	to
bring	about	in	that	situation.
In	all	of	these	instances	we	must	admit	that	asking	about	the	words
or	situations	that	lie	“behind”	the	text	of	Scripture	may	at	times	be
helpful	to	us	in	understanding	what	the	text	means.	Nevertheless,
our	hypothetical	reconstructions	of	these	words	or	situations	can
never	replace	or	compete	with	Scripture	itself	as	the	final	authority,
nor	should	we	ever	allow	them	to	contradict	or	call	into	question
the	accuracy	of	any	of	the	words	of	Scripture.	We	must	continually
remember	that	we	have	in	the	Bible	God’s	very	words,	and	we	must
not	try	to	“improve”	on	them	in	some	way,	for	this	cannot	be	done.
Rather,	we	should	seek	to	understand	them	and	then	trust	them	and
obey	them	with	our	whole	heart.
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
If	you	want	to	persuade	someone	that	the	Bible	is	God’s	Word,	what	do
you	want	that	person	to	read	more	than	any	other	piece	of	literature?
2
.	
Who	would	try	to	make	people	want	to	disbelieve	something	in
Scripture?	To	disobey	something	in	Scripture?	Is	there	anything	in	the
Bible	that	you	do	not	want	to	believe?	To	obey?	If	your	answers	to	either
of	the	preceding	two	questions	were	positive,	what	is	the	best	way	to
approach	and	to	deal	with	the	desires	you	have	in	this	area?
3
.	
Do	you	know	of	any	proven	fact	in	all	of	history	that	has	shown
something	in	the	Bible	to	be	false?	Can	the	same	be	said	about	other
religious	writings	such	as	the	
Book	of	Mormon	
or	the	
Qur’an?	
If	you
have	read	in	other	books	such	as	these,	can	you	describe	the	spiritual
effect	they	had	on	you?	Compare	that	with	the	spiritual	effect	that
reading	the	Bible	has	on	you.	Can	you	say	that	when	you	read	the	Bible
you	hear	the	voice	of	your	Creator	speaking	to	you	in	a	way	that	is	true
of	no	other	book?
4
.	
Do	you	ever	find	yourself	believing	something	not	because	you	have
external	evidence	for	it	but	simply	because	it	is	written	in	Scripture?	Is
that	proper	faith,	according	to	Hebrews	11:1?	If	you	do	believe	things
simply	because	Scripture	says	them,	what	do	you	think	Christ	will	say	to
you	about	this	habit	when	you	stand	before	his	judgment	seat?	Do	you
think	that	trusting	and	obeying	everything	that	Scripture	affirms	will
ever	lead	you	into	sin	or	away	from	God’s	blessing	in	your	life?
SPECIAL	TERMS
absolute	authority
	
	
	
	
inspiration
authority
	
	
	
	
plenary	inspiration
circular	argument
	
	
	
	
Scripture
dictation
	
	
	
	
self-attesting
God-breathed
	
	
	
	
	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the
bibliography	to	chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be
found	in	
Appendix	4
.)
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.		Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92		Litton,	18–40
1930		Thomas,	115–20,	123–33,	141–45
2.		Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1875–76		Pope,	1:92–99,	156–92
1892–94		Miley,	2:481–89
1940		Wiley,	1:166–84
1960		Purkiser,	60–80
1983		Carter,	1:287–330
3.		Baptist
1767		Gill,	1:15–37
1907		Strong,	111–242
1917		Mullins,	142–44,	150–53
1976–83		Henry,	2:247–334;	3:28–47,	203–488;	4:7–
271,	470–93
1983–85		Erickson,	175–259
1987–94		Lewis/Demarest,	1:93–171
4.		Dispensational
1947		Chafer,	1:21–104,	120–23
1949		Thiessen,	43–49,	62–74
1986		Ryrie,	20–22,	63–76
5.		Lutheran
1917–24		Pieper,	1:193–317,	349–59
1934		Mueller,	90–136
6.		Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1559		Calvin,	1:7–8,	74–93
1861		Heppe,	21–28
1871–73		Hodge,	1:153–82
1887–1921		Warfield,	
IAB,	
3–410,	419–42;	
SSW,	
2:537–638
1889		Shedd,	1:70–110;	3:27–88
1937–66		Murray,	
CW,	
3:256–62;	
CW,	
4:30–57
1938		Berkhof,	
Intro.,	
144–65,	182–86
1962		Buswell,	1:183–93,	198–213
7.		Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988–92		Williams,	1:22–25
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.		Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955		Ott	(no	explicit	treatment)
2.		Roman	Catholic:	Post-Vatican	II
1980		McBrien,	1:62–77,	201–44
Other	Works
Carson,	D.	A.,	and	John	Woodbridge,	eds.	
Hermeneutics,	Authority,	and
Canon.	
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1986.
_____.	
Scripture	and	Truth.	
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1983.
Geisler,	Norman	L.,	ed.	
Inerrancy.	
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1980.
Grudem,	Wayne	A.	
The	Gift	of	Prophecy	in	1	Corinthians.	
Washington,
D.C.:	University	Press	of	America,	1982,	pp.	1–54.
Helm,	Paul.	
The	Divine	Revelation:	The	Basic	Issues.	
Westchester,	Ill.:
Crossway,	1982.
Henry,	Carl	F.	H.	“Bible,	Inspiration	of.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	145–49.
Kuyper,	Abraham.	
Principles	of	Sacred	Theology.	
Trans.	by	J.	H.	de
Vries.	Repr.	ed.:	Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1968,	pp.	413–563	(first
published	as	
Encyclopedia	of	Sacred	Theology	
in	1898).
Montgomery,	John	W.,	ed.	
God’s	Inerrant	Word.	
Minneapolis:	Bethany
Fellowship,	1974.
Nash,	Ronald	H.	
The	Word	of	God	and	the	Mind	of	Man.	
Grand	Rapids:
Zondervan,	1982.
Packer,	J.	I.	“
Fundamentalism”	and	the	Word	of	God.	
London:	Inter-
Varsity	Press,	1958.
_____.	“Infallibility	and	Inerrancy	of	the	Bible.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	337–39.
_____.	“Scripture.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	627–31.
Pinnock,	Clark.	
Biblical	Revelation.	
Chicago:	Moody,	1971.
Radmacher,	Earl	D.,	and	Robert	D.	Preus,	eds.	
Hermeneutics,	Inerrancy,
and	the	Bible.	
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1984.
Van	Til,	Cornelius.	
In	Defense	of	the	Faith,	
vol.	1:	
The	Doctrine	of
Scripture.	
Ripon,	Calif.:	den	Dulk	Christian	Foundation,	1967.
_____.	
In	Defense	of	the	Faith,	
vol.	5:	
An	Introduction	to	Systematic
Theology.	
Phillipsburg,	N.J.:	Presbyterian	and	Reformed,	1976,	pp.	110–
58.
Warfield,	B.	B.	
Limited	Inspiration.	
Philadelphia:	Presbyterian	and
Reformed,	1962.
Wells,	Paul.	
James	Barr	and	the	Bible:	Critique	of	a	New	Liberalism.
Phillipsburg,	N.J.:	Presbyterian	and	Reformed,	1980.
Wenham,	John	W.	
Christ	and	the	Bible.	
London:	Tyndale	Press,	1972.
Woodbridge,	John.	
Biblical	Authority:	A	Critique	of	the	Rogers/McKim
Proposal.	
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1982.
Westminster	Seminary	Faculty.	
The	Infallible	Word.	
3d	ed.	Philadelphia:
Presbyterian	and	Reformed,	1967.
Young,	Edward	J.	
Thy	Word	Is	Truth.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1957.
Works	From	a	Noninerrancy	Perspective
Baillie,	John.	
The	Idea	of	Revelation	in	Recent	Thought.	
New	York:
Columbia	University	Press,	1956.
Barr,	James.	
Fundamentalism.	
London:	SCM,	1977.
Beegle,	Dewey	M.	
Scripture,	Tradition,	and	Infallibility.	
Grand	Rapids:
Eerdmans,	1973.
Berkouwer,	G.	C.	
Holy	Scripture.	
Trans.	by	Jack	B.	Rogers.	Grand
Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1975.
Burtchaell,	James	Tunstead.	
Catholic	Theories	of	Biblical	Inspiration
Since	1810:	A	Review	and	Critique.	
Cambridge:	University	Press,	1969.
Davis,	Stephen	T.	
The	Debate	About	the	Bible.	
Philadelphia:
Westminster,	1977.
McKim,	Donald	K.,	ed.	
The	Authoritative	Word:	Essays	on	the	Nature	of
Scripture.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1983.
Pinnock,	Clark.	
The	Scripture	Principle.	
San	Francisco:	Harper	and	Row,
1984.
Rogers,	Jack,	ed.	
Biblical	Authority.	
Waco,	Tex.:	Word,	1977.
Rogers,	Jack,	and	Donald	K.	McKim.	
The	Authority	and	Interpretation	of
the	Bible:	An	Historical	Approach.	
San	Francisco:	Harper	and	Row:
1979.
Vawter,	Bruce.	
Biblical	Inspiration.	
Philadelphia:	Westminster,	1972	(a
recent	Roman	Catholic	work).
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
2	Timothy	3:16:	
All	scripture	is	inspired	by	God	and	profitable	for	teaching,
for	reproof,	for	correction,	and	for	training	in	righteousness.
HYMN
“Standing	on	the	Promises”
This	hymn	speaks	of	the	promises	of	God’s	Word	as	the	eternally
firm	and	unchanging	foundation	on	which	we	can	rest	our	faith.	In
the	midst	of	doubt	and	fear	these	promises	“cannot	fail.”	By
standing	firm	on	them	we	will	be	able	to	sing	“Glory	in	the
highest!”	for	all	eternity.	Yet	the	hymn	speaks	not	merely	of	the
promises	of	God’s	Word,	but	of	all	the	contents	of	Scripture:	the
Bible	is	“the	living	Word	of	God”	by	which	we	“prevail”	in	the
midst	of	adversity	(v.	
2),	and	it	is	the	“Spirit’s	sword”	by	which	we
may	be	“overcoming	daily”	(v.	
3).	There	is	no	other	sure	foundation
on	which	to	rest	our	faith	than	on	the	very	words	and	promises	of
God.	“I	am	standing	on	the	promises	of	God!”	is	the	joyful
exclamation	of	a	heart	filled	with	faith,	and	it	shall	be	our	song
throughout	eternity.
Standing	on	the	promises	of	Christ	my	King,
Through	eternal	ages	let	his	praises	ring!
Glory	in	the	highest	I	will	shout	and	sing
Standing	on	the	promises	of	God!
Chorus:
Standing,	standing,	standing	on	the	promises	of	God	my	Savior;
Standing,	standing,	I’m	standing	on	the	promises	of	God.
Standing	on	the	promises	that	cannot	fail
When	the	howling	storms	of	doubt	and	fear	assail;
By	the	living	Word	of	God	I	shall	prevail
Standing	on	the	promises	of	God!
Standing	on	the	promises	of	Christ	the	Lord,
Bound	to	him	eternally	by	love’s	strong	cord,
Overcoming	daily	with	the	Spirit’s	sword
Standing	on	the	promises	of	God!
Standing	on	the	promises	I	cannot	fall,
List’ning	every	moment	to	the	Spirit’s	call,
Resting	in	my	Savior	as	my	all	in	all
Standing	on	the	promises	of	God!
AUTHOR:	R.	KELSO	CARTER,	1886
NOTES
1
Of	course,	I	do	not	mean	to	say	that	every	word	in	Scripture	was	audibly	spoken	by	God	himself,	since	the	Bible	records	the
words	of	hundreds	of	different	people,	such	as	King	David	and	Peter	and	even	Satan	himself.	But	I	do	mean	that	even	the
quotations	of	other	people	are	
God’s	
reports	of	what	they	said,	and,	rightly	interpreted	in	their	contexts,	come	to	us	with	God’s
authority.
2
See	Wayne	Grudem,	
The	Gift	of	Prophecy	in	1	Corinthians	
(Lanham,	Md.:	University	Press	of	America,	1982),	pp.	12–13;	also
Wayne	Grudem,	“Scripture’s	Self-Attestation,”	in	
Scripture	and	Truth,	
ed.	D.	A.	Carson	and	J.	Woodbridge,	pp.	21–22.
3
Some	have	suggested	an	alternative	translation,	namely,	“Every	God-breathed	Scripture	is	also	profitable	for	teaching.	.	.	.”
However,	this	translation	is	highly	unlikely	because	it	makes	the	
kai	
(“also”)	extremely	awkward	in	the	Greek	sentence.	In
coherent	speech,	one	must	say	that	something	that	has	one	characteristic	before	saying	that	it	“also”	has	another	characteristic.
The	“also”	must	indicate	an	addition	to	something	that	has	previously	been	predicated.	Thus,	
theopneustos	
(“God-breathed”)	and
ōphelimos	
(“profitable”)	are	both	best	understood	as	predicate	adjectives,	and	the	best	translation	is,	“All	Scripture	is	God-
breathed	and	is	profitable	for	teaching.	.	.	.”
4
In	at	least	two	cases,	1	Tim.	5:18	and	2	Peter	3:16,	
graphē	
also	includes	some	of	the	New	Testament	writings	along	with	the	Old
Testament	writings	that	it	is	referring	to	(see	discussion	below).
5
I	assume	Pauline	authorship	of	1	and	2	Timothy	and	Titus	throughout	this	book.	For	recent	arguments	defending	Pauline
authorship	see	George	W.	Knight	III,	
The	Pastoral	Epistles,	
NIGTC	(Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	and	Carlisle:	Paternoster,	1992),
pp.	4–54.
6
Older	systematic	theologies	used	the	words	
inspired	
and	
inspiration	
to	speak	of	the	fact	that	the	words	of	Scripture	are	spoken	by
God.	This	terminology	was	based	especially	on	an	older	translation	of	2	Tim.	3:16,	which	said,	“All	scripture	is	given	by
inspiration	of	God.	.	.”	(KJV).	However,	the	word	
inspiration	
has	such	a	weak	sense	in	ordinary	usage	today	(every	poet	or
songwriter	claims	to	be	“inspired”	to	write,	and	even	athletes	are	said	to	give	“inspired”	performances)	that	I	have	not	used	it	in
this	text.	I	have	preferred	the	NIV	rendering	of	2	Tim.	3:16,	“God-breathed,”	and	have	used	other	expressions	to	say	that	the
words	of	Scripture	are	God’s	very	words.	The	older	phrase	“
plenary	
inspiration”	meant	that	all	the	words	of	Scripture	are	God’s
words	(the	word	
plenary	
means	“full”),	a	fact	that	I	affirm	in	this	chapter	without	using	the	phrase.
7
See	
chapter	3
	for	discussion	of	2	Peter	3:16	and	1	Tim.	5:17–18.
8
I	have	translated	the	verse	“things	of	the	Spirit	of	God”	because	the	Greek	text	has	only	the	neuter	plural	definite	article	(
ta
)	used
as	a	substantive,	and	no	specific	noun	is	given.	Thus,	the	RSV	translation	“the	
gifts	
of	the	Spirit	of	God”	is	more	restrictive	in
subject	matter	than	the	actual	words	would	justify	and	is	certainly	not	required	by	the	context.
9
This	point	has	been	made	well	by	John	M.	Frame,	“God	and	Biblical	Language:	Transcendence	and	Immanence,”	in	
God’s
Inerrant	Word,	
ed.	John	Warwick	Montgomery	(Minneapolis:	Bethany	Fellowship,	1974),	pp.	159–77.	See	also	J.	P.	Moreland,
“The	Rationality	of	Belief	in	Inerrancy,”	
TrinJ	
7:1	(1986),	75–86,	for	a	helpful	discussion	of	the	way	we	reach	convictions	about
issues	of	major	significance	in	our	lives.
10
In	some	systematic	theologies,	this	process	by	which	God	used	human	authors	to	write	his	very	words	is	called	“the	mode	of
inspiration.”	I	have	not	used	this	terminology	in	this	book,	since	it	does	not	seem	to	be	a	readily	understandable	phrase	today.
11
This	would	also	include	even	the	influence	of	a	secretary	(technically	called	an	amanuensis)	on	the	wording	of	a	book:	see	the
greeting	from	Tertius	in	Rom.	16:22.
12
I	am	not	denying	that	good	speaking	ability	or	creativity	or	telling	of	personal	experiences	have	a	place	in	preaching,	for	good
preaching	will	include	all	of	these	(see	Prov.	16:21,	23).	I	am	saying	that	the	power	to	change	lives	must	come	from	the	Word
itself,	and	it	will	be	evident	to	the	hearers	when	a	preacher	really	believes	this.
13
Some	scholars	object	that	it	is	“too	simplistic”	to	argue	as	follows:	“The	Bible	is	God’s	words.	God	never	lies.	Therefore	the
Bible	never	lies.”	Yet	it	is	precisely	that	kind	of	argument	that	Paul	uses	in	Titus	1:2.	He	refers	to	the	promises	of	eternal	life	made
“ages	ago”	in	Scripture	and	says	the	promises	were	made	by	God	“who	never	lies.”	He	thus	calls	on	the	truthfulness	of	God’s	own
speech	to	prove	the	truthfulness	of	the	words	of	Scripture.	A	“simple”	argument	this	may	be,	but	it	is	scriptural,	and	it	is	true.	We
should	therefore	not	hesitate	to	accept	it	and	use	it.
14
See	
chapter	15
	for	discussion	of	the	age	of	the	earth,	and	pp.	348–50	for	discussion	of	gaps	in	the	genealogies.
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	5
The	Inerrancy	of	Scripture
Are	there	any	errors	in	the	Bible?
Most	books	on	systematic	theology	have	not	included	a	separate
chapter	on	the	inerrancy	of	the	Bible.	The	subject	has	usually	been
dealt	with	under	the	heading	of	the	authority	of	Scripture,	and	no
further	treatment	has	been	considered	necessary.	However,	this
issue	of	inerrancy	is	of	such	concern	in	the	evangelical	world	today
that	it	warrants	a	separate	chapter	following	our	treatment	of	the
authority	of	the	Word	of	God.
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
A.	The	Meaning	of	Inerrancy
We	will	not	at	this	point	repeat	the	arguments	concerning	the
authority	of	Scripture	that	were	given	in	chapter	4.	There	it	was
argued	that	all	the	words	in	the	Bible	are	God’s	words,	and	that
therefore	to	disbelieve	or	disobey	any	word	in	Scripture	is	to
disbelieve	or	disobey	God.	It	was	argued	further	that	the	Bible
clearly	teaches	that	God	cannot	lie	or	speak	falsely	(2	Sam.	7:28;
Titus	1:2;	Heb.	6:18).	Therefore,	all	the	words	in	Scripture	are
claimed	to	be	completely	true	and	without	error	in	any	part	(Num.
23:19;	Pss.	12:6;	119:89,	96;	Prov.	30:5;	Matt.	24:35).	God’s	words
are,	in	fact,	the	ultimate	standard	of	truth	(John	17:17).
Especially	relevant	at	this	point	are	those	Scripture	texts	that
indicate	the	total	truthfulness	and	reliability	of	God’s	words.	“
The
promises	of	the	L
ORD
	are	promises	that	are	pure,	
silver	refined	in	a
furnace	on	the	ground,	purified	seven	times”	(Ps.	12:6),	indicates
the	flawlessness	or	absolute	reliability	and	purity	of	Scripture.
Similarly,	“
Every	word	of	God	proves	true;	
he	is	a	shield	to	those
who	take	refuge	in	him”	(Prov.	30:5),	indicates	the	truthfulness	of
every	word	that	God	has	spoken.	Though	error	and	at	least	partial
falsehood	may	characterize	the	speech	of	every	human	being,	it	is
the	characteristic	of	God’s	speech	even	when	spoken	through	sinful
human	beings	that	it	is	never	false	and	that	it	never	affirms	error:
“God	is	not	man,	that	he	should	lie,	or	a	son	of	man,	that	he	should
repent”	(Num.	23:19)	was	spoken	by	sinful	Balaam	specifically
about	the	prophetic	words	that	God	had	spoken	through	his	own
lips.
With	evidence	such	as	this	we	are	now	in	a	position	to	define
biblical	inerrancy:	
The	inerrancy	of	Scripture	means	that	Scripture
in	the	original	manuscripts	does	not	affirm	anything	that	is
contrary	to	fact.
This	definition	focuses	on	the	question	of	truthfulness	and
falsehood	in	the	language	of	Scripture.	The	definition	in	simple
terms	just	means	that	
the	Bible	always	tells	the	truth,	
and	that	it
always	tells	the	truth	
concerning	everything	it	talks	about.	
This
definition	does	not	mean	that	the	Bible	tells	us	every	fact	there	is	to
know	about	any	one	subject,	but	it	affirms	that	what	it	does	say
about	any	subject	is	
true.
It	is	important	to	realize	at	the	outset	of	this	discussion	that	the
focus	of	this	controversy	is	on	the	question	of	truthfulness	in
speech.	It	must	be	recognized	that	absolute	truthfulness	in	speech	is
consistent	with	some	other	types	of	statements,	such	as	the
following:
1.
	The	Bible	Can	Be	Inerrant	and	Still	Speak	in	the	Ordinary	Language
of	Everyday	Speech.
	This	is	especially	true	in	“scientific”	or	“historical”
descriptions	of	facts	or	events.	The	Bible	can	speak	of	the	sun	rising	and	the
rain	falling	because	from	the	perspective	of	the	speaker	this	is	exactly	what
happens.	From	the	standpoint	of	an	observer	standing	on	the	sun	(were	that
possible)	or	on	some	hypothetical	“fixed”	point	in	space,	the	earth	rotates	and
brings	the	sun	into	view,	and	rain	does	not	fall	downward	but	upward	or
sideways	or	whatever	direction	necessary	for	it	to	be	drawn	by	gravity	toward
the	surface	of	the	earth.	But	such	explanations	are	hopelessly	pedantic	and
would	make	ordinary	communication	impossible.	From	the	standpoint	of	the
speaker,	the	sun	
does	
rise	and	the	rain	
does	
fall,	and	these	are	perfectly	true
descriptions	of	the	natural	phenomena	the	speaker	observes.
A	similar	consideration	applies	to	numbers	when	used	in	measuring
or	in	counting.	A	reporter	can	say	that	8,000	men	were	killed	in	a
certain	battle	without	thereby	implying	that	he	has	counted
everyone	and	that	there	are	not	7,999	or	8,001	dead	soldiers.	If
roughly	8,000	died,	it	would	of	course	be	false	to	say	that	16,000
died,	but	it	would	not	be	false	in	most	contexts	for	a	reporter	to	say
that	8,000	men	died	when	in	fact	7,823	or	8,242	had	died:	the	limits
of	truthfulness	would	depend	on	the	degree	of	precision	implied	by
the	speaker	and	expected	by	his	original	hearers.
This	is	also	true	for	measurements.	Whether	I	say,	“I	don’t	live	far
from	my	office,”	or	“I	live	a	little	over	a	mile	from	my	office,”	or	“I
live	one	mile	from	my	office,”	or	“I	live	1.287	miles	from	my
office,”	all	four	statements	are	still	approximations	to	some	degree
of	accuracy.	Further	degrees	of	accuracy	might	be	obtained	with
more	precise	scientific	instruments,	but	these	would	still	be
approximations	to	a	certain	degree	of	accuracy.	Thus,
measurements	also,	in	order	to	be	true,	should	conform	to	the
degree	of	precision	implied	by	the	speaker	and	expected	by	the
hearers	in	the	original	context.	It	should	not	trouble	us,	then,	to
affirm	both	that	the	Bible	is	absolutely	truthful	in	everything	it	says
and	that	it	uses	ordinary	language	to	describe	natural	phenomena	or
to	give	approximations	or	round	numbers	when	those	are
appropriate	in	the	context.
We	should	also	note	that	language	can	make	vague	or	imprecise
statements	without	being	untrue.	“I	live	a	little	over	a	mile	from	my
office”	is	a	vague	and	imprecise	statement,	but	it	is	also	inerrant:
there	is	nothing	untrue	about	it.	It	does	not	affirm	anything	that	is
contrary	to	fact.	In	a	similar	way,	biblical	statements	can	be
imprecise	and	still	be	totally	true.	Inerrancy	has	to	do	with
truthfulness,	
not	with	the	degree	of	precision	with	which	events	are
reported.
2.	The	Bible	Can	Be	Inerrant	and	Still	Include	Loose	or	Free	Quotations.
The	method	by	which	one	person	quotes	the	words	of	another	person	is	a
procedure	that	in	large	part	varies	from	culture	to	culture.	In	contemporary
American	and	British	culture	we	are	used	to	quoting	a	person’s	exact	words
when	we	enclose	the	statement	in	quotation	marks	(this	is	called	direct
quotation).	But	when	we	use	indirect	quotation	(with	no	quotation	marks)	we
only	expect	an	accurate	report	of	the	substance	of	a	statement.	Consider	this
sentence:	“Elliot	said	that	he	would	return	home	for	supper	right	away.”	The
sentence	does	not	quote	Elliot	directly,	but	it	is	an	acceptable	and	truthful
report	of	Elliot’s	actual	statement	to	his	father,	“I	will	come	to	the	house	to	eat
in	two	minutes,”	even	though	the	indirect	quotation	included	none	of	the
speaker’s	original	words.
Written	Greek	at	the	time	of	the	New	Testament	had	no	quotation
marks	or	equivalent	kinds	of	punctuation,	and	an	accurate	citation
of	another	person	needed	to	include	only	a	correct	representation	of
the	
content	
of	what	the	person	said	(rather	like	our	indirect
quotations):	it	was	not	expected	to	cite	each	word	exactly.	Thus,
inerrancy	is	consistent	with	loose	or	free	quotations	of	the	Old
Testament	or	of	the	words	of	Jesus,	for	example,	so	long	as	the
content	
is	not	false	to	what	was	originally	stated.	The	original
writer	did	not	ordinarily	imply	that	he	was	using	the	exact	words	of
the	speaker	and	only	those,	nor	did	the	original	hearers	expect
verbatim	quotation	in	such	reporting.
3.	It	Is	Consistent	With	Inerrancy	to	Have	Unusual	or	Uncommon
Grammatical	Constructions	in	the	Bible.
	Some	of	the	language	of	Scripture
is	elegant	and	stylistically	excellent.	Other	scriptural	writings	contain	the
rough-hewn	language	of	ordinary	people.	At	times	this	includes	a	failure	to
follow	the	commonly	accepted	“rules”	of	grammatical	expression	(such	as	the
use	of	a	plural	verb	where	grammatical	rules	would	require	a	singular	verb,	or
the	use	of	a	feminine	adjective	where	a	masculine	one	would	be	expected,	or
different	spelling	for	a	word	than	the	one	commonly	used,	etc.).	These
stylistically	or	grammatically	irregular	statements	(which	are	especially	found
in	the	book	of	Revelation)	should	not	trouble	us,	for	they	do	not	affect	the
truthfulness	of	the	statements	under	consideration:	a	statement	can	be
ungrammatical	but	still	be	entirely	true.	For	example,	an	uneducated
backwoodsman	in	some	rural	area	may	be	the	most	trusted	man	in	the	county
even	though	his	grammar	is	poor,	because	he	has	earned	a	reputation	for
never	telling	a	lie.	Similarly,	there	are	a	few	statements	in	Scripture	(in	the
original	languages)	that	are	ungrammatical	(according	to	current	standards	of
proper	grammar	at	that	time)	but	still	inerrant	because	they	are	completely
true.	The	issue	is	
truthfulness	
in	speech.
B.	Some	Current	Challenges	to	Inerrancy
In	this	section	we	examine	the	major	objections	that	are	commonly
made	against	the	concept	of	inerrancy.
1.
	The	Bible	Is	Only	Authoritative	for	“Faith	and	Practice.”
	One	of	the
most	frequent	objections	is	raised	by	those	who	say	that	the	purpose	of
Scripture	is	to	teach	us	in	areas	that	concern	“faith	and	practice”	only;	that	is,
in	areas	that	directly	relate	to	our	religious	faith	or	to	our	ethical	conduct.	This
position	would	allow	for	the	possibility	of	false	statements	in	Scripture,	for
example,	in	
other	
areas	such	as	in	minor	historical	details	or	scientific	facts—
these	areas,	it	is	said,	do	not	concern	the	purpose	of	the	Bible,	which	is	to
instruct	us	in	what	we	should	believe	and	how	we	are	to	live.
1
	Its	advocates
often	prefer	to	say	that	the	Bible	is	“
infallible,
”	but	they	hesitate	to	use	the
word	
inerrant.
2
The	response	to	this	objection	can	be	stated	as	follows:	the	Bible
repeatedly	affirms	that	all	of	Scripture	is	profitable	for	us	(2	Tim.
3:16)	and	that	
all	
of	it	is	“God-breathed.”	Thus	it	is	completely	pure
(Ps.	12:6),	perfect	(Ps.	119:96),	and	true	(Prov.	30:5).	The	Bible
itself	does	not	make	any	restriction	on	the	kinds	of	subjects	to
which	it	speaks	truthfully.
The	New	Testament	contains	further	affirmations	of	the	reliability
of	all	parts	of	Scripture:	in	Acts	24:14,	Paul	says	that	he	worships
God,	“
believing	everything	
laid	down	by	the	law	or	written	in	the
prophets.”	In	Luke	24:25,	Jesus	says	that	the	disciples	are	“foolish
men”	because	they	are	“slow	of	heart	to	believe	all	that	the	prophets
have	spoken.”	In	Romans	15:4,	Paul	says	that	“
whatever	
was
written”	in	the	Old	Testament	was	“written	for	our	instruction.”
These	texts	give	no	indication	that	there	is	any	part	of	Scripture	that
is	not	to	be	trusted	or	relied	on	completely.	Similarly,	in	1
Corinthians	10:11,	Paul	can	refer	even	to	minor	historical	details	in
the	Old	Testament	(sitting	down	to	eat	and	drink,	rising	up	to
dance)	and	can	say	both	that	they	“
happened
”	(thus	implying
historical	reliability)	and	“were	written	down	for	our	instruction.”
If	we	begin	to	examine	the	way	in	which	the	New	Testament
authors	trust	the	smallest	historical	details	of	the	Old	Testament
narrative,	we	see	no	intention	to	separate	out	matters	of	“faith	and
practice,”	or	to	say	that	this	is	somehow	a	recognizable	category	of
affirmations,	or	to	imply	that	statements	not	in	that	category	need
not	be	trusted	or	thought	to	be	inerrant.	Rather,	it	seems	that	the
New	Testament	authors	are	willing	to	cite	and	affirm	as	true	
every
detail	
of	the	Old	Testament.
In	the	following	list	are	some	examples	of	these	historical	details
cited	by	New	Testament	authors.	If	all	of	these	are	matters	of	“faith
and	practice,”	then	
every	
historical	detail	of	the	Old	Testament	is	a
matter	of	“faith	and	practice,”	and	this	objection	ceases	to	be	an
objection	to	inerrancy.	On	the	other	hand,	if	so	many	details	can	be
affirmed,	then	it	seems	that	all	of	the	historical	details	in	the	Old
Testament	can	be	affirmed	as	true,	and	we	should	not	speak	of
restricting	the	necessary	truthfulness	of	Scripture	to	some	category
of	“faith	and	practice”	that	would	exclude	certain	minor	details.
There	are	no	types	of	details	left	that	could	not	be	affirmed	as	true.
The	New	Testament	gives	us	the	following	data:	David	ate	the
bread	of	the	Presence	(Matt.	12:3–4);	Jonah	was	in	the	whale	(Matt.
12:40);	the	men	of	Nineveh	repented	(Matt.	12:41);	the	queen	of	the
South	came	to	hear	Solomon	(Matt.	12:42);	Elijah	was	sent	to	the
widow	of	Zarephath	(Luke	4:25–26);	Naaman	the	Syrian	was
cleansed	of	leprosy	(Luke	4:27);	on	the	day	Lot	left	Sodom	fire	and
brimstone	rained	from	heaven	(Luke	17:29;	cf.	v.	
32	with	its
reference	to	Lot’s	wife	who	turned	to	salt);	Moses	lifted	up	the
serpent	in	the	wilderness	(John	3:14);	Jacob	gave	a	field	to	Joseph
(John	4:5);	many	details	of	the	history	of	Israel	occurred	(Acts
13:17–23);	Abraham	believed	and	received	the	promise	before	he
was	circumcised	(Rom.	4:10);	Abraham	was	about	one	hundred
years	old	(Rom.	4:19);	God	told	Rebekah	before	her	children	were
born	that	the	elder	child	would	serve	the	younger	(Rom.	9:10–12);
Elijah	spoke	with	God	(Rom.	11:2–4);	the	people	of	Israel	passed
through	the	sea,	ate	and	drank	spiritual	food	and	drink,	desired	evil,
sat	down	to	drink,	rose	up	to	dance,	indulged	in	immorality,
grumbled,	and	were	destroyed	(1	Cor.	10:11);	Abraham	gave	a
tenth	of	everything	to	Melchizedek	(Heb.	7:1–2);	the	Old	Testament
tabernacle	had	a	specific	and	detailed	design	(Heb.	9:1–5);	Moses
sprinkled	the	people	and	the	tabernacle	vessels	with	blood	and
water,	using	scarlet	wool	and	hyssop	(Heb.	9:19–21);	the	world	was
created	by	the	Word	of	God	(Heb.	11:3);
3
	many	details	of	the	lives
of	Abel,	Enoch,	Noah,	Abraham,	Moses,	Rahab,	and	others	actually
happened	(Heb.	11,	passim);	Esau	sold	his	birthright	for	a	single
meal	and	later	sought	it	back	with	tears	(Heb.	12:16–17);	Rahab
received	the	spies	and	sent	them	out	another	way	(James	2:25);
eight	persons	were	saved	in	the	ark	(1	Peter	3:20;	2	Peter	2:5);	God
turned	Sodom	and	Gomorrah	to	ashes	but	saved	Lot	(2	Peter	2:6–
7);	Balaam’s	donkey	spoke	(2	Peter	2:16).
This	list	indicates	that	the	New	Testament	writers	were	willing	to
rely	on	the	truthfulness	of	any	part	of	the	historical	narratives	of	the
Old	Testament.	No	detail	was	too	insignificant	to	be	used	for	the
instruction	of	New	Testament	Christians.	There	is	no	indication	that
they	thought	of	a	certain	category	of	scriptural	statements	that	were
unreliable	and	untrustworthy	(such	as	“historical	and	scientific”
statements	as	opposed	to	doctrinal	and	moral	passages).	It	seems
clear	that	the	Bible	itself	does	not	support	any	restriction	on	the
kinds	of	subjects	to	which	it	speaks	with	absolute	authority	and
truth;	indeed,	many	passages	in	Scripture	actually	exclude	the
validity	of	this	kind	of	restriction.
A	second	response	to	those	who	limit	the	necessary	truthfulness	of
Scripture	to	matters	of	“faith	and	practice”	is	to	note	that	this
position	mistakes	the	
major	
purpose	of	Scripture	for	the	
total
purpose	of	Scripture.	To	say	that	the	major	purpose	of	Scripture	is
to	teach	us	in	matters	of	“faith	and	practice”	is	to	make	a	useful	and
correct	summary	of	God’s	purpose	in	giving	us	the	Bible.	But	as	a
summary	
it	includes	only	the	most	prominent	purpose	of	God	in
giving	us	Scripture.	It	is	not,	however,	legitimate	to	use	this
summary	to	deny	that	it	is	
part	
of	the	purpose	of	Scripture	to	tell	us
about	minor	historical	details	or	about	some	aspects	of	astronomy
or	geography,	and	so	forth.	A	summary	cannot	properly	be	used	to
deny	one	of	the	things	it	is	summarizing!	To	use	it	this	way	would
simply	show	that	the	summary	is	not	detailed	enough	to	specify	the
items	in	question.
It	is	better	to	say	that	the	
whole	purpose	
of	Scripture	is	to	say
everything	it	does	say,	on	whatever	subject.	Every	one	of	God’s
words	in	Scripture	was	deemed	by	him	to	be	important	for	us.	Thus,
God	issues	severe	warnings	to	anyone	who	would	take	away	even
one	word	from	what	he	has	said	to	us	(Deut.	4:2;	12:32;	Rev.
22:18–19):	we	cannot	add	to	God’s	words	or	take	from	them,	for	all
are	part	of	his	larger	purpose	in	speaking	to	us.	Everything	stated	in
Scripture	is	there	because	God	intended	it	to	be	there:	God	does	not
say	anything	unintentionally!	Thus,	this	first	objection	to	inerrancy
makes	a	wrong	use	of	a	summary	and	thereby	incorrectly	attempts
to	impose	artificial	limits	on	the	kinds	of	things	about	which	God
can	speak	to	us.
2.	The	Term	
Inerrancy	
Is	a	Poor	Term.
	People	who	make	this	second
objection	say	that	the	term	
inerrancy	
is	too	precise	and	that	in	ordinary	usage
it	denotes	a	kind	of	absolute	scientific	precision	that	we	do	not	want	to	claim
for	Scripture.	Furthermore,	those	who	make	this	objection	note	that	the	term
inerrancy	
is	not	used	in	the	Bible	itself.	Therefore,	it	is	probably	an
inappropriate	term	for	us	to	insist	upon.
The	response	to	this	objection	may	be	stated	as	follows:	first,	the
scholars	who	have	used	the	term	
inerrancy	
have	defined	it	clearly
for	over	a	hundred	years,	and	they	have	always	allowed	for	the
“limitations”	that	attach	to	speech	in	ordinary	language.	In	no	case
has	the	term	been	used	to	denote	a	kind	of	absolute	scientific
precision	by	any	responsible	representative	of	the	inerrancy
position.	Therefore	those	who	raise	this	objection	to	the	term	are
not	giving	careful	enough	attention	to	the	way	in	which	it	has	been
used	in	theological	discussions	for	more	than	a	century.
Second,	it	must	be	noted	that	we	often	use	nonbiblical	terms	to
summarize	a	biblical	teaching.	The	word	
Trinity	
does	not	occur	in
Scripture,	nor	does	the	word	
incarnation.	
Yet	both	of	these	terms
are	very	helpful	because	they	allow	us	to	summarize	in	one	word	a
true	biblical	concept,	and	they	are	therefore	helpful	in	enabling	us
to	discuss	a	biblical	teaching	more	easily.
It	should	also	be	noted	that	no	other	single	word	has	been	proposed
which	says	as	clearly	what	we	want	to	affirm	when	we	wish	to	talk
about	total	truthfulness	in	language.	The	word	
inerrancy	
does	this
quite	well,	and	there	seems	no	reason	not	to	continue	to	use	it	for
that	purpose.
Finally,	in	the	church	today	we	seem	to	be	unable	to	carry	on	the
discussion	around	this	topic	without	the	use	of	this	term.	People
may	object	to	this	term	if	they	wish,	but,	like	it	or	not,	this	is	the
term	about	which	the	discussion	has	focused	and	almost	certainly
will	continue	to	focus	in	the	next	several	decades.	When	the
International	Council	on	Biblical	Inerrancy	(ICBI)	in	1977	began	a
ten-year	campaign	to	promote	and	defend	the	idea	of	biblical
inerrancy,	it	became	inevitable	that	this	word	would	be	the	one
about	which	discussion	would	proceed.	The	“Chicago	Statement	on
Biblical	Inerrancy,”	which	was	drafted	and	published	in	1978	under
ICBI	sponsorship	(see	
appendix	1
),	defined	what	most	evangelicals
mean	by	inerrancy,	perhaps	not	perfectly,	but	quite	well,	and	further
objections	to	such	a	widely	used	and	well-defined	term	seem	to	be
unnecessary	and	unhelpful	for	the	church.
3.	We	Have	No	Inerrant	Manuscripts;	Therefore,	Talk	About	an	Inerrant
Bible	Is	Misleading.
	Those	who	make	this	objection	point	to	the	fact	that
inerrancy	has	always	been	claimed	for	the	first	or	
original	copies	of	the
biblical	documents.
4
	Yet	none	of	these	survive:	we	have	only	copies	of	copies
of	what	Moses	or	Paul	or	Peter	wrote.	What	is	the	use,	then,	of	placing	so
great	importance	on	a	doctrine	that	applies	only	to	manuscripts	that	no	one
has?
In	reply	to	this	objection,	it	may	first	be	stated	that	for	over	99
percent	of	the	words	of	the	Bible,	we	
know	
what	the	original
manuscript	said.	Even	for	many	of	the	verses	where	there	are
textual	variants	(that	is,	different	words	in	different	ancient	copies
of	the	same	verse),	the	correct	decision	is	often	quite	clear,	and
there	are	really	very	few	places	where	the	textual	variant	is	both
difficult	to	evaluate	and	significant	in	determining	the	meaning.	In
the	small	percentage	of	cases	where	there	is	significant	uncertainty
about	what	the	original	text	said,	the	general	sense	of	the	sentence
is	usually	quite	clear	from	the	context.	(One	does	not	have	to	be	a
Hebrew	or	Greek	scholar	to	know	where	these	variants	are,	because
all	modern	English	translations	indicate	them	in	marginal	notes
with	words	such	as	“some	ancient	manuscripts	read	.	.	.”	or	“other
ancient	authorities	add.	.	.	.”)
This	is	not	to	say	that	the	study	of	textual	variants	is	unimportant,
but	it	is	to	say	that	the	study	of	textual	variants	has	not	left	us	in
confusion	about	what	the	original	manuscripts	said.
5
	It	has	rather
brought	us	extremely	close	to	the	content	of	those	original
manuscripts.	For	most	practical	purposes,	then,	the	
current
published	scholarly	texts	
of	the	Hebrew	Old	Testament	and	Greek
New	Testament	
are	the	same	as	the	original	manuscripts.	
Thus,
when	we	say	that	the	original	manuscripts	were	inerrant,	we	are
also	implying	that	over	99	percent	of	the	words	in	our	present
manuscripts	are	also	inerrant,	for	they	are	exact	copies	of	the
originals.	Furthermore,	we	
know	
where	the	uncertain	readings	are
(for	where	there	are	no	textual	variants	we	have	no	reason	to	expect
faulty	copying	of	the	original).
6
	Thus,	our	present	manuscripts	are
for	most	purposes	the	same	as	the	original	manuscripts,	and	the
doctrine	of	inerrancy	therefore	directly	concerns	our	present
manuscripts	as	well.
Furthermore,	it	is	extremely	important	to	affirm	the	inerrancy	of	the
original	documents,	for	the	subsequent	copies	were	made	by	men
with	no	claim	or	guarantee	by	God	that	these	copies	would	be
perfect.	But	the	original	manuscripts	are	those	to	which	the	claims
to	be	God’s	very	words	apply.	Thus,	if	we	have	mistakes	in	the
copies	(as	we	do),	then	these	are	only	the	
mistakes	of	men.	
But	if
we	have	mistakes	in	the	
original	manuscripts,	
then	we	are	forced	to
say	not	only	that	men	made	mistakes,	but	that	
God	himself	
made	a
mistake	and	spoke	falsely.	This	we	cannot	do.
4.	The	Biblical	Writers	“Accommodated”	Their	Messages	in	Minor
Details	to	the	False	Ideas	Current	in	Their	Day,	and	Affirmed	or	Taught
Those	Ideas	in	an	Incidental	Way.
	This	objection	to	inerrancy	is	slightly
different	from	the	one	that	would	restrict	the	inerrancy	of	Scripture	to	matters
of	faith	and	practice,	but	it	is	related	to	it.	Those	who	hold	this	position	argue
that	it	would	have	been	very	difficult	for	the	biblical	writers	to	communicate
with	the	people	of	their	time	if	they	had	tried	to	correct	all	the	false	historical
and	scientific	information	believed	by	their	contemporaries.	Those	who	hold
this	position	would	not	argue	that	the	points	where	the	Bible	affirms	false
information	are	numerous,	or	even	that	these	places	are	the	main	points	of	any
particular	section	of	Scripture.	Rather,	they	would	say	that	when	the	biblical
writers	were	attempting	to	make	a	larger	point,	they	sometimes	incidentally
affirmed	some	falsehood	believed	by	the	people	of	their	time.
7
To	this	objection	to	inerrancy	it	can	be	replied,	first,	that	God	is
Lord	of	human	language	who	can	use	human	language	to
communicate	perfectly	without	having	to	affirm	any	false	ideas	that
may	have	been	held	by	people	during	the	time	of	the	writing	of
Scripture.	This	objection	to	inerrancy	essentially	denies	God’s
effective	lordship	over	human	language.
Second,	we	must	respond	that	such	“accommodation”	by	God	to
our	misunderstandings	would	imply	that	God	had	acted	contrary	to
his	character	as	an	“unlying	God”	(Num.	23:19;	Titus	1:2;	Heb.
6:18).	It	is	not	helpful	to	divert	attention	from	this	difficulty	by
repeated	emphasis	on	the	gracious	condescension	of	God	to	speak
on	our	level.	Yes,	God	does	condescend	to	speak	our	language,	the
language	of	human	beings.	But	no	passage	of	Scripture	teaches	that
he	“condescends”	so	as	to	act	contrary	to	his	moral	character.	He	is
never	said	to	be	able	to	condescend	so	as	to	affirm—even
incidentally—something	that	is	false.	If	God	were	to
“accommodate”	himself	in	this	way,	he	would	cease	to	be	the
“unlying	God.”	He	would	cease	to	be	the	God	the	Bible	represents
him	to	be.	Such	activity	would	not	in	any	way	show	God’s
greatness,	for	God	does	not	manifest	his	greatness	by	acting	in	a
way	that	contradicts	his	character.	This	objection	thus	at	root
misunderstands	the	purity	and	unity	of	God	as	they	affect	all	of	his
words	and	deeds.
Furthermore,	such	a	process	of	accommodation,	if	it	actually	had
occurred,	would	create	a	serious	moral	problem	for	us.	We	are	to	be
imitators	of	God’s	moral	character	(Lev.	11:44;	Luke	6:36;	Eph.
5:1;	1	Peter	5:1,	et	al.).	Paul	says,	since	in	our	new	natures	we	are
becoming	more	like	God	(Eph.	4:24),	we	should	“put	away
falsehood”	and	“speak	the	truth”	with	one	another	(v.	
25).	We	are	to
imitate	God’s	truthfulness	in	our	speech.	However,	if	the
accommodation	theory	is	correct,	then	God	
intentionally	
made
incidental	affirmations	of	falsehood	in	order	to	enhance
communication.	Therefore,	would	it	not	also	be	right	for	us
intentionally	to	make	incidental	affirmations	of	falsehood	whenever
it	would	enhance	communication?	Yet	this	would	be	tantamount	to
saying	that	a	minor	falsehood	told	for	a	good	purpose	(a	“white
lie”)	is	not	wrong.	Such	a	position,	contradicted	by	the	Scripture
passages	cited	above	concerning	God’s	total	truthfulness	in	speech,
cannot	be	held	to	be	valid.
5.	Inerrancy	Overemphasizes	the	Divine	Aspect	of	Scripture	and	Neglects
the	Human	Aspect.
	This	more	general	objection	is	made	by	those	who	claim
that	people	who	advocate	inerrancy	so	emphasize	the	divine	aspect	of
Scripture	that	they	downplay	its	human	aspect.
It	is	agreed	that	Scripture	has	both	a	human	and	a	divine	aspect,	and
that	we	must	give	adequate	attention	to	both.	However,	those	who
make	this	objection	almost	invariably	go	on	to	insist	that	the	truly
“human”	aspects	of	Scripture	
must	
include	the	presence	of	some
errors	in	Scripture.	We	can	respond	that	though	the	Bible	is	fully
human	in	that	it	was	written	by	human	beings	using	their	own
language,	the	activity	of	God	in	overseeing	the	writing	of	Scripture
and	causing	it	to	be	also	his	words	means	that	it	is	different	from
much	other	human	writing	in	precisely	this	aspect:	it	does	not
include	error.	That	is	exactly	the	point	made	even	by	sinful,	greedy,
disobedient	Balaam	in	Numbers	23:19:	God’s	speech	through	sinful
human	beings	is	different	from	the	ordinary	speech	of	men	because
“God	is	not	man	that	he	should	lie.”	Moreover,	it	is	simply	not	true
that	all	human	speech	and	writing	contains	error,	for	we	make
dozens	of	statements	each	day	that	are	completely	true.	For
example:	“My	name	is	Wayne	Grudem.”	“I	have	three	children.”	“I
ate	breakfast	this	morning.”
6.	There	Are	Some	Clear	Errors	in	the	Bible.
	This	final	objection,	that
there	are	clear	errors	in	the	Bible,	is	either	stated	or	implied	by	most	of	those
who	deny	inerrancy,	and	for	many	of	them	the	conviction	that	there	are	some
actual	errors	in	Scripture	is	a	major	factor	in	persuading	them	to	challenge	the
doctrine	of	inerrancy.
In	every	case,	the	first	answer	that	should	be	made	to	this	objection
is	to	ask	where	such	errors	are.	In	which	specific	verse	or	verses	do
these	errors	occur?	It	is	surprising	how	frequently	one	finds	that
this	objection	is	made	by	people	who	have	little	or	no	idea	where
the	specific	errors	are,	but	who	believe	there	are	errors	because
others	have	told	them	so.
In	other	cases,	however,	people	will	mention	one	or	more	specific
passages	where,	they	claim,	there	is	a	false	statement	in	Scripture.
In	these	cases,	it	is	important	that	we	look	at	the	biblical	text	itself,
and	look	at	it	very	closely.	If	we	believe	that	the	Bible	is	indeed
inerrant,	we	should	be	eager	and	certainly	not	afraid	to	inspect	these
texts	in	minute	detail.	In	fact,	our	expectation	will	be	that	close
inspection	will	show	there	to	be	no	error	at	all.	Once	again	it	is
surprising	how	often	it	turns	out	that	a	careful	reading	just	of	the
English	text	of	the	passage	in	question	will	bring	to	light	one	or
more	possible	solutions	to	the	difficulty.
In	a	few	passages,	no	solution	to	the	difficulty	may	be	immediately
apparent	from	reading	the	English	text.	At	that	point	it	is	helpful	to
consult	some	commentaries	on	the	text.	Both	Augustine	(A.D.	354–
430)	and	John	Calvin	(1509–64),	along	with	many	more	recent
commentators,	have	taken	time	to	deal	with	most	of	the	alleged
“problem	texts”	and	to	suggest	plausible	solutions	to	them.
Furthermore	some	writers	have	made	collections	of	all	the	most
difficult	texts	and	have	provided	suggested	answers	for	them.
8
There	are	a	few	texts	where	a	knowledge	of	Hebrew	or	Greek	may
be	necessary	to	find	a	solution,	and	those	who	do	not	have	firsthand
access	to	these	languages	may	have	to	find	answers	either	from	a
more	technical	commentary	or	by	asking	someone	who	does	have
this	training.	Of	course,	our	understanding	of	Scripture	is	never
perfect,	and	this	means	that	there	may	be	cases	where	we	will	be
unable	to	find	a	solution	to	a	difficult	passage	at	the	present	time.
This	may	be	because	the	linguistic,	historical,	or	contextual
evidence	we	need	to	understand	the	passage	correctly	is	presently
unknown	to	us.	This	should	not	trouble	us	in	a	small	number	of
passages	so	long	as	the	overall	pattern	of	our	investigation	of	these
passages	has	shown	that	there	is,	in	fact,	no	error	where	one	has
been	alleged.
9
But	while	we	must	allow	the	
possibility	
of	being	unable	to	solve	a
particular	problem,	it	should	also	be	stated	that	there	are	many
evangelical	Bible	scholars	today	who	will	say	that	they	do	not
presently	know	of	any	problem	texts	for	which	there	is	no
satisfactory	solution.	It	is	possible,	of	course,	that	some	such	texts
could	be	called	to	their	attention	in	the	future,	but	during	the	past
fifteen	years	or	so	of	controversy	over	biblical	inerrancy,	no	such
“unsolved”	text	has	been	brought	to	their	attention.
10
Finally,	a	historical	perspective	on	this	question	is	helpful.	There
are	no	really	“new”	problems	in	Scripture.	The	Bible	in	its	entirety
is	over	1,900	years	old,	and	the	alleged	“problem	texts”	have	been
there	all	along.	Yet	throughout	the	history	of	the	church	there	has
been	a	firm	belief	in	the	inerrancy	of	Scripture	in	the	sense	in	which
it	is	defined	in	this	chapter.	Moreover,	for	these	hundreds	of	years
highly	competent	biblical	scholars	have	read	and	studied	those
problem	texts	and	still	have	found	no	difficulty	in	holding	to
inerrancy.	This	should	give	us	confidence	that	the	solutions	to	these
problems	are	available	and	that	belief	in	inerrancy	is	entirely
consistent	with	a	lifetime	of	detailed	attention	to	the	text	of
Scripture.
11
C.	Problems	With	Denying	Inerrancy
The	problems	that	come	with	a	denial	of	biblical	inerrancy	are	not
insignificant,	and	when	we	understand	the	magnitude	of	these
problems	it	gives	us	further	encouragement	not	only	to	affirm
inerrancy	but	also	to	affirm	its	importance	for	the	church.	Some	of
the	more	serious	problems	are	listed	here.
1.
	If	We	Deny	Inerrancy,	a	Serious	Moral	Problem	Confronts	Us:	May
We	Imitate	God	and	Intentionally	Lie	in	Small	Matters	Also?
	This	is
similar	to	the	point	made	in	response	to	objection	#4,	above,	but	here	it
applies	not	only	to	those	who	espouse	objection	#4	but	also	more	broadly	to
all	who	deny	inerrancy.	Ephesians	5:1	tells	us	to	be	imitators	of	God.	But	a
denial	of	inerrancy	that	still	claims	that	the	words	of	Scripture	are	God-
breathed	words	necessarily	implies	that	God	intentionally	spoke	falsely	to	us
in	some	of	the	less	central	affirmations	of	Scripture.	But	if	this	is	right	for
God	to	do,	how	can	it	be	wrong	for	us?	Such	a	line	of	reasoning	would,	if	we
believed	it,	exert	strong	pressure	on	us	to	begin	to	speak	untruthfully	in
situations	where	that	might	seem	to	help	us	communicate	better,	and	so	forth.
This	position	would	be	a	slippery	slope	with	ever-increasing	negative	results
in	our	own	lives.
2.	If	Inerrancy	Is	Denied,	We	Begin	to	Wonder	If	We	Can	Really	Trust
God	in	Anything	He	Says.
	Once	we	become	convinced	that	God	has	spoken
falsely	to	us	in	some	minor	matters	in	Scripture,	then	we	realize	that	God	is
capable	
of	speaking	falsely	to	us.	This	will	have	a	detrimental	effect	on	our
ability	to	take	God	at	his	word	and	trust	him	completely	or	obey	him	fully	in
the	rest	of	Scripture.	We	will	begin	to	disobey	initially	those	sections	of
Scripture	that	we	least	wish	to	obey,	and	to	distrust	initially	those	sections	that
we	are	least	inclined	to	trust.	But	such	a	procedure	will	eventually	increase,	to
the	great	detriment	of	our	spiritual	lives.	Of	course,	such	a	decline	in	trust	and
obedience	to	Scripture	may	not	necessarily	follow	in	the	life	of	every
individual	who	denies	inerrancy,	but	this	will	certainly	be	the	general	pattern,
and	it	will	be	the	pattern	exhibited	over	the	course	of	a	generation	that	is
taught	to	deny	inerrancy.
3.	If	We	Deny	Inerrancy,	We	Essentially	Make	Our	Own	Human	Minds	a
Higher	Standard	of	Truth	Than	God’s	Word	Itself.
	We	use	our	minds	to
pass	judgment	on	some	sections	of	God’s	Word	and	pronounce	them	to	be	in
error.	But	this	is	in	effect	to	say	that	we	know	truth	more	certainly	and	more
accurately	than	God’s	Word	does	(or	than	God	does),	at	least	in	these	areas.
Such	a	procedure,	making	our	own	minds	to	be	a	higher	standard	of	truth	than
God’s	Word,	is	the	root	of	all	intellectual	sin.
12
4.	If	We	Deny	Inerrancy,	Then	We	Must	Also	Say	That	the	Bible	Is
Wrong	Not	Only	in	Minor	Details	but	in	Some	of	Its	Doctrines	as	Well.
	A
denial	of	inerrancy	means	that	we	say	that	the	Bible’s	teaching	about	the
nature	of	Scripture	
and	about	the	
truthfulness	and	reliability	of	God’s	words	
is
also	false.	These	are	not	minor	details	but	are	major	doctrinal	concerns	in
Scripture.
13
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
Why	do	you	think	the	debate	about	inerrancy	has	become	such	a	large
issue	in	this	century?	Why	do	people	on	both	sides	of	the	question	think
it	to	be	important?
2
.	
If	you	thought	there	were	some	small	errors	affirmed	by	Scripture,	how
do	you	think	that	would	affect	the	way	you	read	Scripture?	Would	it
affect	your	concern	for	truthfulness	in	everyday	conversation?
3
.	
Do	you	know	of	any	Scripture	texts	that	seem	to	contain	errors?	What
are	they?	Have	you	tried	to	resolve	the	difficulties	in	those	texts?	If	you
have	not	found	a	solution	to	some	text,	what	further	steps	might	you	try?
4
.	
As	Christians	go	through	life	learning	to	know	their	Bibles	better	and
growing	in	Christian	maturity,	do	they	tend	to	trust	the	Bible	more	or
less?	In	heaven,	do	you	think	you	will	believe	the	Bible	is	inerrant?	If	so,
will	you	believe	it	more	firmly	or	less	firmly	than	you	do	now?
5
.	
If	you	are	convinced	that	the	Bible	teaches	the	doctrine	of	inerrancy,	how
do	you	feel	about	it?	Are	you	glad	that	such	a	teaching	is	there,	or	do	you
feel	it	to	be	something	of	a	burden	which	you	would	rather	not	have	to
defend?
6
.	
Does	belief	in	inerrancy	guarantee	sound	doctrine	and	a	sound	Christian
life?	How	can	Jehovah’s	Witnesses	say	that	the	Bible	is	inerrant	while
they	themselves	have	so	many	false	teachings?
7
.	
If	you	agree	with	inerrancy,	do	you	think	belief	in	inerrancy	should	be	a
requirement	for	church	membership?	For	teaching	a	Sunday	school
class?	For	holding	a	church	office	such	as	elder	or	deacon?	For	being
ordained	as	a	pastor?	For	teaching	at	a	theological	seminary?	Why	or
why	not?
8
.	
When	there	is	a	doctrinal	controversy	in	the	church,	what	are	the
personal	dangers	facing	those	whose	position	is	more	consistent	with
Scripture?	In	particular,	how	could	pride	in	correct	doctrine	become	a
problem?	What	is	the	solution?	Do	you	think	inerrancy	is	an	important
issue	for	the	future	of	the	church?	Why	or	why	not?	How	do	you	think	it
will	be	resolved?
SPECIAL	TERMS
autograph
	
	
	
inerrant
faith	and	practice
	
	
	
infallible
ICBI
	
	
	
textual	variant
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the
bibliography	to	chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be
found	in	
Appendix	4
.)
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
(In	this	section,	when	referring	to	some	significant	older	works	that
do	not	include	a	specific	discussion	of	inerrancy,	I	have	listed
instead	the	pages	where	they	discuss	biblical	authority	generally.	In
those	cases	the	pages	here	duplicate	the	listings	for	chapter	4	on	the
authority	of	Scripture.)
1.		Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92		Litton,	18–40
1930		Thomas,	500–501
2.		Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1875–76		Pope,	1:36–192
1892–94		Miley,	2:41–49
1940		Wiley,	1:166–84
1960		Purkiser,	66–80
3.		Baptist
1767		Gill,	11–18
1907		Strong,	222–42
1917		Mullins,	142–44,	150–53
1976–83		Henry,	3:248–487;	4:129–255,	353–404
1983–85		Erickson,	221–40
1987–94		Lewis/Demarest,	1:93–171
4.		Dispensational
1947		Chafer,	1:63–88
1949		Thiessen,	105–15
1986		Ryrie,	77–104
5.		Lutheran
1917–24		Pieper,	1:232–65,	338–49
1934		Mueller,	101–37
6.		Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1559		Calvin,	1:74–92
1871–73		Hodge,	1:163–82
1878		Dabney,	
DET,	
1:282–313,	466–81
1887–1921			Warfield,	
IAB,	
passim
1889		Shedd,	1:93–110
1937–66		Murray,	
CW,	
1:9–15;	
CW,	
4:22–29
1938		Berkhof,	
Intro,	
144–65,	182–86
7.		Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988–92		Williams,	1:36–43
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.		Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955		Ott	(no	explicit	treatment)
2.		Roman	Catholic:	Post-Vatican	II
1980		McBrien,	1:64
Other	Works
(See	also	the	
bibliography	for	chapter	4
,	“Authority,”	much	of	which	is	also
relevant	here,	but	only	part	of	which	has	been	listed	again.)
Archer,	Gleason.	
Encyclopedia	of	Bible	Difficulties.	
Grand	Rapids:
Zondervan,	1982.
Arndt,	W.	
Bible	Difficulties.	
St.	Louis:	Concordia,	1932.
_____.	
Does	the	Bible	Contradict	Itself?	
St.	Louis:	Concordia,	1955.
Boice,	James,	ed.	
The	Foundation	of	Biblical	Authority.	
Grand	Rapids:
Zondervan,	1978.
Carson,	D.	A.,	and	John	Woodbridge,	eds.	
Hermeneutics,	Authority,	and
Canon.	
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1986.
_____.	
Scripture	and	Truth.	
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1983.
Feinberg,	Paul.	“Bible,	Inerrancy	and	Infallibility	of.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	141–
45.
Geisler,	Norman,	ed.	
Biblical	Errancy:	An	Analysis	of	Its	Philosophical
Roots.	
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1981.
_____.	ed.	
Inerrancy.	
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1979	(papers	from	the
October	1978	Chicago	Conference	of	the	ICBI).
Haley,	John	W.	
Alleged	Discrepancies	of	the	Bible.	
Repr.	ed.	Grand
Rapids:	Baker,	1977	(first	published	1874).
Lindsell,	Harold.	
The	Battle	for	the	Bible.	
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,
1976.
_____.	
The	Bible	in	the	Balance.	
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1979.
Montgomery,	John	W.,	ed.	
God’s	Inerrant	Word.	
Minneapolis:	Bethany
Fellowship,	1974.
Packer,	J.	I.	“Scripture.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	627–31.
_____.	“Infallibility	and	Inerrancy	of	the	Bible.”	In	
NDT,	
337–39.
Schaeffer,	Francis.	
No	Final	Conflict:	The	Bible	Without	Error	in	All
That	It	Affirms.	
Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,	1975.
Warfield,	B.	B.	
Limited	Inspiration.	
Philadelphia:	Presbyterian	and
Reformed,	1962.
Woodbridge,	John.	
Biblical	Authority:	A	Critique	of	the	Rogers/McKim
Proposal.	
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1982.
Young,	Edward	J.	
Thy	Word	Is	Truth.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1957.
Works	From	a	Noninerrancy	Perspective	
(See	also	the	
bibliography	for	chapter	4
.)
Barr,	James.	
Fundamentalism.	
London:	SCM,	1977.
Beegle,	Dewey	M.	
Scripture,	Tradition,	and	Infallibility.	
Grand	Rapids:
Eerdmans,	1973.
Davis,	Stephen	T.	
The	Debate	About	the	Bible.	
Philadelphia:
Westminster,	1977.
McKim,	Donald	K.,	ed.	
The	Authoritative	Word:	Essays	on	the	Nature	of
Scripture.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1983.
Rogers,	Jack,	ed.	
Biblical	Authority.	
Waco,	Tex.:	Word,	1977.
Rogers,	Jack	B.,	and	Donald	K.	McKim.	
The	Authority	and
Interpretation	of	the	Bible:	An	Historical	Approach.	
San	Francisco:
Harper	and	Row,	1979.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
Psalm	12:6:	
The	promises	[literally,	“words”]	of	the	L
ORD
	are	promises
[”words”]	that	are	pure,	silver	refined	in	a	furnace	on	the	ground,	purified
seven	times.
HYMN
“The	Law	of	the	Lord	is	Perfect”
This	modern	setting	of	Psalm	19:7–11	expresses	the	perfection	of
God’s	Word	in	several	different	ways	and	shows	various	aspects	of
its	application	to	our	lives.
The	law	of	the	Lord	is	perfect,
converting	the	soul.
The	testimony	of	the	Lord	is	sure,
making	wise	the	simple.
Refrain:
More	to	be	desired	are	they	than	gold,
yea	than	much	fine	gold.
Sweeter	also	than	honey
and	the	honeycomb.
The	statutes	of	the	Lord	are	right,
rejoicing	the	heart.
The	commandments	of	the	Lord	are	pure,
enlight’ning	the	eyes.
The	fear	of	the	Lord	is	clean,
enduring	forever.
The	judgments	of	the	Lord	are	true,
and	righteous	altogether.
AUTHOR:	ANONYMOUS	(FROM	PS.	19:7–11)
NOTES
1
A	good	defense	of	this	position	can	be	found	in	a	collection	of	essays	edited	by	Jack	Rogers,	
Biblical	Authority	
(Waco,	Tex.:
Word,	1977);	and,	more	extensively,	in	Jack	B.	Rogers	and	Donald	McKim,	
The	Authority	and	Interpretation	of	the	Bible:	An
Historical	Approach	
(San	Francisco:	Harper	and	Row,	1979).
2
Until	about	1960	or	1965	the	word	
infallible	
was	used	interchangeably	with	the	word	
inerrant.	
But	in	recent	years,	at	least	in	the
United	States,	the	word	
infallible	
has	been	used	in	a	weaker	sense	to	mean	that	the	Bible	will	not	lead	us	astray	in	matters	of	faith
and	practice.
3
This	is	not	a	minor	detail,	but	it	is	useful	as	an	example	of	a	“scientific”	fact	that	is	affirmed	in	the	Old	Testament	and	one	about
which	the	author	says	that	we	have	knowledge	“by	faith”;	thus,	faith	here	is	explicitly	said	to	involve	trust	in	the	truthfulness	of	a
scientific	and	historical	fact	recorded	in	the	Old	Testament.
4
In	theological	terms,	these	original	copies	are	called	the	“autographs,”	using	the	prefix	
auto-,	
meaning	“self,”	and	the	root	
graph,
meaning	“writing,”	to	refer	to	a	copy	written	by	the	author	himself.
5
An	excellent	survey	of	the	work	of	studying	textual	variants	in	the	extant	manuscripts	of	the	New	Testament	is	Bruce	M.
Metzger,	
The	Text	of	the	New	Testament:	Its	Transmission,	Corruption,	and	Restoration,	
2d	ed.	(Oxford:	Clarendon	Press,	1968).
6
Of	course	the	theoretical	possibility	exists	that	there	was	a	copying	error	in	the	very	first	copy	made	of	one	of	Paul’s	epistles,	for
instance,	and	that	this	error	has	been	reproduced	in	all	remaining	copies.	But	this	must	be	thought	unlikely	because	(1)	it	would
require	that	only	one	copy	was	made	of	the	original,	or	that	only	one	copy	was	the	basis	for	all	other	extant	copies,	and	(2)	our
earlier	argument	about	the	faithfulness	of	God	in	preserving	the	canon	(see	
chapter	3
)	would	seem	to	imply	that	if	such	a	mistake
did	occur,	it	would	not	be	one	that	would	materially	affect	our	understanding	of	Scripture.	The	existence	of	such	a	copying	error
cannot	be	either	proven	or	disproven,	but	further	speculation	about	it	apart	from	hard	evidence	does	not	appear	to	be	profitable.
7
An	explanation	of	this	view	can	be	found	in	Daniel	P.	Fuller,	“Benjamin	B.	Warfield’s	View	of	Faith	and	History,”	
BETS	
11
(1968):	75–83.
8
The	interested	reader	may	consult,	for	example,	Gleason	L.	Archer,	
Encyclopedia	of	Bible	Difficulties	
(Grand	Rapids:
Zondervan,	1982);	William	Arndt,	
Does	the	Bible	Contradict	Itself?	
(St.	Louis:	Concordia,	1955);	idem.,	
Bible	Difficulties	
(St.
Louis:	Concordia,	1932);	and	John	W.	Haley,	
Alleged	Discrepancies	of	the	Bible	
(1874;	reprinted	Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1977).
Almost	all	of	the	difficult	texts	have	also	received	helpful	analysis	in	the	extensive	notes	to	
The	NIV	Study	Bible,	
ed.	Kenneth
Barker	et	al.	(Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1985).
9
J.	P.	Moreland,	“The	Rationality	of	Belief	in	Inerrancy,”	in	
TrinJ	
7:1	(1986):	75–86,	argues	convincingly	that	Christians	should
not	abandon	the	doctrine	of	inerrancy	simply	because	of	a	small	number	of	“problem	texts”	for	which	they	presently	have	no	clear
solution.
10
The	present	writer,	for	example,	has	during	the	last	twenty	years	examined	dozens	of	these	“problem	texts”	that	have	been
brought	to	his	attention	in	the	context	of	the	inerrancy	debate.	In	every	one	of	those	cases,	upon	close	inspection	of	the	text	a
plausible	solution	has	become	evident.
11
On	the	history	of	inerrancy	in	the	church,	see	the	essays	by	Philip	Hughes,	Geoffrey	W.	Bromiley,	W.	Robert	Godfrey,	and	John
D.	Woodbridge	and	Randall	H.	Balmer	in	
Scripture	and	Truth.	
See	also	the	more	extensive	study	by	John	D.	Woodbridge,	
Biblical
Authority:	A	Critique	of	the	Rogers	and	McKim	Proposal	
(Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1982).
12
See	
chapter	4
	for	a	discussion	of	the	Bible	as	our	absolute	standard	of	truth.
13
Although	the	undesirable	positions	listed	above	are	logically	related	to	a	denial	of	inerrancy,	a	word	of	caution	is	in	order:	Not
all	who	deny	inerrancy	will	also	adopt	the	undesirable	conclusions	just	listed.	Some	people	(probably	inconsistently)	will	deny
inerrancy	but	not	take	these	next	logical	steps.	In	debates	over	inerrancy,	as	in	other	theological	discussions,	it	is	important	that	we
criticize	people	on	the	basis	of	views	they	actually	hold,	and	distinguish	those	views	clearly	from	positions	we	think	they	would
hold	if	they	were	consistent	with	their	stated	views.
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	6
The	Four	Characteristics	of	Scripture:	(2)
Clarity
Can	only	Bible	scholars	understand	the	Bible	rightly?
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
Anyone	who	has	begun	to	read	the	Bible	seriously	will	realize	that
some	parts	can	be	understood	very	easily	while	other	parts	seem
puzzling.	In	fact,	very	early	in	the	history	of	the	church	Peter
reminded	his	readers	that	some	parts	of	Paul’s	epistles	were
difficult	to	understand:	“So	also	our	beloved	brother	Paul	wrote	to
you	according	to	the	wisdom	given	him,	speaking	of	this	as	he	does
in	all	his	letters.	There	are	some	things	in	them	
hard	to	understand,
which	the	ignorant	and	unstable	twist	to	their	own	destruction,	as
they	do	the	other	scriptures”	(2	Peter	3:15–16).	We	must	admit
therefore	that	not	all	parts	of	Scripture	are	able	to	be	understood
easily.
But	it	would	be	a	mistake	to	think	that	most	of	Scripture	or
Scripture	in	general	is	difficult	to	understand.	In	fact,	the	Old
Testament	and	New	Testament	frequently	affirm	that	Scripture	is
written	in	such	a	way	that	its	teachings	are	able	to	be	understood	by
ordinary	believers.	Even	in	Peter’s	statement	just	quoted,	the
context	is	an	appeal	to	the	teachings	of	Paul’s	letter,	which	Peter’s
readers	had	read	and	understood	(2	Peter	3:15).	In	fact,	Peter
assigns	some	moral	blame	to	those	who	twist	these	passages	“to
their	own	destruction.”	And	he	does	not	say	that	there	are	things
impossible	to	understand,	but	only	difficult	to	understand.
A.	The	Bible	Frequently	Affirms	Its	Own	Clarity
The	Bible’s	clarity	and	the	responsibility	of	believers	generally	to
read	it	and	understand	it	are	often	emphasized.	In	a	very	familiar
passage,	Moses	tells	the	people	of	Israel:
And	these	words	which	I	command	you	this	day	shall	be	upon	your
heart;	and	
you	shall	teach	them	diligently	to	your	children,	
and	shall
talk	of	them	
when	you	sit	in	your	house,	and	when	you	walk	by	the
way,	and	when	you	lie	down,	and	when	you	rise.	(Deut.	6:6–7)
All	the	people	of	Israel	were	expected	to	be	able	to	understand	the	words	of
Scripture	well	enough	to	be	able	to	“teach	them	diligently”	to	their	children.
This	teaching	would	not	have	consisted	merely	of	rote	memorization	devoid
of	understanding,	for	the	people	of	Israel	were	to	
discuss	
the	words	of
Scripture	during	their	activities	of	sitting	in	the	house	or	walking	or	going	to
bed	or	getting	up	in	the	morning.	God	expected	that	
all	
of	his	people	would
know	and	be	able	to	talk	about	his	Word,	with	proper	application	to	ordinary
situations	in	life.	Similarly,	Psalm	1	tells	us	that	the	“blessed	man,”	whom	all
the	righteous	in	Israel	were	to	emulate,	was	one	who	meditated	on	God’s	law
“day	and	night”	(Ps.	1:2).	This	daily	meditation	assumes	an	ability	to
understand	Scripture	rightly	on	the	part	of	those	who	meditate.
The	character	of	Scripture	is	said	to	be	such	that	even	the	“simple”
can	understand	it	rightly	and	be	made	wise	by	it.	“The	testimony	of
the	L
ORD
	is	sure,	
making	wise	the	simple”	
(Ps.	19:7).	Again	we
read,	“The	unfolding	of	your	words	gives	light;	
it	imparts
understanding	to	the	simple”	
(Ps.	119:130).	Here	the	“simple”
person	(Heb.	
petî
)	is	not	merely	one	who	lacks	intellectual	ability,
but	one	who	lacks	sound	judgment,	who	is	prone	to	making
mistakes,	and	who	is	easily	led	astray.
1
	God’s	Word	is	so
understandable,	so	clear,	that	even	this	kind	of	person	is	made	wise
by	it.	This	should	be	a	great	encouragement	to	all	believers:	no
believer	should	think	himself	or	herself	too	foolish	to	read	Scripture
and	understand	it	sufficiently	to	be	made	wise	by	it.
There	is	a	similar	emphasis	in	the	New	Testament.	Jesus	himself,	in
his	teachings,	his	conversations,	and	his	disputes,	never	responds	to
any	questions	with	a	hint	of	blaming	the	Old	Testament	Scriptures
for	being	unclear.	Even	while	speaking	to	first-century	people	who
were	removed	from	David	by	1,000	years,	from	Moses	by	about
1,500	years,	and	from	Abraham	by	about	2,000	years,	Jesus	still
assumes	that	such	people	are	able	to	read	and	rightly	to	understand
the	Old	Testament	Scriptures.
In	a	day	when	it	is	common	for	people	to	tell	us	how	hard	it	is	to
interpret	Scripture	rightly,	we	would	do	well	to	remember	that	not
once	in	the	Gospels	do	we	ever	hear	Jesus	saying	anything	like	this:
“I	see	how	your	problem	arose—the	Scriptures	are	not	very	clear
on	that	subject.”	Instead,	whether	he	is	speaking	to	scholars	or
untrained	common	people,	his	responses	always	assume	that	the
blame	for	misunderstanding	any	teaching	of	Scripture	is	not	to	be
placed	on	the	Scriptures	themselves,	but	on	those	who
misunderstand	or	fail	to	accept	what	is	written.	Again	and	again	he
answers	questions	with	statements	like,	“Have	you	not	read	.	.	.”
(Matt.	12:3,	5;	19:14;	22:31),	“Have	you	never	read	in	the
scriptures	.	.	.”	(Matt.	21:42),	or	even,	“You	are	wrong	because	you
know	neither	the	Scriptures	nor	the	power	of	God”	(Matt.	22:29;	cf.
Matt.	9:13;	12:7;	15:3;	21:13;	John	3:10;	et	al.).
Similarly,	most	of	the	New	Testament	epistles	are	written	not	to
church	leaders	but	to	entire	congregations.	Paul	writes,	“To	the
church	of	God	which	is	at	Corinth”	(1	Cor.	1:2),	“To	the	churches
of	Galatia”	(Gal.	1:2),	“To	all	the	saints	in	Christ	Jesus	who	are	at
Philippi,	with	the	bishops	and	deacons”	(Phil.	1:1),	and	so	forth.
Paul	
assumes	
that	his	hearers	will	
understand	
what	he	writes,	and
he	encourages	the	sharing	of	his	letters	with	other	churches:	“And
when	this	letter	has	been	read	among	you,	have	it	read	also	in	the
church	of	the	Laodiceans;	and	see	that	you	read	also	the	letter	from
Laodicea”	(Col.	4:16;	cf.	John	20:30–31;	2	Cor.	1:13;	Eph.	3:4;	1
Tim.	4:13;	James	1:1,	22–25;	1	Peter	1:1;	2:2;	2	Peter	1:19;	1	John
5:13).
2
Second	Peter	1:20	may	be	urged	against	the	view	of	the	clarity	of
Scripture	explained	in	this	chapter.	The	verse	says,	“no	prophecy	of
scripture	is	a	matter	of	one’s	own	interpretation,”	and	someone	may
claim	that	this	means	that	ordinary	believers	are	unable	to	interpret
Scripture	rightly	for	themselves.	It	is	unlikely,	however,	that	this
implication	should	be	drawn	from	2	Peter	1:20,	for	the	verse	is
probably	discussing	the	
origin	
and	not	the	interpretation	of
Scripture.	Thus	the	NIV	translates	it,	“no	prophecy	of	Scripture
came	about	by	
the	prophet’s	own	interpretation.”
3
	Furthermore,
even	if	the	verse	were	understood	as	speaking	of	interpreting
Scripture,	it	would	be	saying	that	the	interpretation	of	Scripture
must	be	done	within	the	fellowship	of	believers	and	not	merely	as	a
personal	activity.	It	still	would	not	be	implying	that	authoritative
interpreters	are	needed	to	ascertain	the	true	meaning	of	Scripture,
but	simply	that	reading	and	understanding	Scripture	should	not	be
carried	out	entirely	in	isolation	from	other	Christians.
Lest	we	think	that	understanding	the	Bible	was	somehow	easier	for
first-century	Christians	than	for	us,	it	is	important	to	realize	that	in
many	instances	the	New	Testament	epistles	were	written	to
churches	that	had	large	proportions	of	Gentile	Christians.	They
were	relatively	new	Christians	who	had	no	previous	background	in
any	kind	of	Christian	society,	and	who	had	little	or	no	prior
understanding	of	the	history	and	culture	of	Israel.	Nevertheless,	the
New	Testament	authors	show	no	hesitancy	in	expecting	even	these
Gentile	Christians	to	be	able	to	read	a	translation	of	the	Old
Testament	in	their	own	language	and	to	understand	it	rightly	(cf.
Rom.	4:1–25;	15:4;	1	Cor.	10:1–11;	2	Tim.	3:16–17;	et	al.).
B.	The	Moral	and	Spiritual	Qualities	Needed	
for	Right	Understanding
The	New	Testament	writers	frequently	state	that	the	ability	to
understand	Scripture	rightly	is	more	a	moral	and	spiritual	than
intellectual	ability:	“The	unspiritual	man	does	not	receive	the	gifts
(literally	“things”)	of	the	Spirit	of	God,	for	they	are	folly	to	him,
and	he	is	not	able	to	understand	them	because	they	are	spiritually
discerned”	(1	Cor.	2:14;	cf.	1:18–3:4;	2	Cor.	3:14–16;	4:3–4,	6;
Heb.	5:14;	James	1:5–6;	2	Peter	3:5;	cf.	Mark	4:11–12;	John	7:17;
8:43).	Thus,	although	the	New	Testament	authors	affirm	that	the
Bible	
in	itself	
is	written	clearly,	they	also	affirm	that	it	will	not	be
understood	rightly	by	those	who	are	unwilling	to	receive	its
teachings.	Scripture	is	able	to	be	understood	by	all	unbelievers	who
will	read	it	sincerely	seeking	salvation,	and	by	all	believers	who
will	read	it	while	seeking	God’s	help	in	understanding	it.	This	is
because	in	both	cases	the	Holy	Spirit	is	at	work	overcoming	the
effects	of	sin,	which	otherwise	will	make	the	truth	appear	to	be
foolish	(1	Cor.	2:14;	1:18–25;	James	1:5–6,	22–25).
C.	Definition	of	the	Clarity	of	Scripture
In	order	to	summarize	this	biblical	material,	we	can	affirm	that	the
Bible	is	written	in	such	a	way	that	all	things	necessary	for	our
salvation	and	for	our	Christian	life	and	growth	are	very	clearly	set
forth	in	Scripture.	Although	theologians	have	sometimes	defined
the	clarity	of	Scripture	more	narrowly	(by	saying,	for	example,	only
that	Scripture	is	clear	in	teaching	the	way	of	salvation),	the	many
texts	cited	above	apply	to	many	different	aspects	of	biblical
teaching	and	do	not	seem	to	support	any	such	limitation	on	the
areas	to	which	Scripture	can	be	said	to	speak	clearly.	It	seems	more
faithful	to	those	biblical	texts	to	define	the	clarity
4
	of	Scripture	as
follows:	
The	clarity	of	Scripture	means	that	the	Bible	is	written	in
such	a	way	that	its	teachings	are	able	to	be	understood	by	all	who
will	read	it	seeking	God’s	help	and	being	willing	to	follow	it.	
Once
we	have	stated	this,	however,	we	must	also	recognize	that	many
people,	even	God’s	people,	do	in	fact	misunderstand	Scripture.
D.	Why	Do	People	Misunderstand	Scripture?
During	Jesus’	lifetime,	his	own	disciples	at	times	failed	to
understand	the	Old	Testament	and	Jesus’	own	teachings	(see	Matt.
15:16;	Mark	4:10–13;	6:52;	8:14–21;	9:32;	Luke	18:34;	John	8:27;
10:6).	Although	sometimes	this	was	due	to	the	fact	that	they	simply
needed	to	wait	for	further	events	in	the	history	of	redemption,	and
especially	in	the	life	of	Christ	himself	(see	John	12:16;	13:7;	cf.
John	2:22),	there	were	also	times	when	this	was	due	to	their	own
lack	of	faith	or	hardness	of	heart	(Luke	24:25).	Furthermore,	there
were	times	in	the	early	church	when	Christians	did	not	understand
or	agree	on	the	teachings	of	the	Old	Testament	or	about	the	letters
written	by	the	apostles:	note	the	process	of	growth	in	understanding
concerning	the	implications	of	Gentile	inclusion	in	the	church
(culminating	in	“much	debate”	[Acts	15:7]	in	the	Jerusalem
Council	of	Acts	15),	or	Peter’s	misunderstanding	of	this	issue	in
Galatians	2:11–15,	or	the	frequent	doctrinal	and	ethical	issues	that
had	to	be	corrected	by	the	New	Testament	epistles.	In	fact,
throughout	the	history	of	the	church,	doctrinal	disagreements	have
been	many,	and	progress	in	resolving	doctrinal	differences	has	often
been	slow.
In	order	to	help	people	to	avoid	making	mistakes	in	interpreting
Scripture,	many	Bible	teachers	have	developed	“principles	of
interpretation,”	or	guidelines	to	encourage	growth	in	the	skill	of
proper	interpretation.	The	word	
hermeneutics	
(from	the	Greek	word
hermēnēuo,	
“to	interpret”)	is	the	more	technical	term	for	this	field
of	study:	
hermeneutics	is	the	study	of	correct	methods	of
interpretation	
(especially	interpretation	of	Scripture).
Another	technical	term	often	used	in	discussions	of	biblical
interpretation	is	“exegesis,”	a	term	that	refers	more	to	the	actual
practice	of	interpreting	Scripture,	not	to	theories	and	principles
about	how	it	should	be	done:	
exegesis	is	the	process	of	interpreting
a	text	of	Scripture.	
Consequently,	when	one	studies	principles	of
interpretation,	that	is	“hermeneutics,”	but	when	one	applies	those
principles	and	begins	actually	explaining	a	biblical	text,	he	or	she	is
doing	“exegesis.”
The	existence	of	many	disagreements	about	the	meaning	of
Scripture	throughout	history	reminds	us	that	the	doctrine	of	the
clarity	of	Scripture	does	not	imply	or	suggest	that	all	believers	will
agree	on	all	the	teachings	of	Scripture.	Nevertheless,	it	does	tell	us
something	very	important—that	the	problem	always	lies	not	with
Scripture	but	with	ourselves.	The	situation	is	in	fact	similar	to	that
of	the	authority	of	Scripture.	Whereas	we	affirm	that	the	words	of
Scripture	have	all	the	authority	of	God	himself,	we	also	realize	that
many	people	do	not	acknowledge	that	authority	or	submit
themselves	to	it.	Similarly,	we	affirm	that	all	the	teachings	of
Scripture	are	clear	and	able	to	be	understood,	but	we	also	recognize
that	people	often	(through	their	own	shortcomings)	misunderstand
what	is	clearly	written	in	Scripture.
E.	Practical	Encouragement	From	This	Doctrine
The	doctrine	of	the	clarity	of	Scripture	therefore	has	a	very
important,	and	ultimately	very	encouraging,	practical	implication.	It
tells	us	that	where	there	are	areas	of	doctrinal	or	ethical
disagreement	(for	example,	over	baptism	or	predestination	or
church	government),	there	are	only	two	possible	causes	for	these
disagreements:	(1)	On	the	one	hand,	it	may	be	that	we	are	
seeking
to	make	affirmations	where	Scripture	itself	is	silent.	
In	such	cases
we	should	be	more	ready	to	admit	that	God	has	not	given	us	the
answer	to	our	quest,	and	to	allow	for	differences	of	viewpoint
within	the	church.	(This	will	often	be	the	case	with	very	practical
questions,	such	as	methods	of	evangelism	or	styles	of	Bible
teaching	or	appropriate	church	size.)	(2)	On	the	other	hand,	it	is
possible	that	we	have	made	
mistakes	in	our	interpretation	
of
Scripture.	This	could	have	happened	because	the	data	we	used	to
decide	a	question	of	interpretation	were	inaccurate	or	incomplete.
Or	it	could	be	because	there	is	some	personal	inadequacy	on	our
part,	whether	it	be,	for	example,	personal	pride,	or	greed,	or	lack	of
faith,	or	selfishness,	or	even	failure	to	devote	enough	time	to
prayerfully	reading	and	studying	Scripture.
But	in	no	case	are	we	free	to	say	that	the	teaching	of	the	Bible	on
any	subject	is	confusing	or	incapable	of	being	understood	correctly.
In	no	case	should	we	think	that	persistent	disagreements	on	some
subject	through	the	history	of	the	church	mean	that	we	will	be
unable	to	come	to	a	correct	conclusion	on	that	subject	ourselves.
Rather,	if	a	genuine	concern	about	some	such	subject	arises	in	our
lives,	we	should	sincerely	ask	God’s	help	and	then	go	to	Scripture,
searching	it	with	all	our	ability,	believing	that	God	will	enable	us	to
understand	rightly.
This	truth	should	give	great	encouragement	to	all	Christians	to	read
their	Bibles	daily	and	with	great	eagerness.	We	should	never
assume,	for	example,	that	only	those	who	know	Greek	and	Hebrew,
or	only	pastors	or	Bible	scholars,	are	able	to	understand	the	Bible
rightly—remember	that	the	Old	Testament	was	written	in	Hebrew
and	that	many	of	the	Christians	to	whom	the	New	Testament	letters
were	written	had	no	knowledge	of	Hebrew	at	all:	they	had	to	read
the	Old	Testament	in	a	Greek	translation.	Yet	the	New	Testament
authors	assume	that	these	people	can	read	it	and	understand	it
rightly	even	without	scholarly	ability	in	the	original	language.
Christians	must	never	give	up	to	the	scholarly	“experts”	the	task	of
interpreting	Scripture:	they	must	keep	doing	it	every	day	for
themselves.
5
Furthermore,	even	though	we	admit	that	there	have	been	many
doctrinal	disagreements	in	the	history	of	the	church,	we	must	not
forget	that	there	has	been	an	amazing	amount	of	doctrinal
agreement	on	the	most	central	truths	of	Scripture	throughout	the
history	of	the	church.	Indeed,	those	who	have	had	opportunities	for
fellowship	with	Christians	in	other	parts	of	the	world	have
discovered	the	remarkable	fact	that	wherever	we	find	a	group	of
vital	Christians,	almost	immediately	a	vast	amount	of	agreement	on
all	the	central	doctrines	of	the	Christian	faith	becomes	apparent.
Why	is	this	true,	no	matter	what	the	society,	or	culture,	or
denominational	affiliation?	It	is	because	they	all	have	been	reading
and	believing	the	same	Bible,	and	its	primary	teachings	have	been
clear.
F.	The	Role	of	Scholars
Is	there	any	role	then	for	Bible	scholars	or	for	those	with
specialized	knowledge	of	Hebrew	(for	the	Old	Testament)	and
Greek	(for	the	New	Testament)?	Certainly	there	is	a	role	for	them	in
at	least	four	areas:
1.	They	can	
teach	
Scripture	clearly,	communicating	its	content	to
others	and	thus	fulfilling	the	office	of	“teacher”	mentioned	in	the
New	Testament	(1	Cor.	12:28;	Eph.	4:11).
2.	They	can	
explore	
new	areas	of	understanding	the	teachings	of
Scripture.	This	exploration	will	seldom	(if	ever)	involve	denial	of
the	main	teachings	the	church	has	held	throughout	its	centuries,	but
it	will	often	involve	the	application	of	Scripture	to	new	areas	of	life,
the	answering	of	difficult	questions	that	have	been	raised	by	both
believers	and	unbelievers	at	each	new	period	in	history,	and	the
continual	activity	of	refining	and	making	more	precise	the	church’s
understanding	of	detailed	points	of	interpretation	of	individual
verses	or	matters	of	doctrine	or	ethics.	Though	the	Bible	may	not
seem	large	in	comparison	with	the	vast	amount	of	literature	in	the
world,	it	is	a	rich	treasure-house	of	wisdom	from	God	that
surpasses	in	value	all	the	other	books	that	have	ever	been	written.
The	process	of	relating	its	various	teachings	to	one	another,
synthesizing	them,	and	applying	them	to	each	new	generation,	is	a
greatly	rewarding	task	that	will	never	be	completed	in	this	age.
Every	scholar	who	deeply	loves	God’s	Word	will	soon	realize	that
there	is	much	more	in	Scripture	than	can	be	learned	in	any	one
lifetime!
3.	They	can	
defend	
the	teachings	of	the	Bible	against	attacks	by
other	scholars	or	those	with	specialized	technical	training.	The	role
of	teaching	God’s	Word	also	at	times	involves	correcting	false
teachings.	One	must	be	able	not	only	“to	give	instruction	in	sound
doctrine”	but	also	“to	confute	those	who	contradict	it”	(Titus	1:9;
cf.	2	Tim.	2:25,	“correcting	his	opponents	with	gentleness”;	and
Titus	2:7–8).	Sometimes	those	who	attack	biblical	teachings	have
specialized	training	and	technical	knowledge	in	historical,
linguistic,	or	philosophical	study,	and	they	use	that	training	to
mount	rather	sophisticated	attacks	against	the	teaching	of	Scripture.
In	such	cases,	believers	with	similar	specialized	skills	can	use	their
training	to	understand	and	respond	to	such	attacks.	Such	training	is
also	very	useful	in	responding	to	the	false	teachings	of	cults	and
sects.	This	is	not	to	say	that	believers	without	specialized	training
are	incapable	of	responding	to	false	teaching	(for	most	false
teaching	can	be	clearly	refuted	by	a	believer	who	prays	and	has	a
good	knowledge	of	the	English	Bible),	but	rather	that	technical
points	in	arguments	can	only	be	answered	by	those	with	skills	in	the
technical	areas	appealed	to.
4.	They	can	
supplement	
the	study	of	Scripture	for	the	benefit	of	the
church.	Bible	scholars	often	have	training	that	will	enable	them	to
relate	the	teachings	of	Scripture	to	the	rich	history	of	the	church,
and	to	make	the	interpretation	of	Scripture	more	precise	and	its
meaning	more	vivid	with	a	greater	knowledge	of	the	languages	and
cultures	in	which	the	Bible	was	written.
These	four	functions	benefit	the	church	as	a	whole,	and	all	believers
should	be	thankful	for	those	who	perform	them.	However,	these
functions	do	
not	
include	the	right	to	decide	for	the	church	as	a
whole	what	is	true	and	false	doctrine	or	what	is	proper	conduct	in	a
difficult	situation.	If	such	a	right	were	the	preserve	of	formally
trained	Bible	scholars,	then	they	would	become	a	governing	elite	in
the	church,	and	the	ordinary	functioning	of	the	government	of	the
church	as	described	in	the	New	Testament	would	cease.	The
process	of	decision-making	for	the	church	must	be	left	to	the
officers	of	the	church,	whether	they	are	scholars	or	not	(and,	in	a
congregational	form	of	church	government,	not	only	to	the	officers
but	also	to	the	people	of	the	church	as	a	whole).
6
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
If	the	doctrine	of	the	clarity	of	Scripture	is	true,	why	does	there	seem	to
be	so	much	disagreement	among	Christians	about	the	teaching	of	the
Bible?	Observing	the	diversity	of	interpretations	of	Scripture,	some
conclude,	“People	can	make	the	Bible	say	anything	they	want.”	How	do
you	think	Jesus	would	respond	to	this	statement?
2
.	
What	would	happen	to	the	church	if	most	believers	gave	up	reading	the
Bible	for	themselves	and	only	listened	to	Bible	teachers	or	read	books
about	the	Bible?	If	you	thought	that	only	expert	scholars	could
understand	the	Bible	rightly,	what	would	happen	to	your	personal
reading	of	Scripture?	Has	this	already	happened	to	some	extent	in	your
life	or	in	the	lives	of	those	you	know?
3
.	
Do	you	think	that	there	are	right	and	wrong	interpretations	of	most	or	all
passages	of	Scripture?	If	you	thought	the	Bible	was	generally	unclear,
how	would	your	answer	change?	Will	a	conviction	about	the	clarity	of
Scripture	affect	the	care	you	use	when	studying	a	text	of	Scripture?	Will
it	affect	the	way	you	approach	Scripture	when	trying	to	gain	a	biblical
answer	to	some	difficult	doctrinal	or	moral	problem?
4
.	
If	even	seminary	professors	disagree	about	some	Bible	teaching,	can
other	Christians	ever	hope	to	come	to	a	correct	decision	on	that
teaching?	(Give	reasons	for	your	answer.)	Do	you	think	ordinary	people
among	the	Jews	at	the	time	of	Jesus	had	a	hard	time	deciding	whether	to
believe	Jesus	or	the	scholarly	experts	who	disagreed	with	him?	Did	Jesus
expect	them	to	be	able	to	decide?
5
.	
How	can	a	pastor	preach	biblically	based	sermons	each	Sunday	without
giving	the	impression	that	only	people	with	seminary	training	(like
himself)	are	able	to	interpret	Scripture	rightly?	Do	you	think	it	should
ever	be	necessary,	in	a	doctrinal	or	ethical	controversy,	for	a	Bible
scholar	to	speak	in	a	church	and	base	his	main	arguments	on	special
meanings	of	Greek	or	Hebrew	words	that	the	church	members
themselves	are	unable	to	evaluate	or	take	issue	with	personally?	Is	there
an	appropriate	way	for	a	scholar	to	use	such	technical	knowledge	in
popular	writing	or	speaking?
6
.	
Church	leaders	at	the	time	of	Martin	Luther	said	they	wanted	to	keep	the
Bible	in	Latin	to	prevent	the	common	people	from	reading	it	and	then
misinterpreting	it.	Evaluate	this	argument.	Why	do	you	think	Martin
Luther	was	so	anxious	to	translate	the	Bible	into	German?	Why	do	you
think	church	leaders	in	previous	centuries	have	persecuted	and	even
killed	men—like	William	Tyndale	in	England—who	were	translating	the
Bible	into	the	language	of	the	people?	Why	is	the	task	of	Bible
translation	into	other	languages	so	important	a	part	of	the	work	of
missions?
7
.	
Does	the	doctrine	of	the	clarity	of	Scripture	mean	that	the	New
Testament	can	be	fully	understood	by	people	who	do	not	have	access	to
an	Old	Testament?
SPECIAL	TERMS
clarity	of	Scripture
	
	
hermeneutics
exegesis
	
	
perspicuity
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the
bibliography	to	chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be
found	in	
Appendix	4
.)
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92			Litton	(no	explicit	treatment)
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1875–76			Pope,	1:223–30
1983			Carter,	2:747–67
3.			Baptist
1767			Gill,	30–32
1976–83			Henry,	4:272–367
1983–85			Erickson,	253–56
4.			Dispensational
1947			Chafer,	1:105–19
1986			Ryrie,	110–18
5.			Lutheran
1917–24			Pieper,	1:319–30,	359–70
1934			Mueller,	138–41
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1861			Heppe,	33–41
1871–73			Hodge,	1:183–90
1938			Berkhof,	
Intro.,	
167
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
(no	explicit	treatment)
Other	Works
In	this	section	I	have	listed	several	works	on	developing	greater	skill	in
biblical	interpretation,	including	three	helpful	works	by	nonevangelical
authors	(one	by	Barr	and	two	by	Hirsch).
Barr,	James.	
The	Semantics	of	Biblical	Language.	
London:	Oxford
University	Press,	1961.
Berkhof,	Louis.	
Principles	of	Biblical	Interpretation.	
Grand	Rapids:
Baker,	1950.
Carson,	D.	A.	
Exegetical	Fallacies.	
Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1984.
Dockery,	David	S.	
Biblical	Interpretation	Then	and	Now:	Contemporary
Hermeneutics	in	the	Light	of	the	Early	Church.	
Grand	Rapids:	Baker,
1992.
Fee,	Gordon	D.,	and	Douglas	Stuart.	
How	to	Read	the	Bible	for	All	Its
Worth.	
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1982.
Hirsch,	E.	D.,	Jr.	
The	Aims	of	Interpretation.	
Chicago:	University	of
Chicago	Press,	1976.
_____.	
Validity	in	Interpretation.	
New	Haven	and	London:	Yale
University	Press,	1967.
Hubbard,	Robert	L.,	William	W.	Klein,	and	Craig	L.	Blomberg.
Introduction	to	Biblical	Interpretation.	
Waco,	Tex.:	Word	Books,	1993.
Inch,	Morris	A.,	and	C.	Hassell	Bullock,	eds.	
The	Literature	and
Meaning	of	Scripture.	
Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1981.
Kaiser,	Walter	C.,	Jr.	
Toward	an	Exegetical	Theology.	
Grand	Rapids:
Baker,	1982.
Marshall,	I.	Howard,	ed.	
New	Testament	Interpretation:	Essays	on
Principles	and	Methods.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1977.
McCown,	Wayne,	and	James	Earl	Massey,	eds.	
Interpreting	God’s	Word
for	Today:	An	Inquiry	Into	Hermeneutics	From	a	Biblical	Theological
Perspective.	Wesleyan	Theological	Perspectives,	
vol.	2.	Anderson,	Ind.:
Warner	Press,	1982.
McKnight,	Scot,	ed.	
Introducing	New	Testament	Interpretation.	
Grand
Rapids:	Baker,	1990.
_____.	
Interpreting	the	Synoptic	Gospels.	
Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1988.
Mickelsen,	A.	Berkeley.	
Interpreting	the	Bible.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,
1963.
Osborne,	Grant	R.	
The	Hermeneutical	Spiral:	A	Comprehensive
Introduction	to	Biblical	Interpretation.	
Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity
Press,	1992.
Packer,	J.	I.	“Infallible	Scripture	and	the	Role	of	Hermeneutics.”	In
Scripture	and	Truth.	
Ed.	by	D.	A.	Carson	and	John	Woodbridge.	Grand
Rapids:	Zondervan,	1983,	pp.	325–56.
_____.	“Scripture.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	627–31.
Ramm,	Bernard.	
Protestant	Biblical	Interpretation.	
3d	ed.	Grand	Rapids:
Baker,	1970.
Schultz,	Samuel	J.,	and	Morris	A.	Inch,	eds.	
Interpreting	the	Word	of
God.	Festschrift	in	Honor	of	Steven	Barabas.	
Chicago:	Moody,	1976.
Silva,	Moises.	
Biblical	Words	and	Their	Meanings.	
Grand	Rapids:
Zondervan,	1983.
_____.	
Has	the	Church	Misread	the	Bible?	The	History	of	Interpretation
in	the	Light	of	Contemporary	Issues.	
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1987.
Sire,	James.	
Scripture	Twisting:	Twenty	Ways	the	Cults	Misread	the
Bible.	
Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,	1980.
Sproul,	R.	C.	
Knowing	Scripture.	
Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,
1977.
Thiselton,	Anthony	C.	
New	Horizons	in	Hermeneutics:	The	Theory	and
Practice	of	Transforming	Biblical	Reading.	
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,
1992.
_____.	
The	Two	Horizons:	New	Testament	Hermeneutics	and
Philosophical	Description.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1980.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
Deuteronomy	6:6–7:	
And	these	words	which	I	command	you	this	day	shall
be	upon	your	heart;	and	you	shall	teach	them	diligently	to	your	children,	and
shall	talk	of	them	when	you	sit	in	your	house,	and	when	you	walk	by	the	way,
and	when	you	lie	down,	and	when	you	rise.
HYMN
“Jehovah’s	Perfect	Law”
This	section	of	Psalm	19	set	to	music	reminds	us	of	many	excellent
qualities	of	Scripture,	among	them	the	fact	that	it	is	written	clearly:
“The	testimony	of	the	L
ORD
	is	sure,	making	wise	the	simple”	(v.	
7).
(Use	the	tune	of	“We	Come,	O	Christ,	to	You.”)
Jehovah’s	perfect	law	restores	the	soul	again;
His	testimony	sure	gives	wisdom	unto	men;
The	precepts	of	the	L
ORD
	are	right,
And	fill	the	heart	with	great	delight.
The	L
ORD
’s	commands	are	pure;	they	light	and	joy	restore;
Jehovah’s	fear	is	clean,	enduring	evermore;
His	statutes,	let	the	world	confess,
Are	wholly	truth	and	righteousness.
They	are	to	be	desired	above	the	finest	gold;
Than	honey	from	the	comb	more	sweetness	far	they	hold;
With	warnings	they	your	servant	guard,
In	keeping	them	is	great	reward.
His	errors	who	can	know?	Cleanse	me	from	hidden	stain;
Keep	me	from	willful	sins,	nor	let	them	o’er	me	reign;
And	then	I	upright	shall	appear
And	be	from	great	transgressions	clear.
Whene’er	you	search	my	life,	may	all	my	thoughts	within
And	all	the	words	I	speak	your	full	approval	win.
O	Lord,	you	are	a	rock	to	me,
And	my	Redeemer	you	shall	be.
FROM:	
THE	PSALTER,	
1912	(TAKEN	FROM	PS.	19:7–14)
NOTES
1
Compare	the	use	of	this	same	word	in	Prov.	1:4;	7:7;	8:5;	9:6;	14:15,	18;	22:3;	27:12.
2
Paul	tells	the	Corinthians,	“We	write	you	nothing	but	what	you	can	read	and	understand,”	and	then	he	adds,	“I	hope	you	will
understand	fully,	as	you	have	understood	in	part”	(2	Cor.	1:13–14).	The	addition	to	his	first	statement	does	not	negate	his
affirmation	of	the	clarity	of	what	he	has	written	to	them,	but	does	encourage	the	Corinthians	to	be	diligent	in	listening	carefully	to
Paul’s	words,	in	order	that	their	partial	understanding	may	be	deepened	and	enriched.	Indeed,	the	very	expression	of	such	a	hope
shows	that	Paul	assumes	his	writings	are	able	to	be	understood	(
elpizō,	
“I	hope,”	in	the	New	Testament	expresses	a	much	more
confident	expectation	of	a	future	event	than	does	the	English	word	
hope
).
3
This	interpretation	is	well	defended	by	Michael	Green,	
The	Second	Epistle	of	Peter	and	the	Epistle	of	Jude,	
TNTC	(Grand
Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1987),	pp.	100–102.
4
The	old	term	for	the	clarity	of	Scripture	was	
perspicuity,	
a	term	that	simply	means	“clarity.”	That	term	itself	is	not	very	clear	to
people	today,	and	I	have	not	used	it	in	this	book.
5
I	do	not	mean	to	suggest	that	the	activity	of	interpreting	Scripture	should	be	an	individualistic	one:	God	will	often	use	the
writings	of	others	or	the	personal	advice	of	others	to	enable	us	to	understand	his	Word	rightly.	The	main	point	is	that	by	whatever
means,	and	primarily	through	the	means	of	reading	Scripture	for	themselves,	Christians	should	expect	that	they	will	be	enabled	by
God	to	understand	the	teachings	of	Scripture	rightly.
6
See	the	discussion	of	various	forms	of	church	government	in	
chapter	47
.
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	7
The	Four	Characteristics	of	Scripture:	(3)
Necessity
For	what	purposes	are	the	Bible	necessary?	How	much	can	people
know	about	God	without	the	Bible?
Do	we	need	to	have	a	Bible	or	to	have	someone	tell	us	what	the
Bible	says	in	order	to	know	that	God	exists?	Or	that	we	are	sinners
needing	to	be	saved?	Or	to	know	how	to	find	salvation?	Or	to	know
God’s	will	for	our	lives?	These	are	the	kinds	of	questions	which	an
investigation	of	the	necessity	of	Scripture	is	intended	to	answer.
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
The	necessity	of	Scripture	may	be	defined	as	follows:	
The	necessity
of	Scripture	means	that	the	Bible	is	necessary	for	knowing	the
gospel,	for	maintaining	spiritual	life,	and	for	knowing	God’s	will,
but	is	not	necessary	for	knowing	that	God	exists	or	for	knowing
something	about	God’s	character	and	moral	laws.
That	definition	may	now	be	explained	in	its	various	parts.
1
A.	The	Bible	Is	Necessary	for	Knowledge	of	the	Gospel
In	Romans	10:13–17	Paul	says:
For,	“everyone	who	calls	upon	the	name	of	the	Lord	will	be	saved.”
But	how	are	men	to	call	upon	him	in	whom	they	have	not	believed?
And	
how	are	they	to	believe	in	him	of	whom	they	have	never	heard?
And	how	are	they	to	hear	without	a	preacher?	
.	.	.	So	
faith	comes	from
what	is	heard,	
and	what	is	heard	comes	by	the	preaching	of	Christ.
This	statement	indicates	the	following	line	of	reasoning:	(1)	It	first
assumes	that	one	must	call	upon	the	name	of	the	Lord	to	be	saved.
(In	Pauline	usage	generally	as	well	as	in	this	specific	context	[see	v.
9],	“the	Lord”	refers	to	the	Lord	Jesus	Christ.)	(2)	People	can	only
call	upon	the	name	of	Christ	if	they	believe	in	him	(that	is,	that	he	is
a	Savior	worthy	of	calling	upon	and	one	who	will	answer	those	who
call).	(3)	People	cannot	believe	in	Christ	unless	they	have	heard	of
him.	(4)	They	cannot	hear	of	Christ	unless	there	is	someone	to	tell
them	about	Christ	(a	“preacher”).	(5)	The	conclusion	is	that	saving
faith	comes	by	hearing	(that	is,	by	hearing	the	gospel	message),	and
this	hearing	of	the	gospel	message	comes	about	through	the
preaching	of	Christ.	The	implication	seems	to	be	that	without
hearing	the	preaching	of	the	gospel	of	Christ,	no	one	can	be	saved.
2
This	passage	is	one	of	several	that	show	that	eternal	salvation
comes	only	through	belief	in	Jesus	Christ	and	no	other	way.
Speaking	of	Christ,	John	3:18	says,	“He	who	believes	in	him	is	not
condemned;	
he	who	does	not	believe	is	condemned	already,
because	he	has	not	believed	in	the	name	of	the	only	Son	of	God.”
Similarly,	in	John	14:6	Jesus	says,	“I	am	the	way,	and	the	truth,	and
the	life;	
no	one	comes	to	the	Father,	but	by	me.”
Peter,	on	trial	before	the	Sanhedrin,	says,	“
there	is	salvation	in	no
one	else,	
for	there	is	
no	other	name	
under	heaven	given	among	men
by	which	we	must	be	saved”	(Acts	4:12).	Of	course,	the
exclusiveness	of	salvation	through	Christ	is	because	Jesus	is	the
only	one	who	ever	died	for	our	sins	or	whoever	could	have	done	so.
Paul	says,	“For	there	is	one	God,	and	
there	is	one	mediator	between
God	and	men,	the	man	Christ	Jesus,	who	gave	himself	as	a	ransom
for	all	
.	.	.”	(1	Tim.	2:5–6).	There	is	no	other	way	to	be	reconciled
to	God	than	through	Christ,	for	there	is	no	other	way	of	dealing
with	the	guilt	of	our	sin	before	a	holy	God.
3
But	if	people	can	be	saved	only	through	faith	in	Christ,	someone
might	ask	how	believers	under	the	old	covenant	could	have	been
saved.	The	answer	must	be	that	those	who	were	saved	under	the	old
covenant	were	also	saved	through	trusting	in	Christ,	even	though
their	faith	was	a	forward-looking	faith	based	on	God’s	word	of
promise	that	a	Messiah	or	a	Redeemer	would	come.	Speaking	of
Old	Testament	believers	such	as	Abel,	Enoch,	Noah,	Abraham,	and
Sarah,	the	author	of	Hebrews	says,	“
These	all	died	in	faith,	
not
having	received	what	was	promised,	but	
having	seen	it	and	greeted
it	from	afar	
.	.	.”	(Heb.	11:13).	The	same	chapter	goes	on	to	say	that
Moses	“considered	abuse	suffered	
for	the	Christ	
(or	the	Messiah)
greater	wealth	than	the	treasures	of	Egypt,	for	he	looked	to	the
reward”	(Heb.	11:26).	And	Jesus	can	say	of	Abraham,	“Your	father
Abraham	rejoiced	that	he	was	to	see	my	day;	
he	saw	it	
and	was
glad”	(John	8:56).	This	again	apparently	refers	to	Abraham’s	joy	in
looking	forward	to	the	day	of	the	promised	Messiah.	Thus,	even
Old	Testament	believers	had	saving	faith	in	Christ,	to	whom	they
looked	forward,	not	with	exact	knowledge	of	the	historical	details
of	Christ’s	life,	but	with	great	faith	in	the	absolute	reliability	of
God’s	word	of	promise.
The	Bible	is	necessary	for	salvation,	then,	in	this	sense:	one	must
either	read	the	gospel	message	in	the	Bible	for	oneself,	or	hear	it
from	another	person.	Even	those	believers	who	came	to	salvation	in
the	old	covenant	did	so	by	trusting	in	the	words	of	God	that
promised	a	Savior	to	come.
In	fact,	these	repeated	instances	of	people	trusting	in	God’s	
words
of	promise,	together	with	the	verses	above	that	affirm	the	necessity
of	hearing	about	and	believing	in	Christ,	seem	to	indicate	that	sinful
people	need	more	on	which	to	rest	their	faith	than	just	an	intuitive
guess	that	God	might	provide	a	means	of	salvation.	It	seems	that
the	only	foundation	firm	enough	to	rest	one’s	faith	on	is	the	
word	
of
God	itself	(whether	spoken	or	written).	This	in	the	earliest	times
came	in	very	brief	form,	but	from	the	very	beginning	we	have
evidence	of	
words	
of	God	promising	a	salvation	yet	to	come,	words
that	were	trusted	by	those	people	whom	God	called	to	himself.
For	example,	even	in	the	lifetime	of	Adam	and	Eve	there	are	some
words	of	God	that	point	toward	a	future	salvation:	in	Genesis	3:15
the	curse	on	the	serpent	includes	a	promise	that	the	seed	of	the
woman	(one	of	her	descendants)	would	bruise	the	head	of	the
serpent	but	would	himself	be	hurt	in	the	process—a	promise
ultimately	fulfilled	in	Christ.	The	fact	that	the	first	two	children	of
Adam	and	Eve,	Cain	and	Abel,	offered	sacrifices	to	the	L
ORD
	(Gen.
4:3–4)	indicates	their	consciousness	of	a	need	to	make	some	kind	of
payment	for	the	guilt	of	their	sin,	and	of	God’s	promise	of
acceptance	of	sacrifices	offered	in	the	right	way.	Genesis	4:7,	“If
you	do	well,	will	you	not	be	accepted?”	indicates	again	in	the	very
briefest	form	a	word	from	God	that	offered	the	provision	of	some
kind	of	salvation	through	trusting	in	the	promise	of	God	offered	in
that	word.	As	the	history	of	the	Old	Testament	progressed,	God’s
words	of	promise	became	more	and	more	specific,	and	the	forward-
looking	faith	of	God’s	people	accordingly	became	more	and	more
definite.	Yet	it	seems	always	to	have	been	a	faith	resting
specifically	on	the	
words	
of	God	himself.
Thus,	although	it	will	be	argued	below	that	people	can	know	that
God	
exists	
and	can	know	something	of	his	
laws	
apart	from
Scripture,	it	seems	that	there	is	no	possibility	of	coming	to	
saving
faith	
apart	from	specific	knowledge	of	God’s	words	of	promise.
B.	The	Bible	Is	Necessary	for	Maintaining	Spiritual	Life
Jesus	says	in	Matthew	4:4	(quoting	Deut.	8:3),	“Man	shall	not	live
on	bread	alone,	but	on	every	word	that	proceeds	out	of	the	mouth	of
God”	(NASB).	Here	Jesus	indicates	that	our	spiritual	life	is
maintained	by	daily	nourishment	with	the	Word	of	God,	just	as	our
physical	lives	are	maintained	by	daily	nourishment	with	physical
food.	To	neglect	regular	reading	of	God’s	Word	is	as	detrimental	to
the	health	of	our	souls	as	the	neglect	of	physical	food	is	detrimental
to	the	health	of	our	bodies.
Similarly,	Moses	tells	the	people	of	Israel	of	the	importance	of
God’s	words	for	their	lives:	“For	it	is	no	trifle	for	you,	but	
it	is	your
life,	
and	thereby	you	shall	live	long	in	the	land	which	you	are	going
over	the	Jordan	to	possess”	(Deut.	32:47).	And	Peter	encourages	the
Christians	to	whom	he	writes,	“Like	newborn	babes,	long	for	the
pure	spiritual	milk,	that	by	it	you	may	grow	up	to	salvation”	(1
Peter	2:2).	The	“pure	spiritual	milk”	in	this	context	must	refer	to	the
Word	of	God	about	which	Peter	has	been	speaking	(see	1	Peter
1:23–25).	The	Bible,	then,	is	necessary	for	maintaining	spiritual	life
and	for	growth	in	the	Christian	life.
C.	The	Bible	Is	Necessary	for	Certain	Knowledge	of	God’s	Will
It	will	be	argued	below	that	all	people	ever	born	have	
some
knowledge	of	God’s	will	through	their	consciences.	But	this
knowledge	is	often	indistinct	and	cannot	give	certainty.	In	fact,	if
there	were	
no	
written	Word	of	God,	we	
could	not	
gain	certainty
about	God’s	will	through	other	means	such	as	conscience,	advice
from	others,	an	internal	witness	of	the	Holy	Spirit,	changed
circumstances,	and	the	use	of	sanctified	reasoning	and	common
sense.	These	all	might	give	an	approximation	of	God’s	will	in	more
or	less	reliable	ways,	but	from	these	means	alone	no	certainty	about
God’s	will	could	ever	be	attained,	at	least	in	a	fallen	world	where
sin	distorts	our	perception	of	right	and	wrong,	brings	faulty
reasoning	into	our	thinking	processes,	and	causes	us	to	suppress
from	time	to	time	the	testimony	of	our	consciences	(cf.	Jer.	17:9;
Rom.	2:14–15;	1	Cor.	8:10;	Heb.	5:14;	10:22;	also	1	Tim.	4:2;	Titus
1:15).
In	the	Bible,	however,	we	have	clear	and	definite	statements	about
God’s	will.	God	has	not	revealed	all	things	to	us,	but	he	has
revealed	enough	for	us	to	know	his	will:	“The	secret	things	belong
to	the	L
ORD
	our	God;	but	
the	things	that	are	revealed	belong	to	us
and	to	our	children	for	ever,	
that	we	may	do	all	the	words	of	this
law”	(Deut.	29:29).	As	it	was	in	the	time	of	Moses,	so	it	is	now
with	us:	God	has	revealed	his	words	to	us	that	we	might	obey	his
laws	and	thereby	do	his	will.	To	be	“blameless”	in	God’s	sight	is	to
“walk	in	the	law	of	the	L
ORD
”	(Ps.	119:1).	The	“blessed”	man	is
one	who	does	not	follow	the	will	of	wicked	people	(Ps.	1:1),	but
delights	“
in	the	law	of	the	L
ORD
,”	
and	meditates	on	God’s	law	“day
and	night”	(Ps.	1:2).	To	love	God	(and	thereby	to	act	in	a	way	that
is	pleasing	to	him)	is	to	“keep	his	commandments”	(1	John	5:3).	If
we	are	to	have	a	certain	knowledge	of	God’s	will,	then,	we	must
attain	it	through	the	study	of	Scripture.
In	fact,	in	one	sense	it	can	be	argued	that	the	Bible	is	necessary	for
certain	knowledge	about	anything.	A	philosopher	might	argue	as
follows:	The	fact	that	we	do	not	know	everything	requires	us	to	be
uncertain	about	everything	we	do	claim	to	know.	This	is	because
some	fact	unknown	to	us	may	yet	turn	out	to	prove	that	what	we
thought	to	be	true	was	actually	false.	For	example,	we	think	we
know	our	date	of	birth,	our	name,	our	age,	and	so	forth.	But	we
must	admit	that	it	is	possible	that	some	day	we	could	find	that	our
parents	had	given	us	false	information	and	our	“certain”	knowledge
would	then	turn	out	to	be	incorrect.	Regarding	events	that	we
personally	have	experienced,	we	all	realize	how	it	is	possible	for	us
to	“remember”	words	or	events	incorrectly	and	find	ourselves	later
corrected	by	more	accurate	information.	We	can	usually	be	more
certain	about	the	events	of	our	present	experience,	so	long	as	it
remains	present	(but	even	that,	someone	might	argue,	could	be	a
dream,	and	we	will	only	discover	this	fact	when	we	wake	up!).	At
any	rate,	it	is	difficult	to	answer	the	philosopher’s	question:	If	we
do	not	know	
all	
the	facts	in	the	universe,	past,	present,	and	future,
how	can	we	ever	attain	
certainty	
that	we	have	correct	information
about	any	one	fact?
Ultimately,	there	are	only	two	possible	solutions	to	this	problem:
(1)	We	must	learn	all	the	facts	of	the	universe	in	order	to	be	sure
that	no	subsequently	discovered	fact	will	prove	our	present	ideas	to
be	false;	or	(2)	someone	who	
does	
know	all	the	facts	in	the
universe,	and	who	never	lies,	could	tell	us	some	true	facts	that	we
can	then	be	sure	will	never	be	contradicted.
This	second	solution	is	in	fact	what	we	have	when	we	have	God’s
words	in	Scripture.	God	knows	all	facts	that	ever	have	been	or	ever
will	be.	And	this	God	who	is	omniscient	(all-knowing)	has
absolutely	certain	knowledge:	there	can	never	be	any	fact	that	he
does	not	already	know;	thus,	there	can	never	be	any	fact	that	would
prove	that	something	God	thinks	is	actually	false.	Now	it	is	from
this	infinite	storehouse	of	certain	knowledge	that	God,	who	never
lies,	has	spoken	to	us	in	Scripture,	in	which	he	has	told	us	many
true	things	about	himself,	about	ourselves,	and	about	the	universe
that	he	has	made.	No	fact	can	ever	turn	up	to	contradict	the	truth
spoken	by	this	one	who	is	omniscient.
Thus,	it	is	appropriate	for	us	to	be	
more	certain	
about	the	truths	we
read	in	Scripture	than	about	any	other	knowledge	we	have.	If	we
are	to	talk	about	degrees	of	certainty	of	knowledge	we	have,	then
the	knowledge	we	attain	from	Scripture	would	have	the	highest
degree	of	certainty:	if	the	word	“certain”	can	be	applied	to	any	kind
of	human	knowledge,	it	can	be	applied	to	this	knowledge.
4
This	concept	of	the	certainty	of	knowledge	that	we	attain	from
Scripture	then	gives	us	a	reasonable	basis	for	affirming	the
correctness	of	much	of	the	other	knowledge	that	we	have.	We	read
Scripture	and	find	that	its	view	of	the	world	around	us,	of	human
nature,	and	of	ourselves	corresponds	closely	to	the	information	we
have	gained	from	our	own	sense-experiences	of	the	world	around
us.	Thus	we	are	encouraged	to	trust	our	sense-experiences	of	the
world	around	us:	our	observations	correspond	with	the	absolute
truth	of	Scripture;	therefore,	our	observations	are	also	true	and,	by
and	large,	reliable.	Such	confidence	in	the	general	reliability	of
observations	made	with	our	eyes	and	ears	is	further	confirmed	by
the	fact	that	it	is	God	who	has	made	these	faculties	and	who	in
Scripture	frequently	encourages	us	to	use	them	(compare	also	Prov.
20:12:	“The	hearing	ear	and	the	seeing	eye,	the	L
ORD
	has	made
them	both”).
In	this	way	the	Christian	who	takes	the	Bible	as	God’s	Word
escapes	from	philosophical	skepticism	about	the	possibility	of
attaining	certain	knowledge	with	our	finite	minds.	In	this	sense,
then,	it	is	correct	to	say	that	for	people	who	are	not	omniscient,	the
Bible	is	necessary	for	certain	knowledge	about	anything.
This	fact	is	important	for	the	following	discussion,	where	we	affirm
that	unbelievers	
can	
know	something	about	God	from	the	general
revelation	that	is	seen	in	the	world	around	them.	Although	this	is
true,	we	must	recognize	that	in	a	fallen	world	knowledge	gained	by
observation	of	the	world	is	always	imperfect	and	always	liable	to
error	or	misinterpretation.	Therefore	the	knowledge	of	God	and
creation	gained	from	Scripture	must	be	used	to	interpret	correctly
the	creation	around	us.	Using	the	theological	terms	that	we	will
define	below,	we	can	say	that	we	need	special	revelation	to	interpret
general	revelation	rightly.
5
D.	But	the	Bible	Is	Not	Necessary	for	Knowing	That	God	Exists
What	about	people	who	do	not	read	the	Bible?	Can	they	obtain	any
knowledge	of	God?	Can	they	know	anything	about	his	laws?	Yes,
without	the	Bible	some	knowledge	of	God	is	possible,	even	if	it	is
not	absolutely	certain	knowledge.
People	can	obtain	a	knowledge	
that	God	exists,	
and	a	knowledge	of
some	of	his	attributes,	
simply	from	observation	of	themselves	and
the	world	around	them.	David	says,	“
The	heavens	are	telling	the
glory	of	God;	
and	the	firmament	proclaims	his	handiwork”	(Ps.
19:1).	To	look	at	the	sky	is	to	see	evidence	of	the	infinite	power,
wisdom,	and	even	beauty	of	God;	it	is	to	observe	a	majestic	witness
to	the	glory	of	God.	Similarly,	Barnabas	and	Paul	tell	the	Greek
inhabitants	of	Lystra	about	the	living	God	who	made	the	heavens
and	the	earth:	“In	past	generations	he	allowed	all	the	nations	to
walk	in	their	own	ways;	yet	
he	did	not	leave	himself	without
witness,	
for	he	did	good	and	gave	you	from	heaven	rains	and
fruitful	seasons,	satisfying	your	hearts	with	food	and	gladness”
(Acts	14:16–17).	Rains	and	fruitful	seasons,	food	produced	from
the	earth,	and	gladness	in	people’s	hearts,	all	bear	witness	to	the
fact	that	their	Creator	is	a	God	of	mercy,	of	love,	and	even	of	joy.
These	evidences	of	God	are	all	around	us	in	creation	to	be	seen	by
those	who	are	willing	to	see	them.
Even	those	who	by	their	wickedness	suppress	the	truth	cannot	avoid
the	evidences	of	God’s	existence	and	nature	in	the	created	order:
For	
what	can	be	known	about	God	is	plain	to	them,	
because	God	has
shown	it	to	them.	Ever	since	the	creation	of	the	world	
his	invisible
nature,	
namely,	his	eternal	power	and	deity,	
has	been	clearly
perceived	in	the	things	that	have	been	made.	
So	they	are	without
excuse;	for	although	
they	knew	God	
they	did	not	honor	him	as	God	or
give	thanks	to	him,	but	they	became	futile	in	their	thinking	and	their
senseless	minds	were	darkened.	(Rom.	1:19–21)
Here	Paul	says	not	only	that	creation	gives	evidence	of	God’s
existence	and	character,	but	also	that	even	wicked	men	recognize
that	evidence.	What	can	be	known	about	God	is	“plain	to	them”	and
in	fact	“they	knew	God”	(apparently,	they	knew	who	he	was),	but
“they	did	not	honor	him	as	God	or	give	thanks	to	him.”	This
passage	allows	us	to	say	that	all	persons,	even	the	most	wicked,
have	some	internal	knowledge	or	perception	that	God	exists	and
that	he	is	a	powerful	Creator.	This	knowledge	is	seen	“in	the	things
that	have	been	made,”	a	phrase	that	refers	to	all	creation.	Yet	it	is
probably	in	seeing	mankind	created	in	the	image	of	God—that	is,	in
seeing	both	themselves	and	other	people—that	even	wicked	persons
see	the	greatest	evidence	of	God’s	existence	and	nature.
6
Thus,	even	without	the	Bible,	all	persons	who	have	ever	lived	have
had	evidence	in	creation	that	God	exists,	that	he	is	the	Creator	and
they	are	creatures,	and	have	also	had	some	evidence	of	his
character.	As	a	result,	they	themselves	have	known	something
about	God	from	this	evidence	(even	though	this	is	never	said	to	be	a
knowledge	that	is	able	to	bring	them	to	salvation).
E.	Furthermore,	the	Bible	Is	Not	Necessary	for	Knowing	
Something	About	God’s	Character	and	Moral	Laws
Paul	goes	on	in	Romans	1	to	show	that	even	unbelievers	who	have
no	written	record	of	God’s	laws	still	have	in	their	consciences	some
understanding	of	God’s	moral	demands.	Speaking	of	a	long	list	of
sins	(“envy,	murder,	strife,	deceit	.	.	.”),	Paul	says	of	wicked	people
who	practice	them,	“Though	
they	know	God’s	decree	that	those	who
do	such	things	deserve	to	die,	
they	not	only	do	them	but	approve
those	who	practice	them”	(Rom.	1:32).	Wicked	people	know	that
their	sin	is	wrong,	at	least	in	large	measure.
Paul	then	talks	about	the	activity	of	conscience	in	Gentiles	who	do
not	have	the	written	law:
When	Gentiles	who	have	not	the	law	do	by	nature	what	the	law
requires,	they	are	a	law	to	themselves,	even	though	they	do	not	have
the	law.	They	show	that	
what	the	law	requires	is	written	on	their
hearts,	
while	their	conscience	also	bears	witness	and	their	conflicting
thoughts	accuse	or	perhaps	excuse	them.	.	.	.”	(Rom.	2:14–15)
The	consciences	of	unbelievers	bear	witness	to	God’s	moral
standards,	but	at	times	this	evidence	of	God’s	law	on	the	hearts	of
unbelievers	is	distorted	or	suppressed.
7
	Sometimes	their	thoughts
“accuse”	them	and	sometimes	their	thoughts	“excuse”	them,	Paul
says.	The	knowledge	of	God’s	laws	derived	from	such	sources	is
never	perfect,	but	it	is	enough	to	give	an	awareness	of	God’s	moral
demands	to	all	mankind.	(And	it	is	on	this	basis	that	Paul	argues
that	all	humanity	is	held	guilty	before	God	for	sin,	even	those	who
do	not	have	the	written	laws	of	God	in	Scripture.)
The	knowledge	of	God’s	existence,	character,	and	moral	law,	which
comes	through	creation	to	all	humanity,	is	often	called	“
general
revelation
”	(because	it	comes	to	all	people	generally).
8
	General
revelation	comes	through	observing	nature,	through	seeing	God’s
directing	influence	in	history,	and	through	an	inner	sense	of	God’s
existence	and	his	laws	that	he	has	placed	inside	every	person.
General	revelation	is	distinct	from	“
special	revelation,
”	which
refers	to	God’s	words	addressed	to	specific	people,	such	as	the
words	of	the	Bible,	the	words	of	the	Old	Testament	prophets	and
New	Testament	apostles,	and	the	words	of	God	spoken	in	personal
address,	such	as	at	Mount	Sinai	or	at	the	baptism	of	Jesus.
9
Special	revelation	includes	all	the	words	of	Scripture	but	is	not
limited	to	the	words	of	Scripture,	for	it	also	includes,	for	example,
many	words	of	Jesus	that	were	not	recorded	in	Scripture,	and
probably	there	were	many	words	spoken	by	Old	Testament
prophets	and	New	Testament	apostles	that	were	not	recorded	in
Scripture	either.
The	fact	that	all	people	know	something	of	God’s	moral	laws	is	a
great	blessing	for	society,	for	unless	they	did	there	would	be	no
societal	restraint	on	the	evil	that	people	would	do	and	no	restraint
from	their	consciences.	Because	there	is	some	common	knowledge
of	right	and	wrong,	Christians	can	often	find	much	consensus	with
non-Christians	in	matters	of	civil	law,	community	standards,	basic
ethics	for	business	and	professional	activity,	and	acceptable	patterns
of	conduct	in	ordinary	life.	Moreover,	we	can	appeal	to	the	sense	of
rightness	within	people’s	hearts	(Rom.	2:14)	when	attempting	to
enact	better	laws	or	overturn	bad	laws,	or	to	right	some	other
injustices	in	society	around	us.	The	knowledge	of	God’s	existence
and	character	also	provides	a	basis	of	information	that	enables	the
gospel	to	make	sense	to	a	non-Christian’s	heart	and	mind:
unbelievers	know	that	God	exists	and	that	they	have	broken	his
standards,	so	the	news	that	Christ	died	to	pay	for	their	sins	should
truly	come	as	
good	news	
to	them.
However,	it	must	be	emphasized	that	Scripture	nowhere	indicates
that	people	can	know	the	gospel,	or	know	the	way	of	salvation,
through	such	general	revelation.	They	may	know	that	God	exists,
that	he	is	their	Creator,	that	they	owe	him	obedience,	and	that	they
have	sinned	against	him.	The	existence	of	systems	of	sacrifice	in
primitive	religions	throughout	history	attests	to	the	fact	that	these
things	can	be	clearly	known	by	people	apart	from	the	Bible.	The
repeated	occurrences	of	the	“rain	and	fruitful	seasons”	mentioned	in
Acts	14:17	may	even	lead	some	people	to	reason	that	God	is	not
only	holy	and	righteous	but	also	loving	and	forgiving.	But	how	the
holiness	and	justice	
of	God	can	ever	be	reconciled	with	his
willingness	to	forgive	sins	
is	a	mystery	that	has	never	been	solved
by	any	religion	apart	from	the	Bible.	Nor	does	the	Bible	give	us	any
hope	that	it	ever	can	be	discovered	apart	from	specific	revelation
from	God.	It	is	the	great	wonder	of	our	redemption	that	God
himself	has	provided	the	way	of	salvation	by	sending	his	own	Son,
who	is	both	God	and	man,	to	be	our	representative	and	bear	the
penalty	for	our	sins,	thus	combining	the	justice	and	love	of	God	in
one	infinitely	wise	and	amazingly	gracious	act.	This	fact,	which
seems	commonplace	to	the	Christian	ear,	should	not	lose	its	wonder
for	us:	it	could	never	have	been	conceived	by	man	alone	apart	from
God’s	special,	verbal	revelation.
Furthermore,	even	if	an	adherent	of	a	primitive	religion	could	think
that	God	somehow	
must	have	
himself	paid	the	penalty	for	our	sins,
such	a	thought	would	only	be	an	extraordinary	speculation.	It	could
never	be	held	with	enough	certainty	to	be	the	ground	on	which	to
rest	saving	faith	unless	God	himself	confirmed	such	speculation
with	his	own	words,	namely,	the	words	of	the	gospel	proclaiming
either	that	this	indeed	was	going	to	happen	(if	the	revelation	came
in	the	time	before	Christ)	or	that	it	indeed	has	happened	(if	the
revelation	came	in	the	time	after	Christ).	The	Bible	never	views
human	speculation	apart	from	the	Word	of	God	as	a	sufficient	basis
on	which	
to	rest	saving	faith:	
such	saving	faith,	according	to
Scripture,	is	always	confidence	or	trust	in	God	that	rests	on	the
truthfulness	of	God’s	own	words.
10
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
When	you	are	witnessing	to	an	unbeliever,	what	is	the	one	thing	above
all	others	that	you	should	want	him	or	her	to	read?	Do	you	know	of
anyone	who	ever	became	a	Christian	without	either	reading	the	Bible	or
hearing	someone	tell	him	or	her	what	the	Bible	said?	What	then	is	the
primary	task	of	an	evangelistic	missionary?	How	should	the	necessity	of
Scripture	affect	our	missionary	orientation?
2
.	
Do	you	nourish	your	soul	on	the	spiritual	food	of	the	Word	as	carefully
and	diligently	as	you	nourish	your	body	on	physical	food?	What	makes
us	so	spiritually	insensitive	that	we	feel	physical	hunger	much	more
acutely	than	spiritual	hunger?	What	is	the	remedy?
3
.	
When	we	are	actively	seeking	to	know	God’s	will,	where	should	we
spend	most	of	our	time	and	effort?	In	practice,	where	do	you	spend	most
of	your	time	and	effort	when	seeking	to	find	God’s	will?	Do	God’s
principles	in	Scripture	and	the	apparent	guidance	we	receive	from
feelings,	conscience,	advice,	circumstances,	human	reasoning,	or	society
ever	seem	to	conflict?	How	should	we	seek	to	resolve	the	conflict?
4
.	
Is	it	a	hopeless	task	to	work	for	civil	legislation	based	on	standards	that
accord	with	God’s	moral	principles	in	Scripture?	Why	is	there	good
reason	to	hope	that	we	will	finally	be	able	to	persuade	a	great	majority	of
our	society	to	adopt	laws	consistent	with	scriptural	norms?	What	would
hinder	this	effort?
SPECIAL	TERMS
general	revelation
	
	
	
necessity	of	Scripture
natural	revelation
	
	
	
special	revelation
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the
bibliography	to	chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be
found	in	
Appendix	4
.)
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92			Litton	(no	explicit	treatment)
1930			Thomas,	258–60
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1983			Carter,	1:288–89
3.			Baptist
1767			Gill,	1:32–36
1976–83			Henry,	1:17–29;	2:91–123;	4:494–522;	6:360–69
1983–85			Erickson,	153–74
1987–94			Lewis/Demarest,	1:59–92
4.			Dispensational
1947			Chafer,	1:48–60
5.			Lutheran
1934			Mueller,	90–98
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1559			Calvin,	1:69–74,	838–49	(1.6;	3.19.6–16)
1724–58			Edwards,	2:479–85
1861			Heppe,	31–33
1871–73			Hodge,	1:18–60,	364–65
1878			Dabney,	64–78
1938			Berkhof,	
Intro.,	
128–33;	165–66
7.			Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988–92			Williams,	33–36,	239–41
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955			Ott	(no	explicit	treatment)
2.			Roman	Catholic:	Post-Vatican	II
1980			McBrien,	1:151–61;	245–81
Other	Works
Berkouwer,	G.	C.	
General	Revelation.	
(No	translator	named.)	Grand
Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1955.
Demarest,	Bruce	A.	
General	Revelation.	
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,
1982.
_____.	“Revelation,	General.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	944–45.
Henry,	Carl	F.	H.	“Revelation,	Special.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	945–48.
Kuyper,	Abraham.	
Principles	of	Sacred	Theology.	
Trans.	by	J.	H.	de
Vries.	Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1968,	pp.	341–405	(originally	published
as	
Encyclopedia	of	Sacred	Theology	
in	1898).
Packer,	J.	I.	“Scripture.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	627–31.
Van	Til,	Cornelius.	
Common	Grace	and	the	Gospel.	
Nutley,	N.J.:
Presbyterian	and	Reformed,	1973.
_____.	
In	Defense	of	the	Faith,	
vol.	1:	
The	Doctrine	of	Scripture.	
Ripon,
Calif.:	den	Dulk	Christian	Foundation,	1967,	pp.	1–15.
_____.	
In	Defense	of	the	Faith,	
vol.	5:	
An	Introduction	to	Systematic
Theology.	
Phillipsburg,	N.J.:	Presbyterian	and	Reformed,	1976,	pp.	62–
109.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
Matthew	4:4:	
But	he	answered,	“It	is	written,	‘Man	shall	not	live	by	bread
alone,	but	by	every	word	that	proceeds	from	the	mouth	of	God.’	”
HYMN
“Teach	Me,	O	Lord,	Your	Way	of	Truth”	
(Use	the	familiar	tune	of	“Jesus	Shall	Reign.”)
Teach	me,	O	Lord,	your	way	of	truth,
And	from	it	I	will	not	depart;
That	I	may	steadfastly	obey,
Give	me	an	understanding	heart.
In	your	commandments	make	me	walk,
For	in	your	law	my	joy	shall	be;
Give	me	a	heart	that	loves	your	will,
From	discontent	and	envy	free.
Turn	now	my	eyes	from	vanity,
And	cause	me	in	your	ways	to	tread;
O	let	your	servant	prove	your	Word
and	thus	to	godly	fear	be	led.
Turn	away	my	reproach	and	fear;
Your	righteous	judgments	I	confess;
To	know	your	precepts	I	desire;
Revive	me	in	your	righteousness.
FROM:	
THE	PSALTER,	
1912	(TAKEN	FROM	PS.	119:33–40)
An	alternative	hymn	for	this	chapter	is	a	modern	Scripture	song,
“Seek	Ye	First	the	Kingdom	of	God.”	The	second	verse	of	this	song
(“Man	shall	not	live	on	bread	alone.	.	.”)	is	a	quotation	of	Matthew
4:4	and	expresses	the	necessity	of	Scripture	for	maintaining	our
spiritual	life:	we	live	on	every	word	that	proceeds	from	the	mouth
of	God.	The	other	verses	of	the	song	do	not	speak	directly	of	the
doctrine	of	the	necessity	of	Scripture	but	do	contain	the	words	of
gospel	invitation	(vv.	1,	4,	5).	All	verses	in	the	song	are	direct
quotations	of	Scripture,	and,	as	such,	will	be	spiritually	nourishing
for	us	to	sing	and	meditate	on.
NOTES
1
As	the	subsequent	sections	indicate,	when	this	definition	says	that	the	Bible	is	necessary	for	certain	things,	I	do	not	mean	to
imply	that	an	actual	printed	copy	of	the	Bible	is	necessary	for	every	person,	because	sometimes	people	hear	the	Bible	read	aloud
or	hear	others	tell	them	some	of	the	contents	of	the	Bible.	But	even	these	oral	communications	of	the	contents	of	the	Bible	are
based	on	the	existence	of	written	copies	of	the	Bible	to	which	other	people	have	access.
2
Someone	might	object	that	the	following	verse,	Rom.	10:18,	in	its	quotation	of	Ps.	19:4,	“Their	voice	has	gone	out	to	all	the
earth,	and	their	words	to	the	ends	of	the	world,”	implies	that	all	people	everywhere	have	already	heard	the	gospel	message	or	the
message	of	Christ.	But	in	the	context	of	Psalm	19,	verse	4	only	speaks	of	the	fact	that	the	natural	creation,	especially	the	heavens
above,	proclaim	God’s	glory	and	the	greatness	of	his	creative	activity.	There	is	no	thought	here	of	the	proclamation	of	salvation
through	Christ.	The	idea	that	all	people	everywhere	have	heard	the	gospel	of	Christ	through	natural	revelation	would	also	be
contrary	to	Paul’s	missionary	activities.
3
On	the	question	of	whether	it	is	fair	of	God	to	condemn	people	who	have	never	heard	of	Christ,	see	the	discussion	in	
chapter	19
and	
chapter	32
.
4
This	statement	assumes	that	we	have	become	convinced	that	Scripture	is	indeed	the	very	words	of	God,	and	that	we	have
understood	at	least	some	portions	of	Scripture	correctly.	Yet	at	this	point	the	doctrine	of	the	clarity	of	Scripture	discussed	in	the
previous	chapter	assures	us	that	we	will	be	able	to	understand	the	teachings	of	Scripture	correctly,	and	the	overwhelming
testimony	of	Scripture	to	its	own	divine	authorship	(discussed	in	the	chapters	above	concerning	different	forms	of	the	Word	of
God	and	concerning	the	authority	of	Scripture),	made	persuasive	to	us	by	the	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit,	convinces	us	of	the	divine
authorship	of	Scripture.	In	this	sense	the	argument	becomes	not	so	much	circular	as	something	like	a	spiral	where	each	section	of
the	doctrine	of	Scripture	reinforces	the	other	and	deepens	our	persuasion	of	the	truthfulness	of	other	sections	of	the	doctrine	of
Scripture.	By	this	process,	our	persuasion	that	Scripture	is	God’s	Word,	that	it	is	truth,	that	it	is	clear,	and	that	knowledge	which
we	attain	from	it	is	certain,	becomes	stronger	and	stronger	the	more	we	study	and	reflect	on	it.
We	can	of	course	speak	of	degrees	of	certainty	that	we	might	have	concerning	the	fact	that	the	Bible	is	God’s	Word,	and	degrees
of	certainty	that	our	interpretation	of	any	one	teaching	in	Scripture	is	correct.	Then	from	the	standpoint	of	individual	personal
experience,	we	could	say	that	our	certainty	of	the	correctness	of	knowledge	that	we	have	from	Scripture	becomes	greater	in
proportion	to	our	certainty	about	the	God-breathed	character	and	clarity	of	Scripture.
Yet	from	a	theological	standpoint,	if	we	begin	with	an	agreement	that	Scripture	is	God-breathed	and	that	we	do	understand	its
teachings	(at	least	its	major	teachings)	correctly,	then	it	is	appropriate	to	say	that	the	knowledge	we	attain	from	Scripture	is	more
certain	than	any	other	knowledge	we	have.
5
See	beginning	of	
chapter	7
	for	definitions	of	general	revelation	and	special	revelation.
6
The	Swiss	theologian	Karl	Barth	(1886–1968)	denied	that	natural	man	can	know	anything	of	God	through	the	general	revelation
found	in	nature,	but	insisted	that	knowledge	of	God	can	only	come	through	a	knowledge	of	God’s	grace	in	Christ.	His	radical
rejection	of	natural	revelation	has	not	gained	wide	acceptance;	it	rests	upon	the	unlikely	view	that	Rom.	1:21	refers	to	a
knowledge	of	God	in	theory	but	not	in	fact.
7
The	consciences	of	unbelievers	will	be	suppressed	or	hardened	in	various	areas	of	morality,	depending	on	cultural	influences	and
personal	circumstances.	A	cannibalistic	society,	for	example,	will	have	many	members	whose	consciences	are	hardened	and
insensitive	with	regard	to	the	evil	of	murder,	while	modern	American	society,	for	example,	exhibits	very	little	sensitivity	of
conscience	with	regard	to	the	evil	of	falsehood	in	speech,	or	disrespect	for	parental	authority,	or	sexual	immorality.	Moreover,
individuals	who	repeatedly	commit	a	certain	sin	will	often	find	the	pangs	of	conscience	diminishing	after	time:	a	thief	may	feel
very	guilty	after	his	first	or	second	robbery	but	feel	little	guilt	after	his	twentieth.	The	witness	of	conscience	is	still	there	in	each
case,	but	it	is	suppressed	through	repeated	wickedness.
8
For	an	extensive	discussion	of	the	history	of	the	doctrine	of	general	revelation	and	its	basis	in	Scripture,	see	Bruce	Demarest,
General	Revelation	
(Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1982);	see	also	the	excellent	treatment	of	this	doctrine	in	Gordon	R.	Lewis	and
Bruce	A.	Demarest,	
Integrative	Theology,	
1:59–91.
9
See	
chapter	2
,	for	a	discussion	of	God’s	words	of	personal	address,	God’s	words	spoken	through	the	lips	of	human	beings,	and
God’s	words	in	Scripture,	all	of	which	fall	in	the	category	of	special	revelation.
10
In	the	New	Testament,	we	should	also	note	that	it	is	specifically	the	Word	of	God	that	is	said	to	be	the	agent	that	God	uses	in
giving	people	spiritual	life	(James	1:18;	1	Peter	1:23).
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	8
The	Four	Characteristics	of	Scripture:	(4)
Sufficiency
Is	the	Bible	enough	for	knowing	what	God	wants	us	to	think	or
do?
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
Are	we	to	look	for	other	words	from	God	in	addition	to	those	we
have	in	Scripture?	The	doctrine	of	the	sufficiency	of	Scripture
addresses	this	question.
A.	Definiton	of	the	Sufficiency	of	Scripture
We	can	define	the	sufficiency	of	Scripture	as	follows:	
The
sufficiency	of	Scripture	means	that	Scripture	contained	all	the
words	of	God	he	intended	his	people	to	have	at	each	stage	of
redemptive	history,	and	that	it	now	contains	everything	we	need
God	to	tell	us	for	salvation,	for	trusting	him	perfectly,	and	for
obeying	him	perfectly.
This	definition	emphasizes	that	it	is	in	Scripture	alone	that	we	are	to
search	for	God’s	words	to	us.	It	also	reminds	us	that	God	considers
what	he	has	told	us	in	the	Bible	to	be	enough	for	us,	and	that	we
should	rejoice	in	the	great	revelation	that	he	has	given	us	and	be
content	with	it.
Significant	scriptural	support	and	explanation	of	this	doctrine	is
found	in	Paul’s	words	to	Timothy,	“from	childhood	you	have	been
acquainted	with	the	sacred	writings	which	are	
able	to	instruct	you
for	salvation	
through	faith	in	Christ	Jesus”	(2	Tim.	3:15).	The
context	shows	that	“sacred	writings”	here	means	the	written	words
of	Scripture	(2	Tim.	3:16).	This	is	an	indication	that	the	words	of
God	which	we	have	in	Scripture	are	all	the	words	of	God	we	need
in	order	to	be	saved:	these	words	are	able	to	make	us	wise	“for
salvation.”	This	is	confirmed	by	other	passages	that	talk	about	the
words	of	Scripture	as	the	means	God	uses	to	bring	us	to	salvation
(James	1:18;	1	Peter	1:23).
Other	passages	indicate	that	the	Bible	is	sufficient	to	equip	us	for
living	the	Christian	life.	Once	again	Paul	writes	to	Timothy,	“All
scripture	is	inspired	by	God	and	profitable	for	teaching,	for	reproof,
for	correction,	and	for	training	in	righteousness,	
that	the	man	of
God	may	be	complete,	equipped	for	every	good	work”	
(2	Tim.
3:16–17).
Here	Paul	indicates	that	one	purpose	for	which	God	caused
Scripture	to	be	written	is	to	train	us	that	we	might	be	“equipped	for
every	good	work.”	If	there	is	any	“good	work”	that	God	wants	a
Christian	to	do,	this	passage	indicates	that	God	has	made	provision
in	his	Word	for	training	the	Christian	in	it.	Thus,	there	is	no	“good
work”	that	God	wants	us	to	do	other	than	those	that	are	taught
somewhere	in	Scripture:	it	can	equip	us	for	
every	
good	work.
A	similar	teaching	is	found	in	Psalm	119:	“Blessed	are	those	whose
way	is	
blameless	
who	
walk	in	the	law	of	the	L
ORD
!”	
(v.	1).	This
verse	shows	an	equivalence	between	being	“blameless”	and
“walking	in	the	law	of	the	L
ORD
”:	those	who	are	blameless	are
those	who	walk	in	the	law	of	the	Lord.	Here	again	is	an	indication
that	all	that	God	requires	of	us	is	recorded	in	his	written	Word:
simply	to	do	all	that	the	Bible	commands	us	is	to	be	blameless	in
God’s	sight.
To	be	morally	perfect	in	God’s	sight,	then,	what	must	we	do	in
addition	to	what	God	commands	us	in	Scripture?	Nothing!	Nothing
at	all!	If	we	simply	keep	the	words	of	Scripture	we	will	be
“blameless”	and	we	will	be	doing	“every	good	work”	that	God
expects	of	us.
B.	We	Can	Find	All	That	God	Has	Said	on	Particular	Topics,	
and	We	Can	Find	Answers	to	Our	Questions
Of	course,	we	realize	that	we	will	never	perfectly	obey	all	of
Scripture	in	this	life	(see	James	3:2;	1	John	1:8–10;	
and	chapter	24
,
below).	Thus,	it	may	not	at	first	seem	very	significant	to	say	that	all
we	have	to	do	is	what	God	commands	us	in	the	Bible,	since	we	will
never	be	able	to	obey	it	all	in	this	life	anyway.	But	the	truth	of	the
sufficiency	of	Scripture	is	of	great	significance	for	our	Christian
lives,	for	it	enables	us	to	
focus	
our	search	for	God’s	words	to	us	on
the	Bible	alone	and	saves	us	from	the	endless	task	of	searching
through	all	the	writings	of	Christians	throughout	history,	or	through
all	the	teachings	of	the	church,	or	through	all	the	subjective	feelings
and	impressions	that	come	to	our	minds	from	day	to	day,
1
	in	order
to	find	what	God	requires	of	us.	In	a	very	practical	sense,	it	means
that	we	are	able	to	come	to	clear	conclusions	on	many	teachings	of
Scripture.	For	example,	though	it	requires	some	work,	it	is	possible
to	find	all	the	biblical	passages	that	are	directly	relevant	to	the
matters	of	marriage	and	divorce,	or	the	responsibilities	of	parents	to
children,	or	the	relationship	between	a	Christian	and	civil
government.
This	doctrine	means,	moreover,	that	it	is	possible	to	collect	all	the
passages	that	directly	relate	to	doctrinal	issues	such	as	the
atonement,	or	the	person	of	Christ,	or	the	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in
the	believer’s	life	today.	In	these	and	hundreds	of	other	moral	and
doctrinal	questions,	the	biblical	teaching	about	the	sufficiency	of
Scripture	gives	us	confidence	that	we	
will	be	able	to	find	
what	God
requires	us	to	think	or	to	do	in	these	areas.	In	many	of	these	areas
we	can	attain	confidence	that	we,	together	with	the	vast	majority	of
the	church	throughout	history,	have	found	and	correctly	formulated
what	God	wants	us	to	think	or	to	do.	Simply	stated,	the	doctrine	of
the	sufficiency	of	Scripture	tells	us	that	it	is	possible	to	study
systematic	theology	and	ethics	and	find	answers	to	our	questions.
At	this	point	we	differ	from	Roman	Catholic	theologians,	who
would	say	that	we	have	not	found	all	that	God	says	to	us	about	any
particular	subject	until	we	have	also	listened	to	the	official	teaching
of	the	church	throughout	its	history.	We	would	respond	that
although	the	history	of	the	church	may	help	us	to	
understand	
what
God	says	to	us	in	the	Bible,	never	in	church	history	has	God	
added
to	the	teachings	or	commands	of	Scripture:	Nowhere	in	church
history	outside	of	Scripture	has	God	
added	
anything	that	he
requires	us	to	believe	or	to	do.	Scripture	is	sufficient	to	equip	us	for
“every	good	work,”	and	to	walk	in	its	ways	is	to	be	“blameless”	in
God’s	sight.
At	this	point	we	also	differ	from	nonevangelical	theologians	who
are	not	convinced	that	the	Bible	is	God’s	Word	in	any	unique	or
absolutely	authoritative	sense,	and	who	would	therefore	search	not
only	the	Bible	but	also	many	other	early	Christian	writings	in	an
attempt	to	find	not	so	much	
what	God	said	
to	mankind	but	rather
what	many	early	Christians	experienced	
in	their	relationship	with
God.	They	would	not	expect	to	arrive	at	a	single,	unified	conclusion
about	what	God	wants	us	to	think	or	do	with	regard	to	any
particular	question,	but	to	discover	a	variety	of	opinions	and
viewpoints	collected	around	some	major	unifying	ideas.	All	of	the
viewpoints	held	by	early	Christians	in	any	of	the	early	churches
would	then	be	potentially	valid	viewpoints	for	Christians	to	hold
today	as	well.	To	this	we	would	reply	that	our	search	for	answers	to
theological	and	ethical	questions	is	not	a	search	to	find	what
various	believers	have	thought	in	the	history	of	the	church,	but	is	a
quest	to	find	and	understand	what	God	himself	says	to	us	in	his
own	words,	which	are	found	in	Scripture	and	only	in	Scripture.
C.	The	Amount	of	Scripture	Given	Was	Sufficient	at	Each	Stage	of
Redemptive	History
The	doctrine	of	the	sufficiency	of	Scripture	does	not	imply	that	
God
cannot	add	any	more	words	to	those	he	has	already	spoken	to	his
people.	It	rather	implies	that	
man	
cannot	add	on	his	own	initiative
any	words	to	those	that	God	has	already	spoken.	Furthermore,	it
implies	that	in	fact	
God	has	not	spoken	
to	mankind	any	more	words
which	he	requires	us	to	believe	or	obey	other	than	those	which	we
have	now	in	the	Bible.
This	point	is	important,	for	it	helps	us	to	understand	how	God	could
tell	his	people	that	his	words	to	them	were	sufficient	at	many
different	points	in	the	history	of	redemption,	and	how	he	could
nevertheless	add	to	those	words	later.	For	example,	in	Deuteronomy
29:29	Moses	says,	“The	secret	things	belong	to	the	L
ORD
	our	God;
but	the	things	that	are	revealed	belong	to	us	and	to	our	children	for
ever,	that	we	may	do	all	the	words	of	this	law.”
This	verse	reminds	us	that	God	has	always	taken	the	initiative	in
revealing	things	to	us.	He	has	decided	what	to	reveal	and	what	not
to	reveal.	At	each	stage	in	redemptive	history,	the	things	that	God
had	revealed	were	for	his	people	for	that	time,	and	they	were	to
study,	believe,	and	obey	those	things.	With	further	progress	in	the
history	of	redemption,	more	of	God’s	words	were	added,	recording
and	interpreting	that	history	(see	
chapter	3
	above	regarding	the
development	of	the	canon).
Thus,	at	the	time	of	the	death	of	Moses,	the	first	five	books	of	our
Old	Testament	were	sufficient	for	God’s	people	at	that	time.	But
God	directed	later	authors	to	add	more	so	that	Scripture	would	be
sufficient	for	believers	in	subsequent	times.	For	Christians	today,
the	words	from	God	that	we	have	in	the	Old	and	New	Testaments
together	are	sufficient	for	us	during	the	church	age.	After	the	death,
resurrection,	and	ascension	of	Christ,	and	the	founding	of	the	early
church	as	recorded	in	the	New	Testament,	and	the	assembling	of	the
books	of	the	New	Testament	canon,	no	further	central	redemptive
acts	of	God	in	history	(acts	that	have	direct	relevance	for	all	God’s
people	for	all	subsequent	time)	have	occurred,	and	thus	no	further
words	of	God	have	been	given	to	record	and	interpret	those	acts	for
us.
This	means	that	we	can	cite	Scripture	texts	from	throughout	the
canon	to	show	that	the	principle	of	the	sufficiency	of	God’s
revelation	to	his	people	at	each	particular	time	has	remained	the
same.	In	this	sense,	these	verses	that	talk	about	the	sufficiency	of
Scripture	in	earlier	periods	are	directly	applicable	to	us	as	well,
even	though	the	extent	of	the	Bible	to	which	they	refer	in	our
situation	is	greater	than	the	extent	of	the	Scripture	to	which	they
referred	in	their	original	setting.	The	following	texts	from	Scripture
thus	apply	to	us	also	in	that	sense:
You	shall	not	add	to	the	word	which	I	command	you,	
nor	take	from	it;
that	you	may	keep	the	commandments	of	the	L
ORD
	your	God	which	I
command	you.	(Deut.	4:2)
Everything	that	I	command	you	you	shall	be	careful	to	do;	
you	shall	not
add	to	it	or	take	from	it.	
(Deut.	12:32)
Every	word	of	God	proves	true;	he	is	a	shield	to	those	who	take	refuge
in	him.	
Do	not	add	to	his	words,	
lest	he	rebuke	you,	and	you	be	found	a
liar.	(Prov.	30:5–6)
I	warn	everyone	who	hears	the	words	of	the	prophecy	of	this	book:	
if
anyone	adds	to	them,	
God	will	add	to	him	the	plagues	described	in	this
book,	and	if	anyone	takes	away	from	the	words	of	the	book	of	this
prophecy,	God	will	take	away	his	share	in	the	tree	of	life	and	in	the
holy	city,	which	are	described	in	this	book.	(Rev.	22:18–19)
2
D.	Practical	Applications	of	the	Sufficiency	of	Scripture
The	doctrine	of	the	sufficiency	of	Scripture	has	several	practical
applications	to	our	Christian	lives.	The	following	list	is	intended	to
be	helpful	but	not	exhaustive.
1.	The	sufficiency	of	Scripture	should	encourage	us	as	we	try	to
discover	what	God	would	have	us	to	
think	
(about	a	particular
doctrinal	issue)	or	to	
do	
(in	a	particular	situation).	We	should	be
encouraged	that	
everything	
God	wants	to	tell	us	about	that	question
is	to	be	found	in	Scripture.	This	does	not	mean	that	the	Bible
answers	all	the	questions	that	we	might	think	up,	for	“The	secret
things	belong	to	the	L
ORD
	our	God”	(Deut.	29:29).	But	it	does	mean
that	when	we	are	facing	a	problem	of	genuine	importance	to	our
Christian	life,	we	can	approach	Scripture	with	the	confidence	that
from	it	God	will	provide	us	with	guidance	for	that	problem.
There	will	of	course	be	some	times	when	the	answer	we	find	is	that
Scripture	does	not	speak	directly	to	our	question.	(This	would	be
the	case,	for	example,	if	we	tried	to	find	from	Scripture	what	“order
of	worship”	to	follow	on	Sunday	mornings,	or	whether	it	is	better	to
kneel	or	perhaps	to	stand	when	we	pray,	or	at	what	time	we	should
eat	our	meals	during	the	day,	etc.)	In	those	cases,	we	may	conclude
that	God	has	not	required	us	to	think	or	to	act	in	any	certain	way
with	regard	to	that	question	(except,	perhaps,	in	terms	of	more
general	principles	regarding	our	attitudes	and	goals).	But	in	many
other	cases	we	will	find	direct	and	clear	guidance	from	the	Lord	to
equip	us	for	“every	good	work”	(2	Tim.	3:17).
As	we	go	through	life,	frequent	practice	in	searching	Scripture	for
guidance	will	result	in	an	increasing	ability	to	find	accurate,
carefully	formulated	answers	to	our	problems	and	questions.
Lifelong	growth	in	understanding	Scripture	will	thus	include
growth	in	the	skill	of	rightly	understanding	the	Bible’s	teachings
and	applying	them	to	specific	questions.
2.	The	sufficiency	of	Scripture	reminds	us	that	
we	are	to	add
nothing	to	Scripture,	
and	that	
we	are	to	consider	no	other	writings
of	equal	value	to	Scripture.	
This	principle	is	violated	by	almost	all
cults	and	sects.	Mormons,	for	example,	claim	to	believe	the	Bible,
but	they	also	claim	divine	authority	for	the	
Book	of	Mormon.
Christian	Scientists	similarly	claim	to	believe	the	Bible,	but	in
practice	they	hold	the	book	
Science	and	Health	With	a	Key	to	the
Scriptures,	
by	Mary	Baker	Eddy,	on	a	par	with	Scripture	or	above	it
in	authority.	Since	these	claims	violate	God’s	commands	not	to	add
to	his	words,	we	should	not	think	that	any	additional	words	from
God	to	us	would	be	found	in	these	writings.	Even	in	Christian
churches	a	similar	error	is	sometimes	made	when	people	go	beyond
what	Scripture	says	and	assert	with	great	confidence	new	ideas
about	God	or	heaven,	basing	their	teachings	not	on	Scripture	but	on
their	own	speculation	or	even	on	claimed	experiences	of	dying	and
coming	back	to	life.
3.	The	sufficiency	of	Scripture	also	tells	us	that	
God	does	not
require	us	to	believe	anything	about	himself	or	his	redemptive	work
that	is	not	found	in	Scripture.	
Among	writings	from	the	time	of	the
early	church	are	some	collections	of	alleged	sayings	of	Jesus	that
were	not	preserved	in	the	Gospels.	It	is	likely	that	at	least	some	of
the	“sayings	of	Jesus”	found	in	these	writings	are	rather	accurate
records	of	things	Jesus	actually	said	(though	it	is	now	impossible
for	us	to	determine	with	any	high	degree	of	probability	which
sayings	those	are).	But	it	does	not	really	matter	at	all	for	our
Christian	lives	if	we	never	read	any	of	those	sayings,	for	God	has
caused	to	be	recorded	in	Scripture	everything	that	we	need	to	know
about	Jesus’	words	and	deeds	in	order	to	trust	and	obey	him
perfectly.	Though	these	collections	of	sayings	do	have	some	limited
value	in	linguistic	research	and	perhaps	in	the	study	of	the	history
of	the	church,	they	are	of	no	direct	value	whatever	for	us	in	learning
what	we	should	believe	about	the	life	and	teachings	of	Christ,	or	in
formulating	our	doctrinal	or	ethical	convictions.
4.	The	sufficiency	of	Scripture	shows	us	that	
no	modern	revelations
from	God	are	to	be	placed	on	a	level	equal	to	Scripture	in	authority.
At	various	times	throughout	the	history	of	the	church,	and
particularly	in	the	modern	charismatic	movement,	people	have
claimed	that	God	has	given	revelations	through	them	for	the	benefit
of	the	church.	However	we	may	evaluate	such	claims,
3
	we	must	be
careful	never	to	allow	(in	theory	or	in	practice)	the	placing	of	such
revelations	on	a	level	equal	to	Scripture.
4
	We	must	insist	that	God
does	not	require	us	to	believe	anything	about	himself	or	his	work	in
the	world	that	is	contained	in	these	revelations	but	not	in	Scripture.
And	we	must	insist	that	God	does	not	require	us	to	obey	any	moral
directives	that	come	to	us	through	such	means	but	that	are	not
confirmed	by	Scripture.	The	Bible	contains	everything	we	need
God	to	tell	us	for	trusting	and	obeying	him	perfectly.
5
It	should	also	be	noted	at	this	point	that	whenever	challenges	to	the
sufficiency	of	Scripture	have	come	in	the	form	of	other	documents
to	be	placed	alongside	Scripture	(whether	from	extrabiblical
Christian	literature	of	the	first	century	or	from	the	accumulated
teachings	of	the	Roman	Catholic	Church,	or	from	the	books	of
various	cults	such	as	the	
Book	of	Mormon
),	the	result	has	always
been	(1)	to	deemphasize	the	teachings	of	the	Bible	itself	and	(2)	to
begin	to	teach	some	things	that	are	contrary	to	Scripture.	This	is	a
danger	of	which	the	church	must	constantly	be	aware.
5.	With	regard	to	living	the	Christian	life,	the	sufficiency	of
Scripture	reminds	us	that	
nothing	is	sin	that	is	not	forbidden	by
Scripture	either	explicitly	or	by	implication.	
To	walk	in	the	law	of
the	Lord	is	to	be	“blameless”	(Ps.	119:1).	Therefore	we	are	not	to
add	prohibitions	to	those	already	stated	in	Scripture.	From	time	to
time	there	may	be	situations	in	which	it	would	be	wrong,	for
example,	for	an	individual	Christian	to	drink	coffee	or	Coca-Cola,
or	to	attend	movie	theaters,	or	to	eat	meat	offered	to	idols	(see	1
Cor.	8–10),	but	unless	some	specific	teaching	or	some	general
principle	of	Scripture	can	be	shown	to	prohibit	these	(or	any	other
activities)	for	all	believers	for	all	time,	we	must	insist	that	these
activities	are	not	in	themselves	sinful	and	they	are	not	in	all
situations	prohibited	by	God	for	his	people.
6
This	also	is	an	important	principle	because	there	is	always	the
tendency	among	believers	to	begin	to	neglect	the	regular	daily
searching	of	Scripture	for	guidance	and	to	begin	to	live	by	a	set	of
written	or	unwritten	rules	(or	denominational	traditions)	concerning
what	one	does	or	does	not	do	in	the	Christian	life.
Furthermore,	whenever	we	add	to	the	list	of	sins	that	are	prohibited
by	Scripture	itself,	there	will	be	harm	to	the	church	and	to	the	lives
of	individual	believers.	The	Holy	Spirit	will	not	empower
obedience	to	rules	that	do	not	have	God’s	approval	from	Scripture,
nor	will	believers	generally	find	delight	in	obedience	to	commands
that	do	not	accord	with	the	laws	of	God	written	on	their	hearts.	In
some	cases,	Christians	may	repeatedly	and	earnestly	plead	with
God	for	“victory”	over	supposed	sins	that	are	in	fact	no	sins	at	all,
yet	no	“victory”	will	be	given,	for	the	attitude	or	action	in	question
is	in	fact	not	a	sin	and	is	not	displeasing	to	God.	Great
discouragement	in	prayer	and	frustration	in	the	Christian	life
generally	may	be	the	outcome.
In	other	cases,	continued	or	even	increasing	disobedience	to	these
new	“sins”	will	result,	together	with	a	false	sense	of	guilt	and	a
resulting	alienation	from	God.	Often	there	arises	an	increasingly
uncompromising	and	legalistic	insistence	on	these	new	rules	on	the
part	of	those	who	
do	
follow	them,	and	genuine	fellowship	among
believers	in	the	church	will	fade	away.	Evangelism	will	often	be
stifled,	for	the	silent	proclamation	of	the	gospel	that	comes	from	the
lives	of	believers	will	at	least	
seem	
(to	outsiders)	to	include	the
additional	requirement	that	one	must	fit	this	uniform	pattern	of	life
in	order	to	become	a	member	of	the	body	of	Christ.
One	clear	example	of	such	an	addition	to	the	commands	of
Scripture	is	found	in	the	opposition	of	the	Roman	Catholic	Church
to	“artificial”	methods	of	birth	control,	a	policy	that	finds	no	valid
support	in	Scripture.	Widespread	disobedience,	alienation,	and	false
guilt	have	been	the	result.	Yet	such	is	the	propensity	of	human
nature	to	make	such	rules	that	other	examples	can	probably	be
found	in	the	written	or	unwritten	traditions	of	almost	every
denomination.
6.	The	sufficiency	of	Scripture	also	tells	us	that	
nothing	is	required
of	us	by	God	that	is	not	commanded	in	Scripture	either	explicitly	or
by	implication.	
This	reminds	us	that	the	focus	of	our	search	for
God’s	will	ought	to	be	on	Scripture,	rather	than	on	seeking
guidance	through	prayer	for	changed	circumstances	or	altered
feelings	or	direct	guidance	from	the	Holy	Spirit	apart	from
Scripture.	It	also	means	that	if	someone	
claims	
to	have	a	message
from	God	telling	us	what	we	ought	to	do,	we	need	never	assume
that	it	is	sin	to	disobey	such	a	message	unless	it	can	be	confirmed
by	the	application	of	Scripture	itself	to	our	situation.
The	discovery	of	this	great	truth	could	bring	tremendous	joy	and
peace	to	the	lives	of	thousands	of	Christians	who,	spending
countless	hours	seeking	God’s	will	outside	of	Scripture,	are	often
uncertain	about	whether	they	have	found	it.	In	fact,	many	Christians
today	have	very	little	confidence	in	their	ability	to	discover	God’s
will	with	any	degree	of	certainty.	Thus,	there	is	little	striving	to	do
God’s	will	(for	who	can	know	it?)	and	little	growth	in	holiness
before	God.
The	opposite	ought	to	be	true.	Christians	who	are	convinced	of	the
sufficiency	of	Scripture	should	begin	eagerly	to	seek	and	find	God’s
will	in	Scripture.	They	should	be	eagerly	and	regularly	growing	in
obedience	to	God,	knowing	great	freedom	and	peace	in	the
Christian	life.	Then	they	would	be	able	to	say	with	the	psalmist:
I	will	keep	your	law	continually,
for	ever	and	ever;
and	
I	shall	walk	at	liberty,
for	I	have	sought	your	precepts.	.	.	.
Great	peace	have	those	who	love	your	law;
nothing	can	make	them	stumble.	(Ps.	119:44–45,	165)
7.	The	sufficiency	of	Scripture	reminds	us	that	in	our	doctrinal	and	ethical
teaching	we	should	
emphasize	what	Scripture	emphasizes	and	be	content	with
what	God	has	told	us	in	Scripture.	
There	are	some	subjects	about	which	God
has	told	us	little	or	nothing	in	the	Bible.	We	must	remember	that	“The	secret
things	belong	to	the	L
ORD
	our	God”	(Deut.	29:29)	and	that	God	has	revealed
to	us	in	Scripture	exactly	what	he	deemed	right	for	us.	We	must	accept	this
and	not	think	that	Scripture	is	something	less	than	it	should	be,	or	begin	to
wish	that	God	had	given	us	much	more	information	about	subjects	on	which
there	are	very	few	scriptural	references.	Of	course,	there	will	be	some
situations	where	we	are	confronted	with	a	particular	problem	that	requires	a
great	deal	of	attention,	far	greater	than	the	emphasis	that	it	receives	in	the
teaching	of	Scripture.	But	those	situations	should	be	relatively	infrequent	and
should	not	be	representative	of	the	general	course	of	our	lives	or	ministries.
It	is	characteristic	of	many	cults	that	they	emphasize	obscure
portions	or	teachings	of	Scripture	(one	thinks	of	the	Mormon
emphasis	on	baptism	for	the	dead,	a	subject	that	is	mentioned	in
only	one	verse	in	the	Bible	[1	Cor.	15:29],	in	a	phrase	whose	exact
meaning	is	apparently	impossible	now	to	determine	with	certainty).
But	a	similar	error	was	made	by	an	entire	generation	of	liberal	New
Testament	scholars	in	the	earlier	part	of	this	century,	who	devoted
most	of	their	scholarly	lives	to	a	futile	search	for	the	sources
“behind”	our	present	gospel	narratives	or	to	a	search	for	the
“authentic”	sayings	of	Jesus.
Unfortunately,	a	similar	pattern	has	too	often	occurred	among
evangelicals	within	various	denominations.	The	doctrinal	matters
that	have	divided	evangelical	Protestant	denominations	from	one
another	have	almost	uniformly	been	matters	on	which	the	Bible
places	relatively	little	emphasis,	and	matters	in	which	our
conclusions	must	be	drawn	from	skillful	inference	much	more	than
from	direct	biblical	statements.	For	example,	abiding
denominational	differences	have	occurred	or	have	been	maintained
over	the	“proper”	form	of	church	government,	the	exact	nature	of
Christ’s	presence	in	the	Lord’s	Supper,	the	exact	sequence	of	the
events	surrounding	Christ’s	return,	the	categories	of	persons	who
should	be	admitted	to	the	Lord’s	Supper,	the	way	in	which	God
planned	that	the	merits	of	Christ’s	death	would	be	applied	to
believers	and	not	applied	to	unbelievers,	the	proper	subjects	for
baptism,	the	correct	understanding	of	the	“baptism	in	the	Holy
Spirit,”	and	so	forth.
We	should	not	say	that	these	issues	are	all	unimportant,	nor	should
we	say	that	Scripture	gives	no	solution	to	any	of	them	(indeed,	with
respect	to	many	of	them	a	specific	solution	will	be	defended	in
subsequent	chapters	of	this	book).	However,	since	all	of	these
topics	receive	
relatively	little	direct	emphasis	in	Scripture,	
it	is
ironic	and	tragic	that	denominational	leaders	will	so	often	give
much	of	their	lives	to	defending	precisely	the	minor	doctrinal	points
that	make	their	denominations	different	from	others.	Is	such	effort
really	motivated	by	a	desire	to	bring	unity	of	understanding	to	the
church,	or	might	it	stem	in	some	measure	from	human	pride,	a
desire	to	retain	power	over	others,	and	an	attempt	at	self-
justification,	which	is	displeasing	to	God	and	ultimately	unedifying
to	the	church?
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
In	the	process	of	growing	in	the	Christian	life	and	deepening	your
relationship	with	God,	approximately	how	much	emphasis	have	you
placed	on	reading	the	Bible	itself	and	how	much	on	reading	other
Christian	books?	In	seeking	to	know	God’s	will	for	your	daily	life,	what
is	the	relative	emphasis	you	have	put	on	reading	Scripture	itself	and	on
reading	other	Christian	books?	Do	you	think	the	doctrine	of	the
sufficiency	of	Scripture	will	cause	you	to	place	more	emphasis	on
reading	Scripture	itself?
2
.	
What	are	some	of	the	doctrinal	or	moral	questions	you	are	wondering
about?	Has	this	chapter	increased	your	confidence	in	the	ability	of
Scripture	to	provide	a	clear	answer	for	some	of	those	questions?
3
.	
Have	you	ever	wished	that	the	Bible	would	say	more	than	it	does	about	a
certain	subject?	Or	less?	What	do	you	think	motivated	that	wish?	After
reading	this	chapter,	how	would	you	approach	someone	who	expressed
such	a	wish	today?	How	is	God’s	wisdom	shown	in	the	fact	that	he	chose
not	to	make	the	Bible	a	great	deal	longer	or	a	great	deal	shorter	than	it
actually	is?
4
.	
If	the	Bible	contains	everything	we	need	God	to	tell	us	for	obeying	him
perfectly,	what	is	the	role	of	the	following	in	helping	us	to	find	God’s
will	for	ourselves:	advice	from	others;	sermons	or	Bible	classes;	our
consciences;	our	feelings;	the	leading	of	the	Holy	Spirit	as	we	sense	him
prompting	our	inward	desires	and	subjective	impressions;	changes	in
circumstances;	the	gift	of	prophecy	(if	you	think	it	can	function	today)?
5
.	
In	the	light	of	this	chapter,	how	would	you	find	God’s	“perfect”	will	for
your	life?	Is	it	possible	that	there	would	be	more	than	one	“perfect”
choice	in	many	decisions	we	make?	(Consider	Ps.	1:3	and	1	Cor.	7:39	in
seeking	an	answer.)
6
.	
Have	there	been	times	when	you	have	understood	the	principles	of
Scripture	well	enough	with	regard	to	a	specific	situation	but	have	not
known	the	facts	of	the	situation	well	enough	to	know	how	to	apply	those
scriptural	principles	correctly?	In	seeking	to	know	God’s	will,	can	there
be	any	other	things	we	need	to	know	except	(a)	the	teaching	of	Scripture
and	(b)	the	facts	of	the	situation	in	question,	together	with	(c)	skill	in
applying	(a)	to	(b)	correctly?	What	then	is	the	role	of	prayer	in	seeking
guidance?	What	should	we	pray	for?
SPECIAL	TERMS
blameless
	
sufficiency	of	Scripture
	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the
bibliography	to	chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be
found	in	
Appendix	4
.)
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1930			Thomas,	120–23
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1875–76			Pope,	1:206–9
1983			Carter,	1:290–91
3.			Baptist
1767			Gill,	1:25–30
1983–85			Erickson,	256–59
4.			Dispensational
1947			Chafer,	1:60
5.			Lutheran
1917–24			Pieper,	1:317–19
1934			Mueller,	137–38
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1559			Calvin,	1:93–96	(1.9)
1861			Heppe,	28–31
1871–73			Hodge,	1:182–83
1937–66			Murray,	
CW,	
1:16–22;	
PC,	
11–26
1938			Berkhof,	
Intro.,	
167–69
7.			Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988–92			Williams,	1:43–44
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955			Ott	(no	explicit	treatment)
2.			Roman	Catholic:	Post-Vatican	II
1980			McBrien,	1:62–77
Other	Works
Friesen,	Garry,	and	J.	Robin	Maxson.	
Decision	Making	and	the	Will	of
God.	
Portland,	Ore.:	Multnomah,	1981.
Packer,	J.	I.	“Scripture.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	627–31.
Weeks,	Noel.	
The	Sufficiency	of	Scripture.	
Edinburgh	and	Carlisle,	Pa.:
Banner	of	Truth,	1988.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
Psalm	119:1:	
Blessed	are	those	whose	way	is	blameless,	who	walk	in	the	law
of	the	L
ORD
!
HYMN
“How	Firm	a	Foundation”
Few	if	any	hymns	deal	specifically	with	the	sufficiency	of
Scripture,	perhaps	because	Christians	have	failed	to	realize	the
great	comfort	and	peace	that	this	doctrine	brings	to	the	Christian
life.	But	the	first	verse	of	the	following	hymn	contains	a	statement
of	this	doctrine.	It	begins	by	telling	us	that	God	has	laid	a	firm
foundation	for	our	faith	in	his	Word.	Then	it	says,	“What	more	can
he	say	than	to	you	he	hath	said	.	.	.	?”	The	rich	and	full	promises	of
God	throughout	Scripture	are	sufficient	for	our	every	need	in	every
circumstance.	This	should	be	great	cause	for	rejoicing!	The
subsequent	verses	contain	quotations,	paraphrases,	and	allusions	to
promises	of	God	that	are	scattered	throughout	Scripture,	many	of
them	from	Isaiah.	Verses	2–6	are	all	written	as	sentences	that	are
spoken	by	God	to	us,	and	when	we	sing	them	we	should	think	of
ourselves	singing	the	words	of	God’s	promises	to	others	in	the
congregation	for	their	comfort	and	encouragement.
How	firm	a	foundation,	ye	saints	of	the	Lord,
Is	laid	for	your	faith	in	his	excellent	Word!
What	more	can	he	say	than	to	you	he	hath	said,
You	who	unto	Jesus	for	refuge	have	fled?
You	who	unto	Jesus	for	refuge	have	fled?
“Fear	not,	I	am	with	thee,	O	be	not	dismayed;
I,	I	am	thy	God,	and	will	still	give	thee	aid;
I’ll	strengthen	thee,	help	thee,	and	cause	thee	to	stand,
Upheld	by	my	righteous,	omnipotent	hand,
Upheld	by	my	righteous,	omnipotent	hand.
“When	through	the	deep	waters	I	call	thee	to	go,
The	rivers	of	woe	shall	not	thee	overflow;
For	I	will	be	with	thee	thy	troubles	to	bless,
And	sanctify	to	thee	thy	deepest	distress,
And	sanctify	to	thee	thy	deepest	distress.
“When	through	fiery	trials	thy	pathway	shall	lie,
My	grace,	all	sufficient,	shall	be	thy	supply;
The	flame	shall	not	hurt	thee;	I	only	design
Thy	dross	to	consume,	and	thy	gold	to	refine,
Thy	dross	to	consume,	and	thy	gold	to	refine.
“E’en	down	to	old	age	all	my	people	shall	prove
My	sovereign,	eternal,	unchangeable	love;
And	when	hoary	hairs	shall	their	temples	adorn,
Like	lambs	they	shall	still	in	my	bosom	be	borne,
Like	lambs	they	shall	still	in	my	bosom	be	borne.
“The	soul	that	on	Jesus	hath	leaned	for	repose,
I	will	not,	I	will	not	desert	to	his	foes;
That	soul,	though	all	hell	should	endeavor	to	shake,
I’ll	never,	no,	never,	no,	never	forsake,
I’ll	never,	no,	never,	no,	never	forsake.”
FROM:	RIPPON’S	
SELECTION	OF	HYMNS,	
1787
NOTES
1
This	is	not	meant	to	imply	that	subjective	impressions	of	God’s	will	are	useless	or	that	they	should	be	ignored.	That	would
suggest	almost	a	deistic	view	of	God’s	(non-)involvement	in	the	lives	of	his	children	and	a	rather	mechanical,	impersonal	view	of
guidance.	God	can	and	indeed	does	use	subjective	impressions	of	his	will	to	remind	and	encourage	us	and	often	to	prompt	our
thoughts	in	the	right	direction	in	many	rapid	decisions	that	we	make	throughout	the	day—and	it	is	Scripture	itself	that	tells	us
about	these	subjective	factors	in	guidance	(see	Acts	16:6–7;	Rom.	8:9,	14,	16;	Gal.	5:16–18,	25).	Yet	these	verses	on	the
sufficiency	of	Scripture	teach	us	that	such	subjective	impressions	can	only	
remind	
us	of	moral	commands	that	are	already	in
Scripture,	or	bring	to	mind	facts	that	we	(in	theory	at	least)	could	have	known	or	did	know	otherwise;	they	can	never	add	to	the
commands	of	Scripture,	or	replace	Scripture	in	defining	what	God’s	will	is,	or	equal	Scripture	in	authority	in	our	lives.
Because	people	from	all	kinds	of	Christian	traditions	have	made	serious	mistakes	when	they	felt	confident	that	God	was	“leading
them”	to	make	a	particular	decision,	it	is	important	to	remember	that,	except	where	an	explicit	text	of	Scripture	applies	directly	to
a	situation,	we	can	never	have	100	percent	certainty	in	this	life	that	we	know	what	God’s	will	is	in	a	situation.	We	can	only	have
varying	degrees	of	confidence	in	different	situations.	Though	our	ability	to	discern	God’s	will	should	increase	as	we	grow	in
Christian	maturity,	we	will	inevitably	make	some	mistakes.	In	this	regard,	I	have	found	helpful	a	sentence	from	Edmund
Clowney:	“The	degree	of	certainty	we	have	with	regard	to	God’s	will	in	a	situation	is	directly	proportional	to	the	degree	of	clarity
we	have	as	to	how	the	Word	of	God	applies	to	the	situation”	(from	a	personal	conversation,	November	1992).
2
The	primary	reference	of	this	verse	is	of	course	to	the	book	of	Revelation	itself,	but	its	placement	here	at	the	very	end	of	the	only
book	that	could	come	last	in	the	New	Testament	canon	can	hardly	be	accidental.	Thus,	a	secondary	application	of	this	verse	to	the
entire	canon	does	not	seem	inappropriate	(see	the	discussion	in	
chapter	3
).
3
See	
chapter	52
,	on	the	possibility	of	some	kinds	of	revelation	from	God	continuing	today	when	the	canon	is	closed,	and
especially	
chapter	53
,	on	the	gift	of	prophecy.
4
In	fact,	the	more	responsible	spokesmen	for	the	modern	charismatic	movement	seem	generally	to	agree	with	this	caution:	see
Wayne	Grudem,	
The	Gift	of	Prophecy	in	the	New	Testament	and	Today	
(Eastbourne,	England:	Kingsway,	and	Westchester,	Ill.:
Crossway,	1988),	pp.	110–12;	245–50.
5
I	do	not	wish	to	imply	at	this	point	that	I	am	adopting	a	“cessationist”	view	of	spiritual	gifts	(that	is,	a	view	that	holds	that	certain
gifts,	such	as	prophecy	and	speaking	in	tongues,	ceased	when	the	apostles	died).	I	only	wish	at	this	point	to	state	that	there	is	a
danger	in	explicitly	or	even	implicitly	giving	these	gifts	a	status	that	effectively	challenges	the	authority	or	the	sufficiency	of
Scripture	in	Christians’	lives.	More	detailed	discussion	of	these	gifts	is	given	in	
chapter	53	below,	and	in	Wayne	Grudem,	
The	Gift
of	Prophecy	in	the	New	Testament	and	Today	
(see	n.	4	above).
6
Of	course,	human	societies	such	as	nations,	churches,	families,	etc.	can	make	rules	for	the	conduct	of	their	own	affairs	(such	as
“Children	in	this	family	may	not	watch	television	on	weeknights”).	No	such	rule	can	be	found	in	Scripture,	nor	is	it	likely	that
such	a	rule	could	be	demonstrated	by	implication	from	the	principles	of	Scripture.	Yet	obedience	to	these	rules	is	required	by	God
because	Scripture	tells	us	to	be	subject	to	governing	authorities	(Rom.	13:1–7;	1	Peter	2:13–3:6;	et	al.).	A	denial	of	the	sufficiency
of	Scripture	would	occur	only	if	someone	attempted	to	give	the	rule	a	generalized	application	outside	of	the	situation	in	which	it
should	appropriately	function	(“No	member	of	our	church	should	watch	TV	on	weeknights”	or	“No	Christian	should	watch	TV	on
weeknights”).	In	such	a	case	it	has	become	not	a	rule	for	conduct	in	one	specific	situation	but	a	moral	command	apparently
intended	to	apply	to	all	Christians	no	matter	what	their	situation.	We	are	not	free	to	add	such	rules	to	Scripture	and	to	attempt	to
impose	them	on	all	the	believers	over	whom	we	have	influence,	nor	can	the	church	as	a	whole	attempt	to	do	this.	(Here	again,
Roman	Catholics	would	differ	and	would	say	that	God	gives	to	the	church	the	authority	to	impose	moral	rules	in	addition	to
Scripture	on	all	the	members	of	the	church.)
OceanofPDF.com
Part	2
The	Doctrine	of	God
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	9
The	Existence	of	God
How	do	we	know	that	God	exists?
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
How	do	we	know	that	God	exists?	The	answer	can	be	given	in	two
parts:	First,	all	people	have	an	inner	sense	of	God.	Second,	we
believe	the	evidence	that	is	found	in	Scripture	and	in	nature.
A.	Humanity’s	Inner	Sense	of	God
All	persons	everywhere	have	a	deep,	inner	sense	that	God	exists,
that	they	are	his	creatures,	and	that	he	is	their	Creator.	Paul	says
that	even	Gentile	unbelievers	“knew	God”	but	did	not	honor	him	as
God	or	give	thanks	to	him	(Rom.	1:21).	He	says	that	wicked
unbelievers	have	“exchanged	the	truth	about	God	for	a	lie”	(Rom.
1:25),	implying	that	they	actively	or	willfully	rejected	some	truth
about	God’s	existence	and	character	that	they	knew.	Paul	says	that
“what	can	be	known	about	God	is	plain	to	them,”	and	adds	that	this
is	“because	God	has	shown	it	to	them”	(Rom.	1:19).
Yet	Scripture	also	recognizes	that	some	people	deny	this	inner	sense
of	God	and	even	deny	that	God	exists.	It	is	“the	
fool”	
who	says	in
his	heart,	“There	is	no	God”	(Ps.	14:1;	53:1).	It	is	the	wicked	person
who	first	“curses	and	renounces	the	L
ORD
”	and	then	in	pride
repeatedly	thinks	“there	is	no	God”	(Ps.	10:3–4).	These	passages
indicate	both	that	sin	leads	people	to	think	irrationally	and	to	deny
God’s	existence,	and	that	it	is	someone	who	is	thinking	irrationally
or	who	has	been	deceived	who	will	say,	“There	is	no	God.”
Paul	also	recognizes	that	sin	will	cause	people	to	
deny	
their
knowledge	of	God:	he	speaks	of	those	who	“by	their	wickedness
suppress	the	truth
”	(Rom.	1:18)	and	says	that	those	who	do	this	are
“without	excuse”	for	this	denial	of	God	(Rom.	1:20).	A	series	of
active	verbs	indicates	that	this	is	a	willful	suppression	of	the	truth
(Rom.	1:23,	25,	28,	32).
1
In	the	life	of	a	Christian	this	inner	awareness	of	God	becomes
stronger	and	more	distinct.	We	begin	to	know	God	as	our	loving
Father	in	heaven	(Rom.	8:15),	the	Holy	Spirit	bears	witness	with
our	spirits	that	we	are	children	of	God	(Rom.	8:16),	and	we	come	to
know	Jesus	Christ	living	within	our	hearts	(Eph.	3:17;	Phil.	3:8,	10;
Col.	1:27;	John	14:23).	The	intensity	of	this	awareness	for	a
Christian	is	such	that	though	we	have	not	seen	our	Lord	Jesus
Christ,	we	indeed	love	him	(1	Peter	1:8).
B.	Believing	the	Evidence	in	Scripture	and	Nature
In	addition	to	people’s	inner	awareness	of	God	that	bears	clear
witness	to	the	fact	that	God	exists,	clear	evidence	of	his	existence	is
to	be	seen	in	Scripture	and	in	nature.
The	evidence	that	God	exists	is	of	course	found	throughout	the
Bible.	In	fact,	the	Bible	everywhere	assumes	that	God	exists.	The
first	verse	of	Genesis	does	not	present	evidence	for	the	existence	of
God	but	begins	immediately	to	tell	us	what	he	has	done:	“In	the
beginning	God	created	the	heavens	and	the	earth.”	If	we	are
convinced	that	the	Bible	is	true,	then	we	know	from	the	Bible	not
only	that	God	exists	but	also	very	much	about	his	nature	and	his
acts.
The	world	also	gives	abundant	evidence	of	God’s	existence.	Paul
says	that	God’s	eternal	nature	and	deity	have	been	“clearly
perceived	in	the	things	that	have	been	made”	(Rom.	1:20).	This
broad	reference	to	“the	things	that	have	been	made”	suggests	that	in
some	sense	every	created	thing	gives	evidence	of	God’s	character.
Nevertheless,	it	is	man	himself,	created	in	the	image	of	God,	who
most	abundantly	bears	witness	to	the	existence	of	God:	whenever
we	meet	another	human	being,	we	should	(if	our	minds	are	thinking
correctly)	realize	that	such	an	incredibly	intricate,	skillful,
communicative	living	creature	could	only	have	been	created	by	an
infinite,	all-wise	Creator.
In	addition	to	the	evidence	seen	in	the	existence	of	living	human
beings,	there	is	further	excellent	evidence	in	nature.	The	“rains	and
fruitful	seasons”	as	well	as	the	“food	and	gladness”	that	all	people
experience	and	benefit	from	are	also	said	by	Barnabas	and	Paul	to
be	witnesses	to	God	(Acts	14:17).	David	tells	us	of	the	witness	of
the	heavens:	“
The	heavens	are	telling	the	glory	of	God;	
and	the
firmament	proclaims	his	handiwork.	Day	to	day	pours	forth	speech,
and	night	to	night	declares	knowledge”	(Ps.	19:1–2).	To	look
upward	into	the	sky	by	day	or	by	night	is	to	see	sun,	moon,	and
stars,	sky	and	clouds,	all	continually	declaring	by	their	existence
and	beauty	and	greatness	that	a	powerful	and	wise	Creator	has
made	them	and	sustains	them	in	their	order.
This	wide	variety	of	testimonies	to	God’s	existence	from	various
parts	of	the	created	world	suggests	to	us	that	in	one	sense
everything	that	exists	
gives	evidence	of	God’s	existence.	For	those
who	have	eyes	to	see	and	evaluate	the	evidence	correctly,	every	leaf
on	every	tree,	every	blade	of	grass,	every	star	in	the	sky,	and	every
other	part	of	creation	all	cry	out	continuously,	“God	made	me!	God
made	me!	God	made	me!”	If	our	hearts	and	minds	were	not	so
blinded	by	sin,	it	would	be	impossible	for	us	to	look	closely	at	a
leaf	from	any	tree	and	say,	“No	one	created	this:	it	just	happened.”
The	beauty	of	a	snowflake,	the	majestic	power	of	a	thunderstorm,
the	skill	of	a	honeybee,	the	refreshing	taste	of	cold	water,	the
incredible	abilities	of	the	human	hand—all	these	and	thousands	of
other	aspects	of	creation	simply	could	not	have	come	into	existence
apart	from	the	activity	of	an	all-powerful	and	all-wise	Creator.
Thus,	for	those	who	are	correctly	evaluating	the	evidence,
everything	
in	Scripture	and	
everything	
in	nature	proves	clearly	that
God	exists	and	that	he	is	the	powerful	and	wise	Creator	that
Scripture	describes	him	to	be.	Therefore,	when	we	believe	that	God
exists,	we	are	basing	our	belief	
not	
on	some	blind	hope	apart	from
any	evidence,	but	on	
an	overwhelming	amount	of	reliable	evidence
from	God’s	words	and	God’s	works.	
It	is	a	characteristic	of	true
faith	that	it	is	a	confidence	based	on	reliable	evidence,	and	faith	in
the	existence	of	God	shares	this	characteristic.
Furthermore,	these	evidences	can	all	be	seen	as	valid	proofs	for	the
existence	of	God,	even	though	some	people	reject	them.	This	does
not	mean	that	the	evidence	is	invalid	in	itself,	only	that	those	who
reject	the	evidence	are	evaluating	it	wrongly.
C.	Traditional	“Proofs”	for	the	Existence	of	God
The	traditional	“proofs”	for	the	existence	of	God	that	have	been
constructed	by	Christian	(and	some	non-Christian)	philosophers	at
various	points	in	history	are	in	fact	attempts	to	analyze	the
evidence,	especially	the	evidence	from	nature,	in	extremely	careful
and	logically	precise	ways,	in	order	to	persuade	people	that	it	is	not
rational	to	reject	the	idea	of	God’s	existence.	If	it	is	true	that	sin
causes	people	to	think	
irrationally,	
then	these	proofs	are	attempts	to
cause	people	to	think	
rationally	
or	correctly	about	the	evidence	for
God’s	existence,	in	spite	of	the	irrational	tendencies	caused	by	sin.
Most	of	the	traditional	proofs	for	the	existence	of	God	can	be
classified	in	four	major	types	of	argument:
1.	The	
cosmological	argument	
considers	the	fact	that	every	known
thing	in	the	universe	has	a	cause.	Therefore,	it	reasons,	the	universe
itself	must	also	have	a	cause,	and	the	cause	of	such	a	great	universe
can	only	be	God.
2.	The	
teleological	argument	
is	really	a	subcategory	of	the
cosmological	argument.	It	focuses	on	the	evidence	of	harmony,
order,	and	design	in	the	universe,	and	argues	that	its	design	gives
evidence	of	an	intelligent	purpose	(the	Greek	word	
telos	
means
“end”	or	“goal”	or	“purpose”).	Since	the	universe	appears	to	be
designed	with	a	purpose,	there	must	be	an	intelligent	and
purposeful	God	who	created	it	to	function	this	way.
3.	The	
ontological	argument	
begins	with	the	idea	of	God,	who	is
defined	as	a	being	“greater	than	which	nothing	can	be	imagined.”	It
then	argues	that	the	characteristic	of	existence	must	belong	to	such
a	being,	since	it	is	greater	to	exist	than	not	to	exist.
2
4.	The	
moral	argument	
begins	from	man’s	sense	of	right	and
wrong,	and	of	the	need	for	justice	to	be	done,	and	argues	that	there
must	be	a	God	who	is	the	source	of	right	and	wrong	and	who	will
someday	mete	out	justice	to	all	people.
Because	all	of	these	arguments	are	based	on	facts	about	the	creation
that	are	indeed	true	facts,	we	may	say	that	all	of	these	proofs	(when
carefully	constructed)	are,	in	an	objective	sense,	valid	proofs.	They
are	valid	in	that	they	correctly	evaluate	the	evidence	and	correctly
reason	to	a	true	conclusion—in	fact,	the	universe	
does	
have	God	as
its	cause,	and	it	
does	
show	evidence	of	purposeful	design,	and	God
does	
exist	as	a	being	greater	than	which	nothing	can	be	imagined,
and	God	
has	
given	us	a	sense	of	right	and	wrong	and	a	sense	that
his	judgment	is	coming	someday.	The	
actual	facts	
referred	to	in
these	proofs,	therefore,	are	
true,	
and	in	that	sense	the	proofs	are
valid,	even	though	not	all	people	are	persuaded	by	them.
But	in	another	sense,	if	“valid”	means	“able	to	compel	agreement
even	from	those	who	begin	with	false	assumptions,”	then	of	course
none	of	the	proofs	is	valid	because	not	one	of	them	is	able	to
compel	agreement	
from	
everyone	who	considers	them.	
Yet	this	is
because	many	unbelievers	either	begin	with	invalid	assumptions	or
do	not	reason	correctly	from	the	evidence.	It	is	not	because	the
proofs	are	invalid	in	themselves.
The	value	of	these	proofs,	then,	lies	chiefly	in	overcoming	some	of
the	intellectual	objections	of	unbelievers.	They	cannot	bring
unbelievers	to	saving	faith,	for	that	comes	about	through	belief	in
the	testimony	of	Scripture.	But	they	can	help	overcome	objections
from	unbelievers,	and,	for	believers,	they	can	provide	further
intellectual	evidence	for	something	they	have	already	been
persuaded	of	from	their	own	inner	sense	of	God	and	from	the
testimony	of	Scripture.
D.	Only	God	Can	Overcome	Our	Sin	and	Enable	Us	
to	Be	Persuaded	of	His	Existence
Finally,	it	must	be	remembered	that	in	this	sinful	world	
God	must
enable	us	to	be	persuaded	
or	we	would	never	believe	in	him.	We
read	that	“the	god	of	this	world	has	
blinded	the	minds	of	the
unbelievers,	
to	keep	them	from	seeing	the	light	of	the	gospel	of	the
glory	of	Christ”	(2	Cor.	4:4).	Furthermore,	Paul	says	that	“since,	in
the	wisdom	of	God,	the	world	did	not	know	God	through	wisdom,
it	pleased	God	through	the	folly	of	what	we	preach	to	save	those
who	believe”	(1	Cor.	1:21).	In	this	sinful	world,	human	wisdom	is
inadequate	for	coming	to	know	God.	Thus,	Paul’s	preaching	came
“in	demonstration	of	the	Spirit	and	of	power,	
that	your	faith	might
not	rest	in	the	wisdom	of	men	but	in	the	power	of	God”	
(1	Cor.	2:5).
We	are	dependent	upon	God	to	remove	the	blindness	and
irrationality	caused	by	sin	and	to	enable	us	to	evaluate	the	evidence
rightly,	believe	what	Scripture	says,	and	come	to	saving	faith	in
Christ.
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
When	the	seraphim	around	God’s	throne	cry	out,	“Holy,	holy,	holy	is	the
L
ORD
	of	hosts;	
the	whole	earth	is	full	of	his	glory”	
(Isa.	6:3),	do	you
think	they	are	seeing	the	earth	from	a	somewhat	different	perspective
than	ours?	In	what	ways?	How	can	we	begin	to	see	the	world	more	from
this	perspective?
2
.	
When	is	your	inner	sense	of	God’s	existence	strongest?	Weakest?	Why?
In	which	of	these	situations	are	you	in	a	condition	more	like	the	one	you
will	have	in	heaven?	In	which	of	these	types	of	situations	are	your
judgments	more	reliable?
3
.	
Look	at	your	hand.	Is	it	more	or	less	complex	than	a	wristwatch?	Is	it
logical	to	think	that	either	one	of	them	just	came	about	by	an	accidental
combination	of	elements?
4
.	
Do	most	people	today	believe	in	the	existence	of	God?	Has	this	been	true
throughout	history?	If	they	believe	that	God	exists,	why	have	they	not
worshiped	him	rightly?
5
.	
Why	do	some	people	deny	the	existence	of	God?	Does	Romans	1:18
suggest	there	is	often	a	moral	factor	influencing	their	intellectual	denial
of	God’s	existence	(cf.	Ps.	14:1–3)?	What	is	the	best	way	to	approach
someone	who	denies	the	existence	of	God?
SPECIAL	TERMS
cosmological	argument
	
	
ontological	argument
inner	sense	of	God
	
	
teleological	argument
moral	argument
	
	
	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the
bibliography	to	chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be
found	in	
Appendix	4
.)
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92			Litton,	42–58
1930			Thomas,	3–14
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1875–76			Pope,	1:233–48
1892–94			Miley,	1:57–136
1940			Wiley,	1:217–40
1960			Purkiser,	39–59
1983			Carter,	1:107–11
1983–			Cottrell,	1:419–42
1987–90			Oden,	1:131–80
3.			Baptist
1767			Gill,	1:1–15
1887			Boyce,	8–46
1907			Strong,	52–110
1917			Mullins,	35–48
1983–85			Erickson,	156–74
4.			Dispensational
1947			Chafer,	1:129–78
1949			Thiessen,	21–42
1986			Ryrie,	25–34
5.			Lutheran
1917–24			Pieper,	1:371–74
1934			Mueller,	143–47
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1559			Calvin,	1:43–69	(1.3–5)
1861			Heppe,	47–56
1871–73			Hodge,	1:191–334
1878			Dabney,	5–26
1887–1921			Warfield,	
SSW,	
1:34–40
1889			Shedd,	1:195–248
1909			Bavinck,	
DG,	
41–80
1938			Berkhof,	19–28
1962			Buswell,	1:72–161
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955			Ott,	13–17
2.			Roman	Catholic:	Post-Vatican	II
1980			McBrien	(no	explicit	treatment)
Other	Works
Brown,	Colin.	
Philosophy	and	the	Christian	Faith.	
Downers	Grove,	Ill.:
InterVarsity	Press,	1968.
Charnock,	Stephen.	
The	Existence	and	Attributes	of	God.	
Repr.	ed.
Evansville,	Ind.:	Sovereign	Grace	Book	Club,	n.d.,	pp.	11–67	(first
published	1655–80).
Clark,	Gordon	H.	
Religion,	Reason,	and	Revelation.	
Nutley,	N.J.:	Craig
Press,	1961.
France,	R.	T.	
The	Living	God.	
Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,
1970.
Geisler,	Norman.	
Christian	Apologetics.	
Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1976.
_____,	and	Paul	Feinberg.	
Introduction	to	Philosophy:	A	Christian
Perspective.	
Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1980.
Hackett,	Stuart.	
The	Resurrection	of	Theism.	
Chicago:	Moody,	1957.
Hoover,	A.	J.	“God,	Arguments	for	the	Existence	of.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	447–
51.
Lewis,	Gordon	R.	
Testing	Christianity’s	Truth	Claims.	
Chicago:	Moody,
1976.
Mavrodes,	George	I.	
Belief	in	God.	
New	York:	Random	House,	1970.
McDowell,	Josh.	
Evidence	That	Demands	a	Verdict.	
San	Bernardino,
Calif.:	Here’s	Life,	1972,	1979.
Packer,	J.	I.	“God.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	274–77.
Sire,	James.	
The	Universe	Next	Door:	A	Basic	World	View	Catalog.
Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,	1976.
Van	Til,	Cornelius.	
The	Defense	of	the	Faith.	
Philadelphia:	Presbyterian
and	Reformed,	1955.
Yandell,	Keith.	
Christianity	and	Philosophy.	Studies	in	a	Christian	World
View.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	and	Leicester:	Inter-Varsity	Press,	1984.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
Romans	1:18–20:	
For	the	wrath	of	God	is	revealed	from	heaven	against	all
ungodliness	and	wickedness	of	men	who	by	their	wickedness	suppress	the
truth.	For	what	can	be	known	about	God	is	plain	to	them,	because	God	has
shown	it	to	them.	Ever	since	the	creation	of	the	world	his	invisible	nature,
namely,	his	eternal	power	and	deity,	has	been	clearly	perceived	in	the	things
that	have	been	made.	So	they	are	without	excuse.
HYMN
“The	Spacious	Firmament	on	High”
This	hymn,	based	on	Psalm	19:1–4,	speaks	of	the	testimony	of	the
sun,	moon,	and	stars	to	their	Creator.	The	word	
firmament	
in	the
first	verse	refers	to	the	expanse	or	open	space	that	is	visible	to	us	as
we	look	upward	from	earth;	it	is	the	place	in	which	the	sun,	moon,
and	stars	exist,	and	might	be	translated	“sky”	or	“heavens.”	The
third	verse	reminds	us	that	though	these	heavenly	bodies	make	no
sounds	that	can	be	heard	by	our	physical	ears,	they	nonetheless
proclaim,	to	all	who	think	rightly	about	them,	“The	hand	that	made
us	is	divine.”
The	spacious	firmament	on	high,
With	all	the	blue	ethereal	sky,
And	spangled	heav’ns,	a	shining	frame,
Their	great	original	proclaim.
Th’	unwearied	sun,	from	day	to	day,
Does	his	Creator’s	pow’r	display,
And	publishes	to	every	land
The	work	of	an	Almighty	hand.
Soon	as	the	evening	shades	prevail,
The	moon	takes	up	the	wondrous	tale,
And	nightly	to	the	list’ning	earth
Repeats	the	story	of	her	birth;
Whilst	all	the	stars	that	round	her	burn,
And	all	the	planets	in	their	turn,
Confirm	the	tidings	as	they	roll,
And	spread	the	truth	from	pole	to	pole.
What	though	in	solemn	silence	all
Move	round	this	dark	terrestrial	ball?
What	though	nor	real	voice	nor	sound
Amidst	their	radiant	orbs	be	found?
In	reason’s	ear	they	all	rejoice,
And	utter	forth	a	glorious	voice;
For	ever	singing,	as	they	shine,
“The	hand	that	made	us	is	divine.”
AUTHOR:	JOSEPH	ADDISON,	1712
Alternative	hymns:	“I	Sing	th’	Almighty	Power	of	God”;	“This	Is
My	Father’s	World”;	or	“Day	Is	Dying	in	the	West”
NOTES
1
Some	people	deny	that	they	have	an	inner	sense	of	God.	But	their	awareness	of	God	will	often	make	itself	evident	in	a	time	of
personal	crisis,	when	deep-seated	convictions	of	the	heart	show	themselves	in	outward	words	and	deeds.	Several	years	ago	I	was	a
passenger	in	a	car	with	several	friends,	including	a	young	woman	who	in	conversation	was	firmly	denying	that	she	had	any	inner
awareness	of	God’s	existence.	Shortly	thereafter	the	car	hit	a	patch	of	ice	and	spun	around	in	a	complete	circle	at	high	speed.
Before	the	car	came	to	rest	in	a	large	snow	bank	(with	no	serious	damage)	this	same	woman	could	be	heard	distinctly	calling	out,
“Lord	Jesus,	please	help	us!”	The	rest	of	us	looked	at	her	in	amazement	when	we	realized	that	her	agnosticism	had	been	disproved
by	words	from	her	own	mouth.
2
The	stem	
ont-	
in	“ontological”	is	derived	from	a	Greek	word	that	means	“being.”
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	10
The	Knowability	of	God
Can	we	really	know	God?	How	much	of	God	can	we	know?
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
A.	The	Necessity	for	God	to	Reveal	Himself	to	Us
If	we	are	to	know	God	at	all,	it	is	necessary	that	he	reveal	himself	to
us.	Even	when	discussing	the	revelation	of	God	that	comes	through
nature,	Paul	says	that	what	can	be	known	about	God	is	plain	to
people	“because	
God	has	shown	it	to	them”	
(Rom.	1:19).	The
natural	creation	reveals	God	because	he	chose	to	have	himself
revealed	in	this	way.
With	regard	to	the	personal	knowledge	of	God	that	comes	in
salvation,	this	idea	is	even	more	explicit.	Jesus	says,	“No	one
knows	the	Son	except	the	Father,	and	no	one	knows	the	Father
except	the	Son	and	
any	one	to	whom	the	Son	chooses	to	reveal
him”	
(Matt.	11:27).	This	kind	of	knowledge	of	God	is	not	found
through	human	effort	or	wisdom:	“in	the	wisdom	of	God,	
the	world
did	not	know	God	through	wisdom”	
(1	Cor.	1:21;	cf.	1	Cor.	2:14;	2
Cor.	4:3–4;	John	1:18).
The	necessity	for	God	to	reveal	himself	to	us	also	is	seen	in	the	fact
that	sinful	people	misinterpret	the	revelation	about	God	found	in
nature.	Those	who	“by	their	wickedness	suppress	the	truth”	are
those	who	“became	futile	in	their	thinking	and	their	senseless	minds
were	darkened	.	.	.	they	exchanged	the	truth	about	God	for	a	lie”
(Rom.	1:18,	21,	25).	Therefore,	we	need	Scripture	if	we	are	to
interpret	natural	revelation	rightly.	Hundreds	of	false	religions	in
the	world	are	evidence	of	the	way	sinful	people,	without	guidance
from	Scripture,	will	always	misunderstand	and	distort	the	revelation
about	God	found	in	nature.	But	the	Bible	alone	tells	us	
how	to
understand	the	testimony	about	God	from	nature.	
Therefore	we
depend	on	God’s	active	communication	to	us	in	Scripture	for	our
true	knowledge	of	God.
B.	We	Can	Never	Fully	Understand	God
Because	God	is	infinite	and	we	are	finite	or	limited,	we	can	never
fully	understand	God.	In	this	sense	God	is	said	to	be
incomprehensible,	
where	the	term	
incomprehensible	
is	used	with	an
older	and	less	common	sense,	“unable	to	be	
fully	
understood.”	This
sense	must	be	clearly	distinguished	from	the	more	common
meaning,	“unable	to	be	understood.”	It	is	not	true	to	say	that	God	is
unable	to	be	understood,	but	it	is	true	to	say	that	he	cannot	be
understood	fully	or	exhaustively.
Psalm	145	says,	“Great	is	the	L
ORD
,	and	greatly	to	be	praised,	and
his	greatness	is	unsearchable”	
(Ps.	145:3).	God’s	greatness	is
beyond	searching	out	or	discovering:	it	is	too	great	ever	to	be	fully
known.	Regarding	God’s	understanding,	Psalm	147	says,	“Great	is
our	L
ORD
,	and	abundant	in	power;	
his	understanding	is	beyond
measure”	
(Ps.	147:5).	We	will	never	be	able	to	measure	or	fully
know	the	understanding	of	God:	it	is	far	too	great	for	us	to	equal	or
to	understand.	Similarly,	when	thinking	of	God’s	knowledge	of	all
his	ways,	David	says,	“
Such	knowledge	is	too	wonderful	for	me;	
it
is	high,	I	cannot	attain	it”	(Ps.	139:6;	cf.	v.	
17).
Paul	implies	this	incomprehensibility	of	God	when	he	says	that	“the
Spirit	searches	everything,	even	the	depths	of	God,”	and	then	goes
on	to	say	that	“no	one	comprehends	the	things
1
	of	God	except	the
Spirit	of	God”	(1	Cor.	2:10–12).	At	the	end	of	a	long	discussion	on
the	history	of	God’s	great	plan	of	redemption,	Paul	breaks	forth	into
praise:	“O	the	depth	of	the	riches	and	wisdom	and	knowledge	of
God!	How	unsearchable	are	his	judgments	and	how	inscrutable	his
ways!”	(Rom.	11:33).
These	verses	allow	us	to	take	our	understanding	of	the
incomprehensibility	of	God	one	step	further.	It	is	not	only	true	that
we	can	never	fully	understand	God;	it	is	also	true	that	
we	can	never
fully	understand	any	single	thing	about	God.	
His	greatness	(Ps.
145:3),	his	understanding	(Ps.	147:5),	his	knowledge	(Ps.	139:6),
his	riches,	wisdom,	judgments,	and	ways	(Rom.	11:33)	are	
all
beyond	our	ability	to	understand	fully.	Other	verses	also	support
this	idea:	as	the	heavens	are	higher	than	the	earth,	so	are	God’s
ways	higher	than	our	ways	and	his	thoughts	than	our	thoughts	(Isa.
55:9).	Job	says	that	God’s	great	acts	in	creating	and	sustaining	the
earth	are	“but	the	outskirts	of	his	ways,”	and	exclaims,	“how	small
a	whisper	do	we	hear	of	him!	But	the	thunder	of	his	power	who	can
understand?”	(Job	26:14;	cf.	11:7–9;	37:5).
Thus,	we	may	know	
something	
about	God’s	love,	power,	wisdom,
and	so	forth.	But	we	can	never	know	his	love	completely	or
exhaustively.	
We	can	never	know	his	power	exhaustively.	We	can
never	know	his	wisdom	exhaustively,	and	so	forth.	In	order	to	know
any	single	thing	about	God	exhaustively	we	would	have	to	know	it
as	he	himself	knows	it.	That	is,	we	would	have	to	know	it	in	its
relationship	to	everything	else	about	God	and	in	its	relationship	to
everything	else	about	creation	throughout	all	eternity!	We	can	only
exclaim	with	David,	“Such	knowledge	is	too	wonderful	for	me;	it	is
high,	I	cannot	attain	it”	(Ps.	139:6).
This	doctrine	of	God’s	incomprehensibility	has	much	positive
application	for	our	own	lives.	It	means	that	we	will	never	be	able	to
know	“too	much”	about	God,	for	we	will	never	run	out	of	things	to
learn	about	him,	and	we	will	thus	never	tire	in	delighting	in	the
discovery	of	more	and	more	of	his	excellence	and	of	the	greatness
of	his	works.
Even	in	the	age	to	come,	when	we	are	freed	from	the	presence	of
sin,	we	will	never	be	able	fully	to	understand	God	or	any	one	thing
about	him.	This	is	seen	from	the	fact	that	the	passages	cited	above
attribute	God’s	incomprehensibility	not	to	our	sinfulness	but	to	his
infinite	greatness.	It	is	because	we	are	finite	and	God	is	infinite	that
we	will	never	be	able	to	understand	him	fully.
2
	For	all	eternity	we
will	be	able	to	go	on	increasing	in	our	knowledge	of	God	and
delighting	ourselves	more	and	more	in	him,	saying	with	David	as
we	learn	more	and	more	of	God’s	own	thoughts,	“How	precious	to
me	are	your	thoughts,	O	God!	How	vast	is	the	sum	of	them!	If	I
would	count	them,	they	are	more	than	the	sand”	(Ps.	139:17–18).
But	if	this	is	so	in	eternity	future,	then	it	certainly	must	be	so	in	this
life.	In	fact,	Paul	tells	us	that	if	we	are	to	lead	a	life	“worthy	of	the
Lord,	fully	pleasing	to	him,”	it	must	be	one	in	which	we	are
continually	“
increasing	in	the	knowledge	of	God”	
(Col.	1:10).	We
should	be	growing	in	our	knowledge	of	God	through	our	entire
lives.
If	we	ever	wished	to	make	ourselves	equal	to	God	in	knowledge,	or
if	we	wished	to	derive	satisfaction	from	the	sin	of	intellectual	pride,
the	fact	that	we	will	never	stop	growing	in	knowledge	of	God
would	be	a	discouraging	thing	for	us—we	might	become	frustrated
that	God	is	a	subject	of	study	that	we	will	never	master!	But	if	we
rather	delight	in	the	fact	that	God	alone	is	God,	that	he	is	always
infinitely	greater	than	we	are,	that	we	are	his	creatures	who	owe
him	worship	and	adoration,	then	this	will	be	a	very	encouraging
idea.	Even	though	we	spend	time	in	Bible	study	and	fellowship
with	God	every	day	of	our	lives,	there	will	always	be	more	to	learn
about	God	and	his	relationships	to	us	and	the	world,	and	thus	there
will	always	be	more	that	we	can	be	thankful	for	and	for	which	we
can	give	him	praise.	When	we	realize	this,	the	prospect	of	a	lifelong
habit	of	regular	Bible	study,	and	even	the	prospect	of	a	lifetime	of
study	of	theology	(if	it	is	theology	that	is	solidly	grounded	in	God’s
Word),	should	be	a	very	exciting	prospect	to	us.	To	study	and	to
teach	God’s	Word	in	both	formal	and	informal	ways	will	always	be
a	great	privilege	and	joy.
C.	Yet	We	Can	Know	God	Truly
Even	though	we	cannot	know	God	exhaustively,	we	can	know	
true
things	about	God.	In	fact,	
all	that	Scripture	tells	us	
about	God	is
true.	It	is	true	to	say	that	God	is	love	(1	John	4:8),	that	God	is	light
(1	John	1:5),	that	God	is	spirit	(John	4:24),	that	God	is	just	or
righteous	(Rom.	3:26),	and	so	forth.	To	say	this,	does	not	imply	or
require	that	we	know	everything	about	God	or	about	his	love	or	his
righteousness	or	any	other	attribute.	When	I	say	that	I	have	three
sons,	that	statement	is	entirely	true,	even	though	I	do	not	know
everything	about	my	sons,	nor	even	about	myself.	So	it	is	in	our
knowledge	of	God:	we	have	true	knowledge	of	God	from	Scripture,
even	though	we	do	not	have	exhaustive	knowledge.	We	can	know
some	of	God’s	thoughts—even	many	of	them—from	Scripture,	and
when	we	know	them,	we,	like	David,	find	them	to	be	“precious”
(Ps.	139:17).
Even	more	significantly,	it	is	
God	himself	
whom	we	know,	not
simply	facts	about	him	or	actions	he	does.	We	make	a	distinction
between	knowing	
facts	
and	knowing	
persons	
in	our	ordinary	use	of
English.	It	would	be	true	for	me	to	say	that	I	know	many	facts
about	the	president	of	the	United	States,	but	it	would	not	be	true	for
me	to	say	that	I	know	
him.	
To	say	that	I	know	him	would	imply	that
I	had	met	him	and	talked	with	him,	and	that	I	had	developed	at	least
to	some	degree	a	personal	relationship	with	him.
Now	some	people	say	that	we	cannot	know	God	himself,	but	that
we	can	only	know	facts	about	him	or	know	what	he	does.	Others
have	said	that	we	cannot	know	God	as	he	is	in	himself,	but	we	can
only	know	him	as	he	relates	to	us	(and	there	is	an	implication	that
these	two	are	somehow	different).	But	Scripture	does	not	speak	that
way.	Several	passages	speak	of	our	
knowing	God	himself.	
We	read
God’s	words	in	Jeremiah:
Let	not	the	wise	man	glory	in	his	wisdom,	let	not	the	mighty	man
glory	in	his	might,	let	not	the	rich	man	glory	in	his	riches;	but	let	him
who	glories	glory	in	this,	that	he	understands	and	
knows	me,	
that	I	am
the	L
ORD
	who	practices	steadfast	love,	justice,	and	righteousness	in
the	earth;	for	in	these	things	I	delight,	says	the	L
ORD
.	(Jer.	9:23–24)
Here	God	says	that	the	source	of	our	joy	and	sense	of	importance
ought	to	come	not	from	our	own	abilities	or	possessions,	but	from
the	fact	that	we	know	him.	Similarly,	in	praying	to	his	Father,	Jesus
could	say,	“And	this	is	eternal	life,	that	
they	know	you	
the	only	true
God,	and	Jesus	Christ	whom	you	have	sent”	(John	17:3).	The
promise	of	the	new	covenant	is	that	all	shall	know	God,	“from	the
least	of	them	to	the	greatest”	(Heb.	8:11),	and	John’s	first	epistle
tells	us	that	the	Son	of	God	has	come	and	given	us	understanding
“
to	know	him	
who	is	true”	(1	John	5:20;	see	also	Gal.	4:9;	Phil.
3:10;	1	John	2:3;	4:8).	John	can	say,	“I	write	to	you,	children,
because	
you	know	the	Father”	
(1	John	2:13).
The	fact	that	we	do	know	God	himself	is	further	demonstrated	by
the	realization	that	the	richness	of	the	Christian	life	includes	a
personal	relationship	with	God.	As	these	passages	imply,	we	have	a
far	greater	privilege	than	mere	knowledge	of	facts	about	God.	We
speak	to	God	in	prayer,	and	he	speaks	to	us	through	his	Word.	We
commune	with	him	in	his	presence,	we	sing	his	praise,	and	we	are
aware	that	he	personally	dwells	among	us	and	within	us	to	bless	us
(John	14:23).	Indeed,	this	personal	relationship	with	God	the
Father,	with	God	the	Son,	and	with	God	the	Holy	Spirit	may	be	said
to	be	the	greatest	of	all	the	blessings	of	the	Christian	life.
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
Sometimes	people	say	that	heaven	sounds	boring.	How	does	the	fact	that
God	is	incomprehensible	yet	knowable	help	to	answer	that	objection?
2
.	
How	can	we	be	sure	that	when	we	reach	heaven	God	will	not	tell	us	that
most	of	what	we	had	learned	about	him	was	wrong,	and	that	we	would
have	to	forget	what	we	had	learned	and	begin	to	learn	different	things
about	him?
3
.	
Do	you	want	to	go	on	knowing	God	more	and	more	deeply	for	all
eternity?	Why	or	why	not?	Would	you	like	sometime	to	be	able	to	know
God	exhaustively?	Why	or	why	not?
4
.	
Why	do	you	think	God	decided	to	reveal	himself	to	us?	Do	you	learn
more	about	God	from	his	revelation	in	nature	or	his	revelation	in
Scripture?	Why	do	you	think	it	is	that	God’s	thoughts	are	“precious”	to
us	(Ps.	139:17)?	Would	you	call	your	present	relationship	to	God	a
personal	relationship?	How	is	it	similar	to	your	relationships	with	other
people,	and	how	is	it	different?	What	would	make	your	relationship	with
God	better?
SPECIAL	TERMS
incomprehensible
	
	
knowable
	
	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the
bibliography	to	chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be
found	in	
Appendix	4
.)
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92			Litton	(no	explicit	treatment)
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1875–76			Pope,	1:242–48
1892–94			Miley,	1:137–58
1983–			Cottrell,	1:1–47,	306–87
1987–90			Oden,	1:317–74
3.			Baptist
1767			Gill,	2:352–64
1887			Boyce,	8–54
1917			Mullins,	35–48
1976–83			Henry,	2:17–167,	247–334;	5:375–409
1983–85			Erickson,	137–40,	177–81,	268–71
4.			Dispensational
1947			Chafer,	1:179–86
1986			Ryrie,	25–34
5.			Lutheran
1917–24			Pieper,	1:375–81
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1559			Calvin,	1:33–43	(1.1–2)
1871–73			Hodge,	1:191–202,	335–65
1909			Bavinck,	
DG,	
13–110
1938			Berkhof,	29–40
1962			Buswell,	1:29–30
7.		Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988–92			Williams,	1:29–46
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955			Ott,	17–24
2.			Roman	Catholic:	Post-Vatican	II
1980			McBrien	(no	explicit	treatment)
Other	Works
Bray,	Gerald	L.	
The	Doctrine	of	God.	
Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity
Press,	1993.
Charnock,	Stephen.	
The	Knowledge	of	God.	The	Complete	Works	of
Stephen	Charnock.	
Vol.	4.	Edinburgh:	James	Nichol,	1865.	Repr.	ed.:
Edinburgh:	Banner	of	Truth,	1985,	esp.	pp.	3–164.
Frame,	John	M.	
The	Doctrine	of	the	Knowledge	of	God.	
Phillipsburg,
N.J.:	Presbyterian	and	Reformed,	1987.
France,	R.	T.	
The	Living	God.	
Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,
1970.
Packer,	J.	I.	“God.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	274–77.
_____.	
Knowing	God.	
London:	Inter-Varsity	Press,	1973,	pp.	13–37.
Piper,	John.	
Desiring	God.	
Portland,	Ore.:	Multnomah,	1986.
Tozer,	A.	W.	
The	Knowledge	of	the	Holy.	
New	York:	Harper	and	Row,
1961.
Van	Til,	Cornelius.	
In	Defense	of	the	Faith,	
vol.	5:	
An	Introduction	to
Systematic	Theology.	
n.p.:	Presbyterian	and	Reformed,	1976,	pp.	159–99.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
(Verse	3	of	this	passage	tells	us	that	God	can	never	be	fully	known,
but	the	fact	that	David	is	praising	God	and	speaking	to	him	shows
also	that	he	does	know	true	things	about	God	and	does	have	a
personal	relationship	to	him.)
Psalm	145:1–3:
I	will	extol	you,	my	God	and	King,
and	bless	your	name	for	ever	and	ever.
Every	day	I	will	bless	you,
and	praise	your	name	for	ever	and	ever.
Great	is	the	L
ORD
,	and	greatly	to	be	praised,
and	his	greatness	is	unsearchable.
HYMN
“I	Will	Thee	Praise,	My	God,	O	King”
Throughout	the	history	of	the	church	Christians	have	enjoyed
rearranging	the	words	of	the	psalms	to	fit	some	poetic	meter	and
then	setting	these	psalms	to	music	for	personal	or	group	worship.
This	is	an	old	metrical	arrangement	of	the	words	to	Psalm	145,	set
to	the	familiar	melody	of	the	hymn,	“Jesus	Shall	Reign	Where’er
the	Sun.”	Stanza	2	speaks	of	God’s	incomprehensibility	(“The	Lord
is	great;	he	praise	exceeds;	his	greatness	fully	search	can	none”),
and	many	of	the	other	stanzas	speak	of	various	attributes	of	God
that	we	know	from	Scripture.	It	should	give	us	joy	to	sing	this	song,
knowing	both	that	we	are	singing	absolutely	true	things	about	God,
and	that	his	greatness	far	exceeds	any	praise	we	will	ever	be	able	to
sing	to	him.
I	will	thee	praise,	my	God,	O	King,
And	I	will	ever	bless	thy	name;
I	will	extol	thee	every	day
And	evermore	thy	praise	proclaim.
The	Lord	is	great;	he	praise	exceeds;
His	greatness	fully	search	can	none;
Race	shall	to	race	extol	thy	deeds
And	tell	thy	mighty	acts	each	one.
Upon	thy	glorious	majesty
And	wondrous	works	my	mind	shall	dwell;
Men	shall	recount	thy	dreadful	acts,
And	of	thy	greatness	I	will	tell.
They	utter	shall	abundantly
The	mem’ry	of	thy	goodness	great,
And	shall	sing	praises	cheerfully
While	they	thy	righteousness	relate.
Jehovah	very	gracious	is;
In	him	compassions	also	flow;
In	lovingkindness	he	is	great,
And	unto	anger	he	is	slow.
O’er	all	his	works	his	mercies	are;
The	Lord	is	good	to	all	that	live.
Praise,	Lord,	to	thee	thy	works	afford;
Thy	saints	to	thee	shall	praises	give.
FROM:	
THE	BOOK	OF	PSALMS	WITH	MUSIC
	
(PITTSBURGH:	REFORMED	PRESBYTERIAN	CHURCH	OF	NORTH	AMERICA,	1973),	
PSALM	145	(PP.	350–51)
Alternative	hymn:	“O	Worship	the	King”	(see	this	hymn	at	the	end
of	
chapter	12
)
NOTES
1
So	KJV,	quite	literally	translating	the	Greek	phrase	
ta	tou	theou.	
RSV,	NIV,	and	NASB	all	supply	the	word	
thoughts,	
because	the
parallel	expression	in	v.	
11,	
ta	tou	anthrōpou	
(“the	things	of	the	man”),	seems	to	require	that	we	supply	the	word	
thoughts	
as
necessary	to	the	context.	But	Paul’s	mention	of	“the	depths	of	God”	in	v.	
10	suggests	that	not	only	God’s	thoughts	but	all	of	God’s
being	is	referred	to	in	both	v.	
10	and	v.	
12.
2
This	is	not	contradicted	by	1	Cor.	13:12,	“Now	I	know	in	part;	then	I	shall	understand	fully,	even	as	I	have	been	fully
understood.”	The	phrase	“know	fully”	is	simply	an	attempt	to	translate	the	word	
epiginōskō,	
which	suggests	deeper	or	more
accurate	knowledge	(or	perhaps,	in	contrast	with	present	partial	knowledge,	knowledge	free	from	error	or	falsehood).	Paul	never
says	anything	like,	“Then	I	shall	know	all	things,”	which	would	have	been	very	easy	to	say	in	Greek	(
tote	epignōsomai	ta	panta
)
if	he	had	wished	to	do	so.
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	11
The	Character	of	God:	“Incommunicable”
Attributes
How	is	God	different	from	us?
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
A.	Introduction	to	the	Study	of	God’s	Character
1.
	Classifying	God’s	Attributes.
	When	we	come	to	talk	about	the	character
of	God,	we	realize	that	we	cannot	say	everything	the	Bible	teaches	us	about
God’s	character	at	once.	We	need	some	way	to	decide	which	aspect	of	God’s
character	to	discuss	first,	which	aspect	to	discuss	second,	and	so	forth.	In
other	words,	we	need	some	way	to	categorize	the	attributes	of	God.	This
question	is	not	as	unimportant	as	it	may	seem.	There	is	the	possibility	that	we
would	adopt	a	misleading	order	of	attributes	or	that	we	would	emphasize
some	attributes	so	much	that	others	would	not	be	presented	properly.
Several	different	methods	of	classifying	God’s	attributes	have	been	used.	In
this	chapter	we	will	adopt	probably	the	most	commonly	used	classification:
the	
incommunicable	attributes	
of	God	(that	is,	those	attributes	that	God	does
not	share	or	“communicate”	to	others)	and	the	
communicable	attributes	
of
God	(those	God	shares	or	“communicates”	with	us).
Examples	of	the	incommunicable	attributes	would	be	God’s	eternity	(God	has
existed	for	all	eternity,	but	we	have	not),	unchangeableness	(God	does	not
change,	but	we	do),	or	omnipresence	(God	is	everywhere	present,	but	we	are
present	only	in	one	place	at	one	time).	Examples	of	the	communicable
attributes	would	be	love	(God	is	love,	and	we	are	able	to	love	as	well),
knowledge	(God	has	knowledge,	and	we	are	able	to	have	knowledge	as	well),
mercy	(God	is	merciful,	and	we	are	able	to	be	merciful	too),	or	justice	(God	is
just	and	we,	too,	are	able	to	be	just).	This	classification	of	God’s	attributes
into	two	major	categories	is	helpful,	and	most	people	have	an	initial	sense	of
which	specific	attributes	should	be	called	incommunicable	and	which	should
be	called	communicable.	Thus	it	makes	sense	to	say	that	God’s	love	is
communicable	but	his	omnipresence	is	not.
However,	upon	further	reflection	we	realize	that	this	distinction,	although
helpful,	is	not	perfect.	That	is	because	there	is	no	attribute	of	God	that	is
completely	
communicable,	and	there	is	no	attribute	of	God	that	is	
completely
incommunicable!	This	will	be	evident	if	we	think	for	a	moment	about	some
things	we	already	know	about	God.
For	example,	God’s	
wisdom	
would	usually	be	called	a	communicable
attribute,	because	we	also	can	be	wise.	But	we	will	never	be	infinitely	wise	as
God	is.	His	wisdom	is	
to	some	extent	
shared	with	us,	but	it	is	never	
fully
shared	with	us.	Similarly,	we	can	share	God’s	
knowledge	
in	part,	yet	we	shall
never	share	it	fully,	for	God’s	thoughts	are	higher	than	ours	“as	the	heavens
are	higher	than	the	earth”	(Isa.	55:9).	We	can	imitate	God’s	love	and	share	in
that	attribute	to	some	degree,	but	we	will	never	be	infinitely	loving	as	God	is.
So	it	is	with	all	the	attributes	that	are	normally	called	“communicable
attributes”:	God	does	indeed	share	them	with	us	
to	some	degree,	
but	none	of
these	attributes	is	completely	communicable.	It	is	better	to	say	that	those
attributes	we	call	“communicable”	are	those	that	are	
more	shared	
with	us.
Those	attributes	we	call	“incommunicable”	are	better	defined	by	saying	that
they	are	attributes	of	God	that	are	
less	shared	
by	us.	Not	one	of	the
incommunicable	attributes	of	God	is	completely	without	some	likeness	in	the
character	of	human	beings.	For	example,	God	is	unchangeable,	while	we
change.	But	we	do	not	change	completely,	for	there	are	some	aspects	of	our
characters	that	remain	largely	unchanged:	our	individual	identities,	many	of
our	personality	traits,	and	some	of	our	long-term	purposes	remain
substantially	unchanged	over	many	years	(and	will	remain	largely	unchanged
once	we	are	set	free	from	sin	and	begin	to	live	in	God’s	presence	forever).
Similarly,	God	is	eternal,	and	we	are	subject	to	the	limitations	of	time.
However,	we	see	
some	
reflection	of	God’s	eternity	in	the	fact	that	we	will	live
with	him	forever	and	enjoy	eternal	life,	as	well	as	in	the	fact	that	we	have	the
ability	to	remember	the	past	and	to	have	a	strong	sense	of	awareness	of	the
future	(unlike	much	of	God’s	creation;	cf.	Eccl.	3:11).	God’s	attributes	of
independence	and	omnipresence	are	perhaps	those	that	are	least	easy	to	see
reflected	in	our	own	natures,	but	even	these	can	be	seen	to	be	faintly	reflected
in	us	when	we	compare	ourselves	with	much	of	the	rest	of	God’s	creation:	as
we	grow	to	adulthood	we	attain	some	degree	of	independence	from	others	for
our	existence;	and,	though	we	cannot	be	at	more	than	one	place	at	one	time,
we	have	the	ability	to	act	in	ways	that	have	effects	in	many	different	places	at
once	(this	again	sets	us	apart	from	most	of	the	rest	of	creation).
We	will	use	the	two	categories	of	“incommunicable”	and	“communicable”
attributes	then,	while	realizing	that	they	are	not	entirely	precise
classifications,	and	that	there	is	in	reality	much	overlap	between	the
categories.
2.	The	Names	of	God	in	Scripture.
	In	the	Bible	a	person’s	name	is	a
description	of	his	or	her	character.	Likewise,	the	names	of	God	in	Scripture
are	various	descriptions	of	his	character.	In	a	broad	sense,	then,	God’s	“name”
is	equal	to	all	that	the	Bible	and	creation	tell	us	about	God.	When	we	pray,
“Hallowed	be	your	
name”	
as	part	of	the	Lord’s	Prayer	(Matt.	6:9),	we	are
praying	that	people	would	speak	about	God	in	a	way	that	is	honoring	to	him
and	that	accurately	reflects	his	character.	This	honoring	of	God’s	name	can	be
done	with	actions	as	well	as	words,	for	our	actions	reflect	the	character	of	the
Creator	whom	we	serve	(Matt.	5:16).	To	honor	God’s	name	is	therefore	to
honor	him.	The	command,	“You	shall	not	take	the	
name	
of	the	L
ORD
	your
God	in	vain”	(Ex.	20:7)	is	a	command	that	we	not	dishonor	God’s	reputation
either	by	words	that	speak	of	him	in	a	foolish	or	misleading	way,	or	by
actions	that	do	not	reflect	his	true	character.
Now	the	Bible	does	give	many	individual	names	to	God,	all	of	which	reflect
some	true	aspect	of	his	character.	Many	of	these	names	are	taken	from	human
experience	or	emotions	in	order	to	describe	parts	of	God’s	character,	while
many	other	names	are	taken	from	the	rest	of	the	natural	creation.	In	a	sense,
all	of	these	expressions	of	God’s	character	in	terms	of	things	found	in	the
universe	are	“names”	of	God	because	they	tell	us	something	true	about	him.
Herman	Bavinck,	in	
The	Doctrine	of	God,
1
	gives	a	long	list	of	such
descriptions	of	God	taken	from	creation:	God	is	compared	to	a	lion	(Isa.
31:4),	an	eagle	(Deut.	32:11),	a	lamb	(Isa.	53:7),	a	hen	(Matt.	23:37),	the	sun
(Ps.	84:11),	the	morning	star	(Rev.	22:16),	a	light	(Ps.	27:1),	a	torch	(Rev.
21:23),	a	fire	(Heb.	12:29),	a	fountain	(Ps.	36:9),	a	rock	(Deut.	32:4),	a	hiding
place	(Ps.	119:114),	a	tower	(Prov.	18:10),	a	shadow	(Ps.	91:1),	a	shield	(Ps.
84:11),	a	temple	(Rev.	21:22),	and	so	forth.
Taken	from	human	experience,	Bavinck	finds	an	even	more	extensive	list,
which	is	reproduced	here	only	in	part:	God	is	called	bridegroom	(Isa.	61:10),
husband	(Isa.	54:5),	father	(Deut.	32:6),	judge	and	king	(Isa.	33:22),	man	of
war	(Ex.	15:3),	builder	and	maker	(Heb.	11:10),	shepherd	(Ps.	23:1),
physician	(Ex.	15:26),	and	so	forth.	Furthermore,	God	is	spoken	of	in	terms	of
human	actions	such	as	knowing	(Gen.	18:21),	remembering	(Gen.	8:1;	Ex.
2:24),	seeing	(Gen.	1:10),	hearing	(Ex.	2:24),	smelling	(Gen.	8:21),	tasting
(Ps.	11:5),	sitting	(Ps.	9:7),	rising	(Ps.	68:1),	walking	(Lev.	26:12),	wiping
away	tears	(Isa.	25:8),	and	so	forth.	Human	emotions	are	attributed	to	God,
such	as	joy	(Isa.	62:5),	grief	(Ps.	78:40;	Isa.	63:10),	anger	(Jer.	7:18–19),	love
(John	3:16),	hatred	(Deut.	16:22),	wrath	(Ps.	2:5),	and	so	forth.
Even	though	God	does	not	have	a	physical	body,
2
	Scripture	uses	various	parts
of	the	human	body	to	describe	God’s	activities	in	a	metaphorical	way.
Scripture	can	speak	of	God’s	face	or	countenance	(Ex.	33:20,	23;	Isa.	63:9;
Ps.	16:11;	Rev.	22:4),	eyes	(Ps.	11:4;	Heb.	4:13),	eyelids	(Ps.	11:4),	ears	(Ps.
55:1;	Isa.	59:1),	nose	(Deut.	33:10),	mouth	(Deut.	8:3),	lips	(Job	11:5),	tongue
(Isa.	30:27),	neck	(Jer.	18:17),	arms	(Ex.	15:16),	hand	(Num.	11:23),	finger
(Ex.	8:19),	heart	(Gen.	6:6),	foot	(Isa.	66:1),	and	so	forth.	Even	terms
describing	personal	characteristics	such	as	good,	merciful,	gracious,
righteous,	holy,	just,	and	many	more,	are	terms	whose	meaning	is	familiar	to
us	through	an	experience	of	these	qualities	in	other	human	beings.	And	even
those	terms	that	seem	least	related	to	creation,	such	as	eternity	or
unchangeableness,	are	understood	by	us	not	intuitively	but	by	negating
concepts	that	we	know	from	our	experience	(eternity	is	not	being	limited	by
time	and	unchangeableness	is	not	changing).
The	point	of	collecting	all	these	passages	is	to	show,	first,	that	in	one	sense	or
another	
all	of	creation	reveals	something	about	God	to	us,	
and	that	the	higher
creation,	especially	man	who	is	made	in	God’s	image,	reveals	him	more	fully.
The	second	reason	for	mentioning	this	long	list	is	to	show	that	all	that	we
know	about	God	from	Scripture	comes	to	us	in	terms	that	we	understand
because	they	describe	events	or	things	common	to	human	experience.	Using	a
more	technical	term,	we	can	say	that	
all	that	Scripture	says	about	God	uses
anthropomorphic	language—that	is,	language	that	speaks	of	God	in	human
terms.
3
	Sometimes	people	have	been	troubled	by	the	fact	that	there	is
anthropomorphic	language	in	Scripture.	But	this	should	not	be	troubling	to	us,
for,	if	God	is	going	to	teach	us	about	things	we	do	not	know	by	direct
experience	(such	as	his	attributes),	he	has	to	teach	us	in	terms	of	what	we	do
know.	This	is	why	all	that	Scripture	says	about	God	is	“anthropomorphic”	in	a
broad	sense	(speaking	of	God	either	in	human	terms	or	in	terms	of	the
creation	we	know).	This	fact	does	not	mean	that	Scripture	gives	us	wrong	or
misleading	ideas	about	God,	for	this	is	the	way	that	God	has	chosen	to	reveal
himself	to	us,	and	to	reveal	himself	truly	and	accurately.	Nonetheless,	it
should	caution	us	not	to	take	any	one	of	these	descriptions	by	itself	and
isolate	it	from	its	immediate	context	or	from	the	rest	of	what	Scripture	says
about	God.
4
	If	we	did	that,	we	would	run	the	risk	of	misunderstanding	or	of
having	an	imbalanced	or	inadequate	picture	of	who	God	is.	Each	description
of	one	of	God’s	attributes	must	be	understood	in	the	light	of	everything	else
that	Scripture	tells	us	about	God.	If	we	fail	to	remember	this,	we	will
inevitably	understand	God’s	character	wrongly.
For	example,	we	have	an	
idea	
of	love	from	human	experience.	That	helps	us
to	understand	what	Scripture	means	when	it	says	that	God	is	love,	but	our
understanding	of	the	meaning	of	“love”	when	applied	to	God	is	not	identical
with	our	experience	of	love	in	human	relationships.	So	we	must	learn	from
observing	how	God	acts	in	all	of	Scripture	and	from	the	other	attributes	of
God	that	are	given	in	Scripture,	as	well	as	from	our	own	real-life	experiences
of	God’s	love,	if	we	are	to	refine	our	idea	of	God’s	love	in	an	appropriate	way
and	avoid	misunderstanding.	Thus,	anthropomorphic	language	about	God	is
true	
when	it	occurs	in	Scripture,	but	it	can	be	understood	rightly	only	by
continual	reading	of	Scripture	throughout	our	lives	in	order	that	we	may
understand	this	language	in	the	context	of	all	of	Scripture.
There	is	yet	a	third	reason	for	pointing	out	the	great	diversity	of	descriptions
about	God	taken	from	human	experience	and	from	the	natural	world.	This
language	should	remind	us	that	
God	made	the	universe	so	that	it	would	show
forth	the	excellence	of	his	character,	
that	is,	that	it	would	show	forth	his	glory.
God	is	worthy	to	receive	glory	because	he	created	all	things	(Rev.	4:11);
therefore,	all	things	should	honor	him.
Psalm	148	is	an	example	of	all	creation	being	summoned	to	give	praise	to
God:
Praise	him,	sun	and	moon,
praise	him,	all	you	shining	stars!	.	.	.
Praise	the	L
ORD
	from	the	earth,
you	sea	monsters	and	all	deeps,
fire	and	hail,	snow	and	frost,
stormy	wind	fulfilling	his	command!
Mountains	and	all	hills,
fruit	trees	and	all	cedars!	.	.	.
Kings	of	the	earth	and	all	peoples.	.	.
Let	them	praise	the	name	of	the	Lord,
for	his	name	alone	is	exalted;
his	glory	is	above	earth	and	heaven.	(Ps.	148:3,	7–11,	13)
As	we	learn	about	God’s	character	from	Scripture,	it	should	open	our	eyes
and	enable	us	to	interpret	creation	rightly.	As	a	result,	we	will	be	able	to	see
reflections	of	the	excellence	of	God’s	character	everywhere	in	creation:	“the
whole	earth	is	full	of	his	glory”	(Isa.	6:3).
It	must	be	remembered	that	though	all	that	Scripture	tells	us	about	God	is
true,	it	is	not	exhaustive.	Scripture	does	not	tell	us	everything	about	God’s
character.	Thus,	we	will	never	know	God’s	
full	or	complete	“name”	
in	the
sense	that	we	will	never	understand	God’s	character	exhaustively.	We	will
never	know	all	there	is	to	know	about	God.	For	this	reason	theologians	have
sometimes	said,	“God	has	many	names,	yet	God	has	no	name.”	God	has	many
names	in	that	we	know	many	true	descriptions	of	his	character	from	Scripture,
but	God	has	no	name	in	that	we	will	never	be	able	to	describe	or	understand
all	of	his	character.
3.	Balanced	Definitions	of	God’s	Incommunicable	Attributes.
	The
incommunicable	attributes	of	God	are	perhaps	the	most	easily	misunderstood,
probably	because	they	represent	aspects	of	God’s	character	that	are	least
familiar	to	our	experience.	In	this	chapter,	therefore,	each	of	the
incommunicable	attributes	of	God	is	defined	with	a	two-part	sentence.	The
first	part	defines	the	attribute	under	discussion,	and	the	second	part	guards
against	misunderstanding	the	attribute	by	stating	a	balancing	or	opposite
aspect	that	relates	to	that	attribute.	For	example,	God’s	unchangeableness	is
defined	as	follows:	“God	is	unchanging	in	his	being,	perfections,	purposes,
and	promises,	
yet	
God	does	act,	and	he	acts	differently	in	response	to	different
situations.”	The	second	half	of	the	sentence	guards	against	the	idea	that
unchangeableness	means	inability	to	act	at	all.	Some	people	do	understand
unchangeableness	in	this	way,	but	such	an	understanding	is	inconsistent	with
the	biblical	presentation	of	God’s	unchangeableness.
B.	The	Incommunicable	Attributes	of	God
1.
	Independence.
	God’s	independence	is	defined	as	follows:	
God	does	not
need	us	or	the	rest	of	creation	for	anything,	yet	we	and	the	rest	of	creation	can
glorify	him	and	bring	him	joy.	
This	attribute	of	God	is	sometimes	called	his
self-existence	or	his	
aseity	
(from	the	Latin	words	
a	se,	
which	mean	“from
himself	”).
Scripture	in	several	places	teaches	that	God	does	not	need	any	part	of	creation
in	order	to	exist	or	for	any	other	reason.	God	is	absolutely	independent	and
self-sufficient.	Paul	proclaims	to	the	men	of	Athens,	“The	God	who	made	the
world	and	everything	in	it,	being	Lord	of	heaven	and	earth,	does	not	live	in
shrines	made	by	man,	
nor	is	he	served	by	human	hands,	as	though	he	needed
anything,	
since	he	himself	gives	to	all	men	life	and	breath	and	everything”
(Acts	17:24–25).	The	implication	is	that	God	does	not	need	anything	from
mankind.
God	asks	Job,	“Who	has	given	to	me,	that	I	should	repay	him?	
Whatever	is
under	the	whole	heaven	is	mine”	
(Job	41:11).	No	one	has	ever	contributed	to
God	anything	that	did	not	first	come	from	God	who	created	all	things.
Similarly,	we	read	God’s	word	in	Psalm	50,	“every	beast	of	the	forest	is	mine,
the	cattle	on	a	thousand	hills.	I	know	all	the	birds	of	the	air,	and	all	that	moves
in	the	field	is	mine.	If	I	were	hungry,	I	would	not	tell	you;	for	
the	world	and
all	that	is	in	it	is	mine”	
(Ps.	50:10–12).
People	have	sometimes	thought	that	God	created	human	beings	because	he
was	lonely	and	needed	fellowship	with	other	persons.	If	this	were	true,	it
would	certainly	mean	that	God	is	not	completely	independent	of	creation.	It
would	mean	that	God	would	
need	
to	create	persons	in	order	to	be	completely
happy	or	completely	fulfilled	in	his	personal	existence.
Yet	there	are	some	specific	indications	in	Jesus’	words	that	show	this	idea	to
be	inaccurate.	In	John	17:5,	Jesus	prays,	“Father,	glorify	me	in	your	own
presence	with	
the	glory	which	I	had	with	you	before	the	world	was	made.”
Here	is	an	indication	that	there	was	a	sharing	of	glory	between	the	Father	and
the	Son	before	creation.	Then	in	John	17:24,	Jesus	speaks	to	the	Father	of
“my	glory	which	you	have	given	me	
in	your	love	for	me	before	the	foundation
of	the	world.”	
There	was	love	and	communication	between	the	Father	and	the
Son	before	creation.
These	passages	indicate	explicitly	what	we	can	learn	elsewhere	from	the
doctrine	of	the	Trinity,	namely,	that	among	the	persons	of	the	Trinity	there	has
been	perfect	love	and	fellowship	and	communication	for	all	eternity.	The	fact
that	God	is	three	persons	yet	one	God	means	that	there	was	no	loneliness	or
lack	of	personal	fellowship	on	God’s	part	before	creation.	In	fact,	the	love	and
interpersonal	fellowship,	and	the	sharing	of	glory,	have	always	been	and	will
always	be	far	more	perfect	than	any	communion	we	as	finite	human	beings
will	ever	have	with	God.	And	as	the	second	verse	quoted	above	speaks	of	the
glory	the	Father	gave	to	the	Son,	we	should	also	realize	that	there	is	a	giving
of	glory	by	the	members	of	the	Trinity	to	one	another	that	far	surpasses	any
bestowal	of	glory	that	could	ever	be	given	to	God	by	all	creation.
With	regard	to	God’s	existence,	this	doctrine	also	reminds	us	that	only	God
exists	by	virtue	of	his	very	nature,	and	that	he	was	never	created	and	never
came	into	being.	He	always	was.	This	is	seen	from	the	fact	that	all	things	that
exist	were	made	by	him	(“For	you	created	
all	things,	
and	by	your	will	they
existed	and	were	created”	[Rev.	4:11];	this	is	also	affirmed	in	John	1:3;	Rom.
11:35–36;	1	Cor.	8:6).	Moses	tells	us	that	God	existed	before	there	was	any
creation:	“
Before	
the	mountains	were	brought	forth,	or	ever	you	had	formed
the	earth	and	the	world,	from	everlasting	to	everlasting	
you	are	God”	
(Ps.
90:2).	God’s	independence	is	also	seen	in	his	self-designation	in	Exodus	3:14:
“God	said	to	Moses,	
‘I	AM	WHO	I	AM.’	”	
It	is	also	possible	to	translate	this
statement	“I	will	be	what	I	will	be,”	but	in	both	cases	the	implication	is	that
God’s	existence	and	character	are	determined	by	himself	alone	and	are	not
dependent	on	anyone	or	anything	else.	This	means	that	God’s	being	has
always	been	and	will	always	be	exactly	what	it	is.	God	is	not	dependent	upon
any	part	of	creation	for	his	existence	or	his	nature.	Without	creation,	God
would	still	be	infinitely	loving,	infinitely	just,	eternal,	omniscient,	trinitarian,
and	so	forth.
God’s	being	is	also	something	totally	unique.	It	is	not	just	that	God	
does	not
need	the	creation	for	anything;	God	
could	not	
need	the	creation	for	anything.
The	difference	between	the	creature	and	the	Creator	is	an	immensely	vast
difference,	for	God	exists	in	a	fundamentally	different	order	of	being.	It	is	not
just	that	we	exist	and	God	has	always	existed;	it	is	also	that	God	
necessarily
exists	in	an	infinitely	better,	stronger,	more	excellent	way.	The	difference
between	God’s	being	and	ours	is	more	than	the	difference	between	the	sun
and	a	candle,	more	than	the	difference	between	the	ocean	and	a	raindrop,
more	than	the	difference	between	the	arctic	ice	cap	and	a	snowflake,	more
than	the	difference	between	the	universe	and	the	room	we	are	sitting	in:	God’s
being	is	
qualitatively	different.	
No	limitation	or	imperfection	in	creation
should	be	projected	onto	our	thought	of	God.	He	is	the	Creator;	all	else	is
creaturely.	All	else	can	pass	away	in	an	instant;	he	
necessarily	exists	
forever.
The	balancing	consideration	with	respect	to	this	doctrine	is	the	fact	that	
we
and	the	rest	of	creation	can	glorify	God	and	bring	him	joy.	
This	must	be
stated	in	order	to	guard	against	any	idea	that	God’s	independence	makes	us
meaningless.	Someone	might	wonder,	if	God	does	not	need	us	for	anything,
then	are	we	important	at	all?	Is	there	any	significance	to	our	existence	or	to
the	existence	of	the	rest	of	creation?	In	response	it	must	be	said	that	we	are	in
fact	very	meaningful	because	God	has	created	us	and	he	has	determined	that
we	would	be	
meaningful	to	him.	
That	is	the	final	definition	of	genuine
significance.
God	speaks	of	his	sons	and	daughters	from	the	ends	of	the	earth	as	“every	one
who	is	called	by	my	name,	whom	I	created	
for	my	glory,	
whom	I	formed	and
made”	(Isa.	43:7).	Although	God	did	not	have	to	create	us,	he	chose	to	do	so
in	a	totally	free	choice.	He	decided	that	he	would	create	us	to	glorify	him	(cf.
Eph.	1:11–12;	Rev.	4:11).
It	is	also	true	that	we	are	able	to	bring	real	joy	and	delight	to	God.	It	is	one	of
the	most	amazing	facts	in	Scripture	that	God	actually	delights	in	his	people
and	rejoices	over	them.	Isaiah	prophesies	about	the	restoration	of	God’s
people:
You	shall	be	a	crown	of	beauty	in	the	hand	of	the	L
ORD
,
and	a	royal	diadem	in	the	hand	of	your	God.
You	shall	no	more	be	termed	Forsaken
and	your	land	shall	no	more	be	termed	Desolate;
but	you	shall	be	called	My	delight	is	in	her,
and	your	land	Married;
for	
the	L
ORD
	delights	in	you
and	your	land	shall	be	married.	.	.	.
as	the	bridegroom	rejoices	over	the	bride,
so	shall	your	God	rejoice	over	you.	
(Isa.	62:3–5)
Similarly,	Zephaniah	prophesies	that	the	L
ORD
	“will	rejoice	over	you	with
gladness,	he	will	renew	you	in	his	love;	
he	will	exult	over	you	with	loud
singing	
as	on	a	day	of	festival”	(Zeph.	3:17–18).	God	does	not	need	us	for
anything,	yet	it	is	the	amazing	fact	of	our	existence	that	he	chooses	to	delight
in	us	and	to	allow	us	to	bring	joy	to	his	heart.	This	is	the	basis	for	personal
significance	in	the	lives	of	all	God’s	people:	to	be	significant	to	God	is	to	be
significant	in	the	most	ultimate	sense.	No	greater	personal	significance	can	be
imagined.
2.	Unchangeableness.
	We	can	define	the	unchangeableness	of	God	as
follows:	
God	is	unchanging	in	his	being,	perfections,	purposes,	and	promises,
yet	God	does	act	and	feel	emotions,	and	he	acts	and	feels	differently	in
response	to	different	situations.
5
	This	attribute	of	God	is	also	called	God’s
immutability.
a.	Evidence	in	Scripture:
	In	Psalm	102	we	find	a	contrast	between	things
that	we	may	think	to	be	permanent	such	as	the	earth	or	the	heavens,	on	the
one	hand,	and	God,	on	the	other	hand.	The	psalmist	says:
Of	old	you	laid	the	foundation	of	the	earth,
and	the	heavens	are	the	work	of	your	hands.
They	will	perish,	but	you	endure;
they	will	all	wear	out	like	a	garment.
You	change	them	like	raiment,	and	they	pass	away;
but	
you	are	the	same,	and	your	years	have	no	end.
(Ps.	102:25–27)
6
God	existed	before	the	heavens	and	earth	were	made,	and	he	will	exist	long
after	they	have	been	destroyed.	God	causes	the	universe	to	change,	but	in
contrast	to	this	change	he	is	“the	same.”
Referring	to	his	own	qualities	of	patience,	long-suffering,	and	mercy,	God
says,	“For	
I	the	L
ORD
	do	not	change;	
therefore	you,	O	sons	of	Jacob,	are	not
consumed”	(Mal.	3:6).	Here	God	uses	a	general	statement	of	his
unchangeableness	to	refer	to	some	specific	ways	in	which	he	does	not	change.
James	reminds	his	readers	that	all	good	gifts	come	ultimately	from	God	
“with
whom	there	is	no	variation	or	shadow	due	to	change”	
(James	1:17).	His
argument	is	that	since	good	gifts	have	always	come	from	God,	we	can	be
confident	that	only	good	gifts	will	come	from	him	in	the	future,	because	his
character	never	changes	in	the	slightest	degree.
The	definition	given	above	specifies	that	God	is	unchanging—not	in	every
way	that	we	might	imagine,	but	only	in	ways	that	Scripture	itself	affirms.	The
Scripture	passages	already	cited	refer	either	to	God’s	own	being	or	to	some
attribute	of	his	character.	From	these	we	can	conclude	that	God	is
unchanging,	at	least	with	respect	to	his	
“being,”	
and	with	respect	to	his
“perfections”	
(that	is,	his	attributes	or	the	various	aspects	of	his	character).
The	great	Dutch	theologian	Herman	Bavinck	notes	that	the	fact	that	God	is
unchanging	in	his	being	is	of	the	utmost	importance	for	maintaining	the
Creator/creature	distinction,	and	for	our	worship	of	God:
The	doctrine	of	God’s	immutability	is	of	the	highest	significance	for
religion.	The	contrast	between	being	and	becoming	marks	the
difference	between	the	Creator	and	the	creature.	Every	creature	is
continually	becoming.	It	is	changeable,	constantly	striving,	seeks	rest
and	satisfaction,	and	finds	this	rest	in	God,	in	him	alone,	for	only	he	is
pure	being	and	no	becoming.	Hence,	in	Scripture	God	is	often	called
the	Rock.	.	.	.
7
The	definition	given	above	also	affirms	God’s	unchangeableness	or
immutability	with	respect	to	his	
purposes.	
“The	counsel	of	the	L
ORD
	stands
for	ever,	the	thoughts	of	his	heart	to	all	generations”	(Ps.	33:11).	This	general
statement	about	God’s	counsel	is	supported	by	several	specific	verses	that	talk
about	individual	plans	or	purposes	of	God	that	he	has	had	for	all	eternity
(Matt.	13:35;	25:34;	Eph.	1:4,	11;	3:9,	11;	2	Tim.	2:19;	1	Peter	1:20;	Rev.
13:8).	Once	God	has	determined	that	he	will	assuredly	bring	something	about,
his	purpose	is	unchanging,	and	it	will	be	achieved.	In	fact,	God	claims
through	Isaiah	that	no	one	else	is	like	him	in	this	regard:
I	am	God,	and	there	is	none	like	me,
declaring	the	end	from	the	beginning
and	from	ancient	times	things	not	yet	done,
saying,	“My	counsel	shall	stand,
and	I	will	accomplish	all	my	purpose”	.	.	.
I	have	spoken,	and	I	will	bring	it	to	pass;
I	have	purposed,	and	I	will	do	it.	
(Isa.	46:9–11)
Furthermore,	God	is	unchanging	in	his	
promises.	
Once	he	has	promised
something,	he	will	not	be	unfaithful	to	that	promise:	“God	is	not	a	man,	that
he	should	lie,	or	a	son	of	man,	that	he	should	repent.	Has	he	said,	and	will	he
not	do	it?	Or	has	he	spoken,	and	will	he	not	fulfil	it?”	(Num.	23:19;	cf.	1	Sam.
15:29).
b.	Does	God	Sometimes	Change	His	Mind?
	Yet	when	we	talk	about	God
being	unchanging	in	his	purposes,	we	may	wonder	about	places	in	Scripture
where	God	said	he	would	judge	his	people	and	then	because	of	prayer	or	the
people’s	repentance	(or	both)	God	relented	and	did	not	bring	judgment	as	he
had	said	he	would.	Examples	of	such	withdrawing	from	threatened	judgment
include	the	successful	intervention	of	Moses	in	prayer	to	prevent	the
destruction	of	the	people	of	Israel	(Ex.	32:9–14),	the	adding	of	another	fifteen
years	to	the	life	of	Hezekiah	(Isa.	38:1–6),	or	the	failure	to	bring	promised
judgment	upon	Nineveh	when	the	people	repented	(Jonah	3:4,	10).	Are	these
not	cases	where	God’s	purposes	in	fact	did	change?	Then	there	are	other
passages	where	God	is	said	to	be	sorry	that	he	had	carried	out	some	previous
action.	One	thinks	of	God	being	sorry	that	he	had	made	man	upon	the	earth
(Gen.	6:6),	or	sorry	that	he	had	made	Saul	king	(1	Sam.	15:10).	Did	not	God’s
purposes	change	in	these	cases?
These	instances	should	all	be	understood	as	true	expressions	of	God’s	
present
attitude	or	intention	
with	respect	to	the	situation	as	it	exists	at	that	moment.	
If
the	situation	changes,	then	of	course	God’s	attitude	or	expression	of	intention
will	also	change.	This	is	just	saying	that	
God	responds	differently	to	different
situations.	
The	example	of	Jonah	preaching	to	Nineveh	is	helpful	here.	God
sees	the	wickedness	of	Nineveh	and	sends	Jonah	to	proclaim,	“Yet	forty	days,
and	Nineveh	shall	be	overthrown!”	(Jonah	3:4).	The	possibility	that	God
would	withhold	judgment	if	the	people	repented	is	not	explicitly	mentioned	in
Jonah’s	proclamation	as	recorded	in	Scripture,	but	it	is	of	course	
implicit	
in
that	warning:	the	
purpose	
for	proclaiming	a	warning	is	to	bring	about
repentance.	Once	the	people	repented,	the	situation	was	different,	and	God
responded	differently	to	that	changed	situation:	“
When	God	saw	what	they
did,	
how	they	turned	from	their	evil	way,	
God	repented	of	the	evil	which	he
had	said	he	would	do	to	them;	
and	he	did	not	do	it”	(Jonah	3:10).
The	situations	with	Hezekiah	and	with	the	intercession	of	Moses	are	similar:
God	had	said	that	he	would	send	judgment,	and	that	was	a	true	declaration,
provided	that	the	situation	remained	the	same.	
But	then	the	situation	changed:
someone	started	to	pray	earnestly	(Moses	in	one	case	and	Hezekiah	in	the
other).	Here	prayer	itself	was	part	of	the	new	situation	and	was	in	fact	what
changed	the	situation.	God	responded	to	that	changed	situation	by	answering
the	prayer	and	withholding	judgment.
In	the	cases	of	God	being	sorry	that	he	had	made	man,	or	that	he	had	made
Saul	king,	these	too	can	be	understood	as	
expressions	of	God’s	present
displeasure	
toward	the	sinfulness	of	man.	In	neither	case	is	the	language
strong	enough	to	require	us	to	think	that	if	God	could	start	again	and	act
differently,	he	would	in	fact	not	create	man	or	not	make	Saul	king.	It	can
instead	imply	that	God’s	previous	action	led	to	events	that,	in	the	short	term,
caused	him	sorrow,	but	that	nonetheless	in	the	long	term	would	ultimately
achieve	his	good	purposes.	This	is	somewhat	analogous	to	a	human	father
who	allows	his	child	to	embark	on	a	course	he	knows	will	bring	much	sorrow,
both	to	the	parent	and	to	the	child,	but	who	allows	it	nonetheless,	because	he
knows	that	greater	long-term	good	will	come	from	it.
c.	The	Question	of	God’s	Impassibility:
	Sometimes	in	a	discussion	of	God’s
attributes	theologians	have	spoken	of	another	attribute,	namely,	the
impassibility	
of	God.	This	attribute,	if	true,	would	mean	that	God	does	not
have	passions	or	emotions,	but	is	“impassible,”	not	subject	to	passions.	In
fact,	chapter	2	of	the	Westminster	Confession	of	Faith	says	that	God	is
“without	.	.	.	passions.”	This	statement	goes	beyond	what	we	have	affirmed	in
our	definition	above	about	God’s	unchangeableness,	and	affirms	
more	
than
that	God	does	not	change	in	his	being,	perfections,	purposes,	or	promises—it
also	affirms	that	God	does	not	even	feel	emotions	or	“passions.”
The	Scripture	proof	given	by	the	Westminster	Confession	of	Faith	is	Acts
14:15,	which	in	the	King	James	Version	reports	Barnabas	and	Paul	as
rejecting	worship	from	the	people	at	Lystra,	protesting	that	they	are	not	gods
but	“men	of	
like	passions	
with	you.”	The	implication	of	the	KJV	translation
might	be	that	someone	who	is	truly	God	would	not	have	“like	passions”	as
men	do,	or	it	might	simply	show	that	the	apostles	were	responding	to	the	false
view	of	passionless	gods	assumed	by	the	men	of	Lystra	(see	vv.	10–11).	But	if
the	verse	is	rightly	translated,	it	certainly	does	not	prove	that	God	has	no
passions	or	emotions	at	all,	for	the	Greek	term	here	(
homoiopathēs
)	can
simply	mean	having	similar	circumstances	or	experiences,	or	being	of	a
similar	nature	to	someone	else.
8
	Of	course,	God	does	not	have	
sinful	
passions
or	emotions.	But	the	idea	that	God	has	no	passions	or	emotions	
at	all	
clearly
conflicts	with	much	of	the	rest	of	Scripture,	and	for	that	reason	I	have	not
affirmed	God’s	impassibility	in	this	book.	Instead,	quite	the	opposite	is	true,
for	God,	who	is	the	origin	of	our	emotions	and	who	created	our	emotions,
certainly	does	feel	emotions:	God	rejoices	(Isa.	62:5).	He	is	grieved	(Ps.
78:40;	Eph.	4:30).	His	wrath	burns	hot	against	his	enemies	(Ex.	32:10).	He
pities	his	children	(Ps.	103:13).	He	loves	with	everlasting	love	(Isa.	54:8;	Ps.
103:17).	He	is	a	God	whose	passions	we	are	to	imitate	for	all	eternity	as	we
like	our	Creator	hate	sin	and	delight	in	righteousness.
d.	The	Challenge	From	Process	Theology:
	God’s	unchangeableness	has
been	denied	frequently	in	recent	years	by	the	advocates	of	
process	theology,	
a
theological	position	that	says	that	process	and	change	are	essential	aspects	of
genuine	existence,	and	that	therefore	God	must	be	changing	over	time	also,
just	like	everything	else	that	exists.	In	fact,	Charles	Hartshorne,	the	father	of
process	theology,	would	say	that	God	is	continually	adding	to	himself	all	the
experiences	that	happen	anywhere	in	the	universe,	and	thus	God	is
continually	changing.
9
	The	real	appeal	of	process	theology	comes	from	the
fact	that	all	people	have	a	deep	longing	to	mean	something,	to	feel	significant
in	the	universe.	Process	theologians	dislike	the	doctrine	of	God’s	immutability
because	they	think	it	implies	that	nothing	we	do	can	really	matter	to	God.	If
God	is	really	unchangeable,	process	theologians	will	say,	then	nothing	we	do
—in	fact,	nothing	that	happens	in	the	universe—has	any	real	effect	on	God,
because	God	can	never	change.	So	what	difference	do	we	make?	How	can	we
have	any	ultimate	meaning?	In	response	to	this	question	process	theologians
reject	the	doctrine	of	God’s	immutability	and	tell	us	that	our	actions	are	so
significant	that	they	have	an	influence	on	the	very	being	of	God	himself!	As
we	act,	and	as	the	universe	changes,	God	is	
truly	
affected	by	these	actions	and
the	being	of	God	changes—God	
becomes	
something	other	than	what	he
was.
10
Advocates	of	process	theology	often	mistakenly	accuse	evangelical	Christians
(or	the	biblical	writers	themselves)	of	believing	in	a	God	who	does	not	act	in
the	world,	or	who	cannot	respond	differently	to	different	situations	(errors	we
have	discussed	above).	With	regard	to	the	idea	that	we	must	be	able	to
influence	the	very	being	of	God	in	order	to	be	significant,	we	must	respond
that	this	is	an	
incorrect	assumption	
imported	into	the	discussion,	and	that	it	is
not	consistent	with	Scripture.	Scripture	is	clear	that	our	ultimate	significance
comes	not	from	being	able	to	change	the	being	of	God,	but	from	the	fact	that
God	has	created	us	for	his	glory	and	that	
he	
counts	us	as	significant.
11
	God
alone	gives	the	ultimate	definition	of	what	is	significant	and	what	is	not
significant	in	the	universe,	and	if	he	counts	us	significant,	then	we	are!
The	other	fundamental	error	in	process	theology	is	in	assuming	that	God	must
be	changeable	like	the	universe	he	created.	This	is	what	Scripture	explicitly
denies:	“You,	Lord,	did	found	the	earth	in	the	beginning,	and	the	heavens	are
the	work	of	your	hands;	they	will	perish,	but	you	remain;	they	will	all	grow
old	like	a	garment	.	.	.	
they	will	be	changed.	But	you	are	the	same,	
and	your
years	will	never	end”	(Heb.	1:10–12,	quoting	Ps.	102:25–27).
e.	God	Is	Both	Infinite	and	Personal:
	Our	discussion	of	process	theology
illustrates	a	common	difference	between	biblical	Christianity	and	all	other
systems	of	theology.	In	the	teaching	of	the	Bible,	God	is	both	
infinite	
and
personal:	
he	is	infinite	in	that	he	is	not	subject	to	any	of	the	limitations	of
humanity,	or	of	creation	in	general.	He	is	far	greater	than	everything	he	has
made,	far	greater	than	anything	else	that	exists.	But	he	is	also	personal:	he
interacts	with	us	as	a	person,	and	we	can	relate	to	him	as	persons.	We	can
pray	to	him,	worship	him,	obey	him,	and	love	him,	and	he	can	speak	to	us,
rejoice	in	us,	and	love	us.
Apart	from	the	true	religion	found	in	the	Bible,	no	system	of	religion	has	a
God	who	is	both	infinite	and	personal.
12
	For	example,	the	gods	of	ancient
Greek	and	Roman	mythology	were	
personal	
(they	interacted	frequently	with
people),	but	they	were	not	infinite:	they	had	weaknesses	and	frequent	moral
failures,	even	petty	rivalries.	On	the	other	hand,	deism	portrays	a	God	who	is
infinite	
but	far	too	removed	from	the	world	to	be	personally	involved	in	it.
Similarly,	pantheism	holds	that	God	is	infinite	(since	the	whole	universe	is
thought	to	be	God),	but	such	a	God	can	certainly	not	be	personal	or	relate	to
us	as	persons.
The	error	of	process	theology	fits	this	general	pattern.	Its	advocates	are
convinced	that	a	God	who	is	unchanging	in	his	being	is	so	different	from	the
rest	of	creation—so	infinite,	so	unlimited	by	the	change	that	characterizes	all
of	our	existence—that	he	
cannot	
also	be	personal	in	a	way	that	we	make	a
difference	to	him.	So	in	order	to	gain	a	God	who	is	personal,	they	think	they
have	to	give	up	a	God	who	is	infinite	for	a	God	who	is	continually	in	process
of	change.	This	kind	of	reasoning	is	typical	of	many	(perhaps	all)	objections
to	the	kind	of	God	presented	in	the	Bible.	People	say	that	if	God	is	infinite,	he
cannot	be	personal,	or	they	say	that	if	God	is	personal,	he	cannot	be	infinite.
The	Bible	teaches	that	God	is	both	infinite	and	personal.	We	must	affirm	both
that	God	is	infinite	(or	unlimited)	with	respect	to	change	that	occurs	in	the
universe	(nothing	will	change	God’s	being,	perfections,	purposes,	or
promises),	that	God	is	
also	
personal,	and	that	he	relates	to	us	personally	and
counts	us	valuable.
f.	The	Importance	of	God’s	Unchangeableness:
	At	first	it	may	not	seem
very	important	to	us	to	affirm	God’s	unchangeableness.	The	idea	is	so	abstract
that	we	may	not	immediately	realize	its	significance.	But	if	we	stop	for	a
moment	to	imagine	what	it	would	be	like	if	God	
could	
change,	the	importance
of	this	doctrine	becomes	more	clear.	For	example,	if	God	
could	
change	(in	his
being,	perfections,	purposes,	or	promises),	then	any	change	would	be	either
for	the	better	or	for	the	worse.	But	if	God	changed	for	the	better,	then	he	was
not	the	best	possible	being	when	we	first	trusted	him.	And	how	could	we	be
sure	that	he	is	the	best	possible	being	now?	But	if	God	could	change	for	the
worse	(in	his	very	
being
),	then	what	kind	of	God	might	he	become?	Might	he
become,	for	instance,	a	little	bit	evil	rather	than	wholly	good?	And	if	he	could
become	a	little	bit	evil,	then	how	do	we	know	he	could	not	change	to	become
largely	evil—or	
wholly	
evil?	And	there	would	be	not	one	thing	we	could	do
about	it,	for	he	is	so	much	more	powerful	than	we	are.	Thus,	the	idea	that	God
could	change	leads	to	the	horrible	possibility	that	thousands	of	years	from
now	we	might	come	to	live	forever	in	a	universe	dominated	by	a	wholly	evil,
omnipotent	God.	It	is	hard	to	imagine	any	thought	more	terrifying.	How	could
we	ever	trust	such	a	God	who	could	change?	How	could	we	ever	commit	our
lives	to	him?
Moreover,	if	God	could	change	with	regard	to	his	
purposes,	
then	even	though
when	the	Bible	was	written	he	promised	that	Jesus	would	come	back	to	rule
over	a	new	heaven	and	new	earth,	he	has	perhaps	abandoned	that	plan	now,
and	thus	our	hope	in	Jesus’	return	is	in	vain.	Or,	if	God	could	change	in	regard
to	his	
promises,	
then	how	could	we	trust	him	completely	for	eternal	life?	Or
for	anything	else	the	Bible	says?	Maybe	when	the	Bible	was	written	he
promised	forgiveness	of	sins	and	eternal	life	to	those	who	trust	in	Christ,	but
(if	God	can	change)	perhaps	he	has	changed	his	mind	on	those	promises	now
—how	could	we	be	sure?	Or	perhaps	his	omnipotence	will	change	someday,
so	that	even	though	he	wants	to	keep	his	promises,	he	will	no	longer	be	able
to	do	so.
A	little	reflection	like	this	shows	how	absolutely	important	the	doctrine	of
God’s	unchangeableness	is.	If	God	is	not	unchanging,	then	the	whole	basis	of
our	faith	begins	to	fall	apart,	and	our	understanding	of	the	universe	begins	to
unravel.	This	is	because	our	faith	and	hope	and	knowledge	all	ultimately
depend	on	a	
person	
who	is	
infinitely	worthy	of	trust—
because	he	is	
absolutely
and	
eternally	
unchanging	in	his	being,	perfections,	purposes,	and	promises.
3.	Eternity.
	God’s	eternity	may	be	defined	as	follows:	
God	has	no	beginning,
end,	or	succession	of	moments	in	his	own	being,	and	he	sees	all	time	equally
vividly,	yet	God	sees	events	in	time	and	acts	in	time.
Sometimes	this	doctrine	is	called	the	doctrine	of	God’s	infinity	with	respect	to
time.	To	be	“infinite”	is	to	be	unlimited,	and	this	doctrine	teaches	that	time
does	not	limit	God.
This	doctrine	is	also	related	to	God’s	unchangeableness.	If	it	is	true	that	God
does	not	change,	then	we	must	say	that	
time	
does	not	change	God:	it	has	no
effect	on	his	being,	perfections,	purposes,	or	promises.	But	that	means	that
time	has	no	effect	on	God’s	knowledge,	for	instance.	God	never	learns	new
things	or	forgets	things,	for	that	would	mean	a	change	in	his	perfect
knowledge.	This	implies	also	that	the	passing	of	time	does	not	add	to	or
detract	from	God’s	knowledge:	he	knows	all	things	past,	present,	and	future,
and	knows	them	all	equally	vividly.
a.	God	Is	Timeless	in	His	Own	Being:
	The	fact	that	God	has	no	beginning
or	end	is	seen	in	Psalm	90:2:	“Before	the	mountains	were	brought	forth,	or
ever	you	had	formed	the	earth	and	the	world,	
from	everlasting	to	everlasting
you	are	God.”	
Similarly,	in	Job	36:26,	Elihu	says	of	God,	“the	number	of	his
years	is	unsearchable.”
God’s	eternity	is	also	suggested	by	passages	that	talk	about	the	fact	that	God
always	is	or	always	exists.	“	‘I	am	the	Alpha	and	the	Omega,”	says	the	Lord
God,	who	is	and	who	was	and	who	is	to	come,	the	Almighty”	(Rev.	1:8;	cf.
4:8).
13
It	is	also	indicated	in	Jesus’	bold	use	of	a	present	tense	verb	that	implies
continuing	present	existence	when	he	replied	to	his	Jewish	adversaries,
“Before	Abraham	was,	
I	am”	
(John	8:58).	This	statement	is	itself	an	explicit
claiming	of	the	name	of	God,	“
I	AM	
WHO	I	AM,”	from	Exodus	3:14,	a	name
that	also	suggests	a	continual	present	existence:	God	is	the	eternal	“I	AM,”
the	one	who	eternally	exists.
The	fact	that	God	never	began	to	exist	can	also	be	concluded	from	the	fact
that	God	created	all	things,	and	that	he	himself	is	an	immaterial	spirit.	Before
God	made	the	universe,	there	was	no	matter,	but	then	he	created	all	things
(Gen.	1:1;	John	1:3;	1	Cor.	8:6;	Col.	1:16;	Heb.	1:2).	The	study	of	physics
tells	us	that	matter	and	time	and	space	must	all	occur	together:	if	there	is	no
matter,	there	can	be	no	space	or	time	either.	Thus,	before	God	created	the
universe,	there	was	no	“time,”	at	least	not	in	the	sense	of	a	succession	of
moments	one	after	another.	Therefore,	when	God	created	the	universe,	he	also
created	time.	When	God	began	to	create	the	universe,	time	began,	and	there
began	to	be	a	succession	of	moments	and	events	one	after	another.
14
	But
before	there	was	a	universe,	and	before	there	was	time,	God	always	existed,
without	beginning,	and	without	being	influenced	by	time.	And	time,
therefore,	does	not	have	existence	in	itself,	but,	like	the	rest	of	creation,
depends	on	God’s	eternal	being	and	power	to	keep	it	existing.
The	foregoing	Scripture	passages	and	the	fact	that	God	always	existed	before
there	was	any	time	combine	to	indicate	to	us	that	God’s	own	being	does	not
have	a	succession	of	moments	or	any	progress	from	one	state	of	existence	to
another.	To	God	himself,	all	of	his	existence	is	always	somehow	“present,”
15
though	admittedly	that	idea	is	difficult	for	us	to	understand,	for	it	is	a	kind	of
existence	different	from	that	which	we	experience.
b.	God	Sees	All	Time	Equally	Vividly:
	It	is	somewhat	easier	for	us	to
understand	that	God	sees	all	time	equally	vividly.	We	read	in	Psalm	90:4,
“For	a	
thousand	years	
in	your	sight	are	but	as	
yesterday	
when	it	is	past,	or	as
a	
watch	
in	the	night.”	It	is	sometimes	difficult	for	us	to	remember	events	that
occurred	several	weeks	ago,	or	several	months	ago,	or	several	years	ago.	We
remember	recent	events	more	vividly,	and	the	clarity	of	our	memory	fades
with	the	passing	of	time.	Even	if	it	were	possible	for	us	to	live	“a	thousand
years,”	we	would	remember	very	few	events	from	hundreds	of	years	earlier,
and	the	clarity	of	that	memory	would	be	very	low.	But	here	Scripture	tells	us
that	God	views	a	thousand	years	“as	yesterday.”	He	can	remember	all	the
detailed	events	of	a	thousand	years	at	least	as	clearly	as	we	can	remember	the
events	of	“yesterday.”	In	fact,	to	him	a	thousand	years	is	“as	a	watch	in	the
night,”	a	three-	or	four-hour	period	during	which	a	guard	would	stand	watch.
Such	a	short	period	of	time	would	pass	quickly	and	all	the	events	would	be
easily	recalled.	Yet	this	is	how	a	thousand	years	seems	to	God.
When	we	realize	that	the	phrase	“a	thousand	years”	does	not	imply	that	God
forgets	things	after	1,100	or	1,200	years,	but	rather	expresses	as	long	a	time	as
one	might	imagine,	it	becomes	evident	that	
all	of	past	history	
is	viewed	by
God	with	great	clarity	and	vividness:	all	of	time	since	the	creation	is	to	God
as	if	it	just	happened.	And	it	will	always	remain	just	that	clear	in	his
consciousness,	throughout	millions	of	years	of	eternity	future.
In	the	New	Testament,	Peter	tells	us,	“with	the	Lord	one	day	is	as	a	thousand
years,	and	a	thousand	years	as	one	day”	(2	Peter	3:8).	The	second	half	of	this
statement	had	already	been	made	in	Psalm	90,	but	the	first	half	introduces	an
additional	consideration,	“One	day	is	as	a	thousand	years”;	that	is,	any	one
day	from	God’s	perspective	seems	to	last	for	“a	thousand	years”:	it	is	as	if	that
day	never	ends,	but	is	always	being	experienced.	Again,	since	“a	thousand
years”	is	a	figurative	expression	for	“as	long	a	time	as	we	can	imagine,”	or
“all	history,”	we	can	say	from	this	verse	that	any	one	day	seems	to	God	to	be
present	to	his	consciousness	forever.
Taking	these	two	considerations	together,	we	can	say	the	following:	in	God’s
perspective,	any	extremely	long	period	of	time	is	as	if	it	just	happened.	And
any	very	short	period	of	time	(such	as	one	day)	seems	to	God	to	last	forever:
it	never	ceases	to	be	“present”	in	his	consciousness.	Thus,	God	sees	and
knows	all	events	past,	present,	and	future	with	equal	vividness.	This	should
never	cause	us	to	think	that	God	does	not	see	events	
in	time	
and	act	
in	time
(see	below),	but	just	the	opposite:	God	is	the	eternal	Lord	and	Sovereign	over
history,	and	he	sees	it	more	clearly	and	acts	in	it	more	decisively	than	any
other.	But,	once	we	have	said	that,	we	still	must	affirm	that	these	verses	speak
of	God’s	relationship	to	time	in	a	way	that	we	do	not	and	cannot	experience:
God’s	experience	of	time	is	not	just	a	patient	endurance	through	eons	of
endless	duration,	but	he	has	a	
qualitatively	different	
experience	of	time	than
we	do.	This	is	consistent	with	the	idea	that	in	his	own	being,	God	is	timeless;
he	does	not	experience	a	succession	of	moments.	This	has	been	the	dominant
view	of	Christian	orthodoxy	throughout	the	history	of	the	church,	though	it
has	been	frequently	challenged,	and	even	today	many	theologians	deny	it.
16
We	can	picture	God’s	relationship	to	time	as	in	figure	11.1.	This	diagram	is
meant	to	show	that	God	created	time	and	is	Lord	over	time.	Therefore	he	can
see	all	events	in	time	equally	vividly,	yet	he	also	can	see	events	in	time	and
act	in	time.
The	diagram	also	anticipates	the	following	discussion,	since	it	indicates	that
God	knows	events	in	the	future,	even	the	infinitely	long	eternal	future.	With
regard	to	the	future,	God	frequently	claims	through	the	Old	Testament
prophets	that	
he	alone	is	the	one	who	knows	and	can	declare	future	events.
“Who	told	this	long	ago?	Who	declared	it	of	old?	Was	it	not	I,	the	L
ORD
?	And
there	is	no	other	god	besides	me,	a	righteous	God	and	a	Savior;	there	is	none
besides	me”	(Isa.	45:21).	Similarly,	we	read:
For	I	am	God,	and	there	is	no	other;
I	am	God,	and	
there	is	none	like	me,
declaring	the	end	from	the	beginning
and	from	ancient	times	things	not	yet	done,
saying,	“My	counsel	shall	stand,
and	I	will	accomplish	all	my	purpose.”	(Isa.	46:9–10)
Thus	God	somehow	stands	above	time	and	is	able	to	see	it	all	as	present	in	his
consciousness.	Although	the	analogy	is	not	perfect,	we	might	think	of	the
moment	we	finish	reading	a	long	novel.	Before	putting	it	back	on	the	shelf	we
might	flip	quickly	through	the	pages	once	more,	calling	to	mind	the	many
events	that	had	occurred	in	that	novel.	For	a	brief	moment,	things	that
transpired	over	a	long	period	of	time	all	seem	to	be	“present”	to	our	minds.
Perhaps	this	is	faintly	analogous	to	God’s	experience	of	seeing	all	of	history
as	equally	present	in	his	consciousness.
THE	RELATIONSHIP	OF	GOD	TO	TIME
Figure	11.1
c.	God	Sees	Events	in	Time	and	Acts	in	Time:
	Yet	once	all	this	has	been
said	it	is	necessary	to	guard	against	misunderstanding	by	completing	the
definition	of	God’s	eternity:	
“yet	God	sees	events	in	time	and	acts	in	time.”
Paul	writes,	
“when	the	time	had	fully	come,	God	sent	forth	his	Son,	
born	of
woman,	born	under	the	law,	to	redeem	those	who	were	under	the	law”	(Gal.
4:4–5).	God	observed	clearly	and	knew	exactly	what	was	happening	with
events	in	his	creation	as	they	occurred	over	time.	We	might	say	that	God
watched	the	progress	of	time	as	various	events	occurred	within	his	creation.
Then	at	the	right	time,	“when	the	time	had	fully	come,”	God	sent	forth	his
Son	into	the	world.
It	is	evident	throughout	Scripture	that	God	acts	within	time	and	acts
differently	at	different	points	in	time.	For	example,	Paul	tells	the	men	of
Athens,	“The	times	of	ignorance	God	overlooked,	but	
now	
he	commands	all
men	everywhere	to	repent,	because	
he	has	fixed	a	day	on	which	he	will	judge
the	world	
in	righteousness	by	a	man	whom	he	has	appointed	.	.	.”	(Acts
17:30–31).	This	statement	includes	a	description	of	a	previous	way	in	which
God	acted,	God’s	present	way	of	acting,	and	a	future	activity	that	he	will
carry	out,	all	in	time.
Indeed,	the	repeated	emphasis	on	God’s	ability	to	predict	the	future	in	the	Old
Testament	prophets	requires	us	to	realize	that	God	predicts	his	actions	at	one
point	in	time	and	then	carries	out	his	actions	at	a	later	point	in	time.	And	on	a
larger	scale,	the	entire	Bible	from	Genesis	to	Revelation	is	God’s	own	record
of	the	way	he	has	acted	over	time	to	bring	redemption	to	his	people.
We	must	therefore	affirm	both	that	God	has	no	succession	of	moments	in	his
own	being	and	sees	all	history	equally	vividly,	and	that	in	his	creation	he	sees
the	progress	of	events	over	time	and	acts	differently	at	different	points	in
time;	in	short,	he	is	the	Lord	who	created	time	and	who	rules	over	it	and	uses
it	for	his	own	purposes.	God	can	act	in	time	
because	
he	is	Lord	of	time.
17
	He
uses	it	to	display	his	glory.	In	fact,	it	is	often	God’s	good	pleasure	to	fulfill	his
promises	and	carry	out	his	works	of	redemption	over	a	period	of	time	so	that
we	might	more	readily	see	and	appreciate	his	great	wisdom,	his	patience,	his
faithfulness,	his	lordship	over	all	events,	and	even	his	unchangeableness	and
eternity.
d.	We	Will	Always	Exist	in	Time:
	Will	we	ever	share	in	God’s	eternity?
Specifically,	in	the	new	heaven	and	new	earth	which	are	yet	to	come,	will
time	still	exist?	Some	have	thought	that	it	would	not.	In	fact,	there	is	a	hymn
that	begins,	“When	the	trumpet	of	the	Lord	shall	sound,	and	time	shall	be	no
more	.	.	.”	And	we	read	in	Scripture,	“And	the	city	has	no	need	of	sun	or
moon	to	shine	upon	it,	for	the	glory	of	God	is	its	light,	and	its	lamp	is	the
Lamb	.	.	.	and	there	shall	be	no	night	there”	(Rev.	21:23,	25;	cf.	22:5).
Nevertheless,	it	is	not	true	to	say	that	heaven	will	be	“timeless,”	or	without
the	presence	of	time	or	the	passage	of	time.	Rather,	as	long	as	we	are	finite
creatures	we	will	necessarily	experience	events	one	after	another.	Even	the
passage	that	talks	about	no	night	being	in	heaven	also	mentions	the	fact	that
the	kings	of	the	earth	will	bring	into	the	heavenly	city	“the	glory	and	the
honor	of	the	nations”	(Rev.	21:26).	We	are	told	concerning	the	light	of	the
heavenly	city,	“By	its	light	shall	the	nations	walk”	(Rev.	21:24).	These
activities	of	bringing	things	into	the	heavenly	city	and	walking	by	the	light	of
the	heavenly	city	imply	that	events	are	done	one	after	another.	Something	is
outside	the	heavenly	city,	and	then	at	a	later	point	in	time	this	thing	is	part	of
the	glory	and	honor	of	the	nations	that	are	brought	into	the	heavenly	city.	To
cast	one’s	crown	before	the	throne	of	God	(Rev.	4:10)	requires	that	at	one
moment	the	person	has	a	crown	and	that	at	a	later	moment	that	crown	is	cast
before	the	throne.	To	sing	a	new	song	of	praise	before	God	in	heaven	requires
that	one	word	be	sung	after	another.	In	fact,	the	“tree	of	life”	in	the	heavenly
city	is	said	to	be	
“yielding	its	fruit	each	month”	
(Rev.	22:2),	which	implies	a
regular	passage	of	time	and	the	occurrence	of	events	in	time.
18
Therefore,	there	will	still	be	a	succession	of	moments	one	after	another	and
things	happening	one	after	another	in	heaven.	We	will	experience	eternal	life
not	in	an	exact	duplication	of	God’s	attribute	of	eternity,	but	rather	in	a
duration	of	time	that	will	never	end:	we,	as	God’s	people	will	experience
fullness	of	joy	in	God’s	presence	for	all	eternity—not	in	the	sense	that	we	will
no	longer	experience	time,	but	in	the	sense	that	our	lives	with	him	will	go	on
forever:	“And	night	shall	be	no	more;	they	need	no	light	of	lamp	or	sun,	for
the	Lord	God	will	be	their	light,	
and	they	shall	reign	for	ever	and	ever”	
(Rev.
22:5).
4.	Omnipresence.
	Just	as	God	is	unlimited	or	infinite	with	respect	to	time,	so
God	is	unlimited	with	respect	to	space.	This	characteristic	of	God’s	nature	is
called	God’s	omnipresence	(the	Latin	prefix	
omni-	
means	“all”).	God’s
omnipresence	may	be	defined	as	follows:	
God	does	not	have	size	or	spatial
dimensions	and	is	present	at	every	point	of	space	with	his	whole	being,	yet
God	acts	differently	in	different	places.
The	fact	that	God	is	Lord	of	space	and	cannot	be	limited	by	space	is	evident
first	from	the	fact	that	he	created	it,	for	the	creation	of	the	material	world
(Gen.	1:1)	implies	the	creation	of	space	as	well.	Moses	reminded	the	people
of	God’s	lordship	over	space:	“Behold,	to	the	L
ORD
	your	God	belong	heaven
and	the	heaven	of	heavens,	the	earth	with	all	that	is	in	it”	(Deut.	10:14).
a.	God	Is	Present	Everywhere:
	Yet	there	are	also	specific	passages	that
speak	of	God’s	presence	in	every	part	of	space.	We	read	in	Jeremiah,	“Am	I	a
God	at	hand,	says	the	L
ORD
,	and	not	a	God	afar	off	?	Can	a	man	hide	himself
in	secret	places	so	that	I	cannot	see	him?	says	the	L
ORD
.	
Do	I	not	fill	heaven
and	earth?	
says	the	L
ORD
”	(Jer.	23:23–24).	God	is	here	rebuking	the	prophets
who	think	their	words	or	thoughts	are	hidden	from	God.	He	is	everywhere
and	fills	heaven	and	earth.
God’s	omnipresence	is	beautifully	expressed	by	David:
Whither	shall	I	go	from	your	Spirit?
Or	whither	shall	I	flee	from	your	presence?
If	I	ascend	to	heaven,	you	are	there!
If	I	make	my	bed	in	Sheol,	you	are	there!
If	I	take	the	wings	of	the	morning
and	dwell	in	the	uttermost	parts	of	the	sea,
even	there	your	hand	shall	lead	me,
and	your	right	hand	shall	hold	me.	(Ps.	139:7–10)
There	is	nowhere	in	the	entire	universe,	on	land	or	sea,	in	heaven	or	in	hell,
where	one	can	flee	from	God’s	presence.
We	should	note	also	that	there	is	no	indication	that	simply	a	
part	
of	God	is	in
one	place	and	a	part	of	him	in	another.	It	is	
God	himself	
who	is	present
wherever	David	might	go.	We	cannot	say	that	some	of	God	or	just	part	of	God
is	present,	for	that	would	be	to	think	of	his	being	in	spatial	terms,	as	if	he
were	limited	somehow	by	space.	It	seems	more	appropriate	to	say	that	God	is
present	
with	his	whole	being	
in	every	part	of	space	(cf.	also	Acts	17:28	where
Paul	affirms	the	correctness	of	the	words,	“In	him	we	live	and	move	and	have
our	being,”	and	Col.	1:17,	which	says	of	Christ,	“in	him	all	things	hold
together”).
b.	God	Does	Not	Have	Spatial	Dimensions:
	While	it	seems	necessary	for	us
to	say	that	God’s	whole	being	is	present	in	every	part	of	space,	or	at	every
point	in	space,	it	is	also	necessary	to	say	that	
God	cannot	be	contained	by	any
space,	
no	matter	how	large.	Solomon	says	in	his	prayer	to	God,	“But	will	God
indeed	dwell	on	the	earth?	Behold,	
heaven	and	the	highest	heaven	cannot
contain	you;	
how	much	less	this	house	which	I	have	built!”	(1	Kings	8:27).
Heaven	and	the	highest	heaven	cannot	contain	God;	indeed,	he	cannot	be
contained	by	the	largest	space	imaginable	(cf.	Isa.	66:1–2;	Acts	7:48).	While
the	thought	that	God	is	everywhere	present	with	his	whole	being	ought	to
encourage	us	greatly	in	prayer	no	matter	where	we	are,	the	fact	that	no	one
place	can	be	said	to	contain	God	should	also	discourage	us	from	thinking	that
there	is	some	special	place	of	worship	that	gives	people	special	access	to	God:
he	cannot	be	contained	in	any	one	place.
We	should	guard	against	thinking	that	God	extends	infinitely	far	in	all
directions	so	that	he	himself	exists	in	a	sort	of	infinite,	unending	space.	Nor
should	we	think	that	God	is	somehow	a	“bigger	space”	or	bigger	area
surrounding	the	space	of	the	universe	as	we	know	it.	All	of	these	ideas
continue	to	think	of	God’s	being	in	spatial	terms,	as	if	he	were	simply	an
extremely	large	being.	Instead,	we	should	try	to	avoid	thinking	of	God	in
terms	of	size	or	spatial	dimensions.	God	is	a	being	who	exists	
without	
size	or
dimensions	in	space.	In	fact,	before	God	created	the	universe,	there	was	no
matter	or	material	so	there	was	no	space	either.	Yet	God	still	existed.	Where
was	God?	He	was	not	in	a	place	that	we	could	call	a	“where,”	for	there	was
no	“where”	or	space.	But	God	still	was!	This	fact	makes	us	realize	that	God
relates	to	space	in	a	far	different	way	than	we	do	or	than	any	created	thing
does.	He	exists	as	a	kind	of	being	that	is	far	different	and	far	greater	than	we
can	imagine.
We	must	also	be	careful	not	to	think	that	God	himself	is	equivalent	to	any	part
of	creation	or	to	all	of	it.	A	pantheist	believes	that	everything	is	God,	or	that
God	is	everything	that	exists.	The	biblical	perspective	is	rather	that	God	is
present	
everywhere	in	his	creation,	but	that	he	is	also	distinct	from	his
creation.	How	can	this	be?	The	analogy	of	a	sponge	filled	with	water	is	not
perfect,	but	it	is	helpful.	Water	is	present	everywhere	in	the	sponge,	but	the
water	is	still	completely	distinct	from	the	sponge.	Now	this	analogy	breaks
down	at	very	small	points	within	the	sponge,	where	we	could	say	that	there	is
sponge	at	one	point	and	not	water,	or	water	and	not	sponge.	Yet	this	is
because	the	analogy	is	dealing	with	two	materials	that	have	spatial
characteristics	and	dimensions,	while	God	does	not.
c.	God	Can	Be	Present	to	Punish,	to	Sustain,	or	to	Bless:
	The	idea	of	God’s
omnipresence	has	sometimes	troubled	people	who	wonder	how	God	can	be
present,	for	example,	in	hell.	In	fact,	isn’t	hell	the	opposite	of	God’s	presence,
or	the	absence	of	God?	This	difficulty	can	be	resolved	by	realizing	that	
God	is
present	in	different	ways	in	different	places,	
or	that	God	acts	differently	in
different	places	in	his	creation.	Sometimes	God	is	
present	to	punish.	
A
terrifying	passage	in	Amos	vividly	portrays	this	presence	of	God	in	judgment:
Not	one	of	them	shall	flee	away,
not	one	of	them	shall	escape.
Though	they	dig	into	Sheol,
from	there	shall	my	hand	take	them;
though	they	climb	up	to	heaven,
from	there	I	will	bring	them	down.
Though	they	hide	themselves	on	the	top	of	Carmel,
from	there	I	will	search	out	and	take	them;
and	though	they	hide	from	my	sight	at	the	bottom	of	the	sea,
there	I	will	command	the	serpent,	and	it	shall	bite	them.
And	though	they	go	into	captivity	before	their	enemies,
there	I	will	command	the	sword,	and	it	shall	slay	them;
and	I	will	set	my	eyes	upon	them	for	evil	and	not	for	good.
(Amos	9:1–4)
At	other	times	God	is	present	neither	to	punish	nor	to	bless,	but	merely
present	to	sustain,	
or	to	keep	the	universe	existing	and	functioning	in	the	way
he	intended	it	to	function.	In	this	sense	the	divine	nature	of	Christ	is
everywhere	present:	“He	is	before	all	things,	and	in	him	all	things	hold
together”	(Col.	1:17).	The	author	of	Hebrews	says	of	God	the	Son	that	he	is
(continually)	“upholding	the	universe	by	his	word	of	power”	(Heb.	1:3).
19
Yet	at	other	times	or	in	other	places	God	is	
present	to	bless.	
David	says,	“
in
your	presence	
there	is	fulness	of	joy,	in	your	right	hand	are	pleasures	for
evermore”	(Ps.	16:11).	Here	David	is	speaking	not	of	God’s	presence	to
punish	or	merely	to	sustain,	but	of	God’s	presence	to	bless.
In	fact,	most	of	the	time	that	the	Bible	talks	about	God’s	presence,	it	is
referring	to	God’s	presence	to	bless.	For	example,	it	is	in	this	way	that	we
should	understand	God’s	presence	above	the	ark	of	the	covenant	in	the	Old
Testament.	We	read	of	“the	ark	of	the	covenant	of	the	L
ORD
	of	hosts,	who	is
enthroned	on	the	cherubim”	
(1	Sam.	4:4;	cf.	Ex.	25:22),	a	reference	to	the
fact	that	God	made	his	presence	known	and	acted	in	a	special	way	to	bring
blessing	and	protection	to	his	people	at	the	location	he	had	designated	as	his
throne,	namely,	the	place	above	the	two	golden	figures	of	heavenly	beings
(“cherubim”)	that	were	over	the	top	of	the	ark	of	the	covenant.	It	is	not	that
God	was	not	present	elsewhere,	but	rather	that	here	he	especially	made	his
presence	known	and	here	he	especially	manifested	his	character	and	brought
blessing	to	his	people.
In	the	new	covenant,	there	is	no	one	place	on	earth	that	God	has	chosen	as	his
particular	dwelling	place,	for	we	can	worship	him	anywhere	(see	John	4:20).
But	now	and	for	all	eternity	God	has	chosen	the	place	the	Bible	calls
“heaven”	to	be	the	focus	of	the	manifestation	of	his	character	and	the
presence	of	his	blessing	and	glory.	So	when	the	new	Jerusalem	comes	down
out	of	heaven	from	God,	John	in	his	vision	hears	a	loud	voice	from	God’s
throne	saying,	“Behold,	the	dwelling	of	God	is	with	men.	He	will	dwell	with
them,	and	they	shall	be	his	people,	and	God	himself	will	be	with	them”	(Rev.
21:3).	We	might	find	it	misleading	to	say	that	God	is	“more	present”	in
heaven	than	anywhere	else,	but	it	would	not	be	misleading	to	say	that	God	is
present	in	a	special	way	in	heaven,	present	especially	there	to	bless	and	to
show	forth	his	glory.	We	could	also	say	that	God	manifests	his	presence	more
fully	in	heaven	than	elsewhere.
In	this	way	also	Paul’s	statement	about	Christ	can	be	understood:	“In	him	the
whole	fulness	of	deity	dwells	bodily”	(Col.	2:9).	In	one	sense	of	course	we
could	say	that	God’s	whole	being	is	present	at	every	point	in	space	and
therefore	at	every	point	in	every	person,	not	only	in	Christ.	But	there	are	two
difficulties	with	speaking	this	way:	(1)	The	Bible	never	speaks	about	God’s
presence	in	unbelievers	in	a	direct	way,	probably	to	avoid	any	connection
between	God	and	the	responsibility	or	blame	for	evil	deeds,	and	probably	also
to	avoid	any	suggestion	of	God’s	presence	to	bless,	since	it	is	only	a	presence
to	sustain.	(2)	Furthermore,	this	sense	of	“present	to	sustain”	is	not	the	sense
Paul	has	in	mind	in	Colossians	2:9.	In	fact,	there	Paul	does	not	even	seem	to
mean	simply	“present	to	bless”	in	the	same	sense	in	which	God	is	present	to
bless	in	the	lives	of	all	believers.	Rather,	Paul	seems	to	mean	that	in	Christ
God’s	own	nature	is	present	to	bless	and	to	manifest	his	character	in	the
fullest	and	most	complete	way	possible.
Our	difficulty	in	understanding	how	to	express	the	way	in	which	God	is
present	in	unbelievers,	for	example,	leads	us	to	realize	that	although	the	Bible
can	
speak	of	God	as	being	present	everywhere,	when	the	Bible	says	that	God
is	“present”	it	
usually	
means	“present	to	bless.”	That	is,	although	there	are	a
few	references	to	God’s	presence	to	sustain	or	presence	to	punish,	the	vast
majority	of	biblical	references	to	God’s	presence	are	simply	more	brief	ways
of	stating	that	he	is	
present	to	bless.	
When	we	become	more	and	more
familiar	with	this	biblical	pattern	of	speech,	it	becomes	more	and	more
difficult	to	speak	of	God’s	presence	in	any	other	way.	And	perhaps	it	is	even
misleading	to	do	so	unless	a	clear	explanation	of	our	meaning	can	be	given.
Some	examples	of	the	usual	biblical	means	of	expression	are	as	follows:	2
Corinthians	3:17:	“Where	the	Spirit	of	the	Lord	is,	there	is	freedom”;	Romans
8:9–10:	“you	are	in	the	Spirit,	if	in	fact	the	Spirit	of	God	dwells	in	you.	.	.	.	if
Christ	is	in	you	.	.	.	your	spirits	are	alive”;	John	14:23:	“If	a	man	loves	me,	he
will	keep	my	word,	and	my	Father	will	love	him,	and	we	will	come	to	him
and	make	our	home	with	him,”	and	so	forth.	All	of	these	verses	talk	about
God’s	presence	and	assume	that	we	understand	that	they	mean	God’s	presence
to	bless.
In	a	parallel	kind	of	expression,	when	the	Bible	talks	about	God	being	“far
away”	it	usually	means	he	is	“not	present	to	bless.”	For	example,	Isaiah	59:2
says,	“Your	iniquities	have	made	a	separation	between	you	and	your	God,”
and	Proverbs	15:29	declares:	“The	L
ORD
	is	far	from	the	wicked,	but	he	hears
the	prayer	of	the	righteous.”
In	summary,	God	is	present	in	every	part	of	space	with	his	whole	being,	yet
God	acts	differently	in	different	places.	Furthermore,	when	the	Bible	speaks
of	God’s	presence,	it	usually	means	his	presence	to	bless,	and	it	is	only
normal	for	our	own	speech	to	conform	to	this	biblical	usage.
Herman	Bavinck,	in	
The	Doctrine	of	God,	
quotes	a	beautiful	paragraph
illustrating	the	practical	application	of	the	doctrine	of	God’s	omnipresence:
When	you	wish	to	do	something	evil,	you	retire	from	the	public	into
your	house	where	no	enemy	may	see	you;	from	those	places	of	your
house	which	are	open	and	visible	to	the	eyes	of	men	you	remove
yourself	into	your	room;	even	in	your	room	you	fear	some	witness
from	another	quarter;	you	retire	into	your	heart,	there	you	meditate:	he
is	more	inward	than	your	heart.	Wherever,	therefore,	you	shall	have
fled,	there	he	is.	From	yourself,	whither	will	you	flee?	Will	you	not
follow	yourself	wherever	you	shall	flee?	But	since	there	is	One	more
inward	even	than	yourself,	there	is	no	place	where	you	may	flee	from
God	angry	but	to	God	reconciled.	There	is	no	place	at	all	whither	you
may	flee.	Will	you	flee	from	him?	Flee	unto	him.
20
5.	Unity.
	The	unity	of	God	may	be	defined	as	follows:	
God	is	not	divided	into
parts,	yet	we	see	different	attributes	of	God	emphasized	at	different	times.
This	attribute	of	God	has	also	been	called	
God’s	simplicity,	
using	
simple	
in	the
less	common	sense	of	“not	complex”	or	“not	composed	of	parts.”	But	since
the	word	
simple	
today	has	the	more	common	sense	of	“easy	to	understand”
and	“unintelligent	or	foolish,”	it	is	more	helpful	now	to	speak	of	God’s
“unity”	rather	than	his	“simplicity.”
21
When	Scripture	speaks	about	God’s	attributes	it	never	singles	out	one
attribute	of	God	as	more	important	than	all	the	rest.	There	is	an	assumption
that	every	attribute	is	completely	true	of	God	and	is	true	of	all	of	God’s
character.	For	example,	John	can	say	that	“God	is	light”	(1	John	1:5)	and	then
a	little	later	say	also	that	“God	is	love”	(1	John	4:8).	There	is	no	suggestion
that	part	of	God	is	light	and	part	of	God	is	love,	or	that	God	is	partly	light	and
partly	love.	Nor	should	we	think	that	God	is	more	light	than	love	or	more	love
than	light.	Rather	it	is	
God	himself	
who	is	light,	and	it	is	
God	himself	
who	is
also	love.
The	same	is	true	of	other	descriptions	of	God’s	character,	such	as	that	in
Exodus	34:6–7:
The	L
ORD
	passed	before	him	and	proclaimed,	“The	L
ORD
,	the	L
ORD
,	a
God	merciful	and	gracious,	slow	to	anger,	and	abounding	in	steadfast
love	and	faithfulness,	keeping	steadfast	love	for	thousands,	forgiving
iniquity	and	transgression	and	sin,	but	who	will	by	no	means	clear	the
guilty,	visiting	the	iniquity	of	the	fathers	upon	the	children	and	the
children’s	children,	to	the	third	and	the	fourth	generation.”
We	would	not	want	to	say	that	these	attributes	are	only	characteristic	of	some
part	of	God,	but	rather	that	they	are	characteristic	of	God	himself	and
therefore	characteristic	of	all	of	God.
These	considerations	indicate	that	we	should	not	think	of	God	as	some	kind	of
collection	of	various	attributes	added	together	as	in	figure	11:2.
GOD’S	BEING	IS	NOT	A	COLLECTION	OF	ATTRIBUTES	ADDED	TOGETHER
Figure	11.2
Nor	should	we	think	of	the	attributes	of	God	as	something	external	from
God’s	real	being	or	real	self,	something	added	on	to	who	God	really	is,	after
the	analogy	of	figure	11.3.

GOD’S	ATTRIBUTES	ARE	NOT	ADDITIONS	TO	HIS	REAL	BEING
Figure	11.3
Rather,	we	must	remember	that	God’s	
whole	being	
includes	all	of	his
attributes:	he	is	
entirely	
loving,	
entirely	
merciful,	
entirely	
just,	and	so	forth.
Every	attribute	of	God	that	we	find	in	Scripture	is	true	of	
all	
of	God’s	being,
and	we	therefore	can	say	that	
every	attribute	of	God	also	qualifies	every	other
attribute.
Figure	11.4	may	be	helpful	in	understanding	this	doctrine	of	God’s	unity.	In
the	diagram,	let	us	assume	that	the	horizontal	lines	represent	the	attribute	of
love,	and	that	the	vertical	lines	represent	the	aspect	of	God’s	justice.
GOD’S	LOVE	AND	JUSTICE
Figure	11.4
Furthermore,	let	us	understand	the	diagonal	lines	going	from	upper	left	to
lower	right	as	representing	God’s	holiness	and	the	diagonal	lines	going	from
upper	right	to	lower	left	as	representing	God’s	wisdom,	as	in	figure	11.5.
GOD’S	LOVE,	JUSTICE,	HOLINESS,	AND	WISDOM
Figure	11.5
We	could	of	course	go	on	with	different	sorts	of	lines	for	each	of	the	different
attributes	of	God.	But	it	should	be	clear	that	each	attribute	is	simply	a	way	of
describing	one	aspect	of	God’s	total	character	or	being.	God	himself	is	a	
unity,
a	unified	and	completely	integrated	whole	person	who	is	infinitely	perfect	in
all	
of	these	attributes.
Why	then	does	Scripture	speak	of	these	different	attributes	of	God?	It	is
probably	because	we	are	unable	to	grasp	all	of	God’s	character	at	one	time,
and	we	need	to	learn	of	it	from	different	perspectives	over	a	period	of	time.
Yet	these	perspectives	should	never	be	set	in	opposition	to	one	another,	for
they	are	just	different	ways	of	looking	at	the	totality	of	God’s	character.
In	terms	of	practical	application,	this	means	that	we	should	never	think,	for
example,	that	God	is	a	loving	God	at	one	point	in	history	and	a	just	or
wrathful	God	at	another	point	in	history.	He	is	the	same	God	always,	and
everything	he	says	or	does	is	fully	consistent	with	all	his	attributes.	It	is	not
accurate	to	say,	as	some	have	said,	that	God	is	a	God	of	justice	in	the	Old
Testament	and	a	God	of	love	in	the	New	Testament.	God	is	and	always	has
been	infinitely	just	and	infinitely	loving	as	well,	and	everything	he	does	in	the
Old	Testament	as	well	as	the	New	Testament	is	completely	consistent	with
both	of	those	attributes.
Now	it	is	true	that	some	actions	of	God	show	certain	of	his	attributes	more
prominently.	Creation	demonstrates	his	power	and	wisdom,	the	atonement
demonstrates	his	love	and	justice,	and	the	radiance	of	heaven	demonstrates
his	glory	and	beauty.	But	all	of	these	in	some	way	or	other	
also	
demonstrate
his	knowledge	and	holiness	and	mercy	and	truthfulness	and	patience	and
sovereignty,	and	so	forth.	It	would	be	difficult	indeed	to	find	some	attribute	of
God	that	is	not	reflected	at	least	to	some	degree	in	any	one	of	his	acts	of
redemption.	This	is	due	to	the	fact	mentioned	above:	God	is	a	unity	and
everything	he	does	is	an	act	of	the	whole	person	of	God.
Moreover,	the	doctrine	of	the	unity	of	God	should	caution	us	against
attempting	to	single	out	any	one	attribute	of	God	as	more	important	than	all
the	others.	At	various	times	people	have	attempted	to	see	God’s	holiness,	or
his	love,	or	his	self-existence,	or	his	righteousness,	or	some	other	attribute	as
the	most	important	attribute	of	his	being.	But	all	such	attempts	seem	to
misconceive	of	God	as	a	combination	of	various	parts,	with	some	parts	being
somehow	larger	or	more	influential	than	others.	Furthermore,	it	is	hard	to
understand	exactly	what	“most	important”	might	mean.	Does	it	mean	that
there	are	some	actions	of	God	that	are	not	fully	consistent	with	some	of	his
other	attributes?	That	there	are	some	attributes	that	God	somehow	sets	aside
at	times	in	order	to	act	in	ways	slightly	contrary	to	those	attributes?	Certainly
we	cannot	maintain	either	of	these	views,	for	that	would	mean	that	God	is
inconsistent	with	his	own	character	or	that	he	changes	and	becomes
something	different	from	what	he	was	previously.	Rather,	when	we	see	all	the
attributes	as	merely	various	aspects	of	the	total	character	of	God,	then	such	a
question	becomes	quite	unnecessary	and	we	discover	that	there	is	no	attribute
that	can	be	singled	out	as	more	important.	It	is	
God	himself	in	his	whole	being
who	is	supremely	important,	and	it	is	God	himself	in	his	whole	being	whom
we	are	to	seek	to	know	and	to	love.
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
As	you	think	of	God’s	independence,	unchangeableness,	eternity,
omnipresence,	and	unity,	can	you	see	some	faint	reflections	of	these	five
incommunicable	attributes	in	yourself	as	God	created	you	to	be?	What
would	it	mean	to	strive	to	become	more	like	God	in	these	areas?	At	what
point	would	it	be	wrong	to	even	want	to	be	like	God	in	each	of	these
areas	because	it	would	be	attempting	to	usurp	his	unique	role	as	Creator
and	Lord?
2
.	
Using	each	of	these	five	incommunicable	attributes,	explain	how	we	will
be	more	like	God	in	heaven	than	we	are	now,	and	also	how	we	will	for
all	eternity	be	unlike	God	in	each	of	these	five	areas.
3
.	
Explain	how	each	aspect	of	the	doctrine	of	God’s	independence	makes
you	feel	emotionally.	Does	this	doctrine	have	a	positive	or	negative
effect	on	your	spiritual	life?	Explain	why.
4
.	
Explain	how	the	doctrine	of	God’s	immutability	or	unchangeableness
helps	to	answer	the	following	questions:	Will	we	be	able	to	do	a	good
job	of	bringing	up	children	in	such	an	evil	world	as	we	have	today?	Is	it
possible	to	have	the	same	close	fellowship	with	God	that	people	had
during	biblical	times?	What	can	we	think	or	do	to	make	Bible	stories
seem	more	real	and	less	removed	from	our	present	life?	Do	you	think
that	God	is	less	willing	to	answer	prayer	today	than	he	was	in	Bible
times?
5
.	
If	you	sin	against	God	today,	when	would	it	start	bringing	sorrow	to
God’s	heart?	When	would	it	stop	bringing	sorrow	to	God’s	heart?	Does
this	reflection	help	you	understand	why	God’s	character	requires	that	he
punish	sin?	Why	did	God	have	to	send	his	Son	to	bear	the	punishment
for	sin	instead	of	simply	forgetting	about	sin	and	welcoming	sinners	into
heaven	without	having	given	the	punishment	for	sin	to	anyone?	Does
God	now	think	of	your	sins	as	forgiven	or	as	unforgiven	sins?
6
.	
If	you	sing	praise	to	God	today,	when	will	the	sound	of	that	praise	cease
being	present	in	God’s	consciousness	and	bringing	delight	to	his	heart?
Do	songs	of	praise	to	God	have	any	ultimate	meaning?	What	about
trusting	in	him	hour	by	hour	or	obeying	him	throughout	each	day?
7
.	
Is	control	over	the	use	of	your	time	a	struggle	in	your	own	life?	As	we
grow	toward	maturity	in	the	Christian	life	and	toward	conformity	to	the
image	of	Christ,	will	we	become	more	like	God	in	our	mastery	over
time?	In	what	ways?
8
.	
Explain	how	each	of	the	five	incommunicable	attributes	of	God
discussed	in	this	chapter	can	be	a	help	in	your	own	prayer	life.
SPECIAL	TERMS
anthropomorphic	language
	
	
infinity	with	respect	to	space
aseity
	
	
infinity	with	respect	to	time
communicable	attributes
	
	
names	of	God
eternity
	
	
omnipresence
immutability
	
	
self-existence
incommunicable	attributes
	
	
simplicity
independence
	
	
unchangeableness
infinite
	
	
unity
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the	
bibliography	to
chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be	found	in	
Appendix	4
.)
Note:	For	this	chapter	on	God’s	incommunicable	attributes,	it	should	be	noted
that	some	systematic	theologies	classify	and	discuss	God’s	attributes	in
categories	other	than	communicable	and	incommunicable,	so	an	exact	cross-
reference	to	parallel	sections	is	not	always	possible.	A	fuller	list	of	the
sections	in	systematic	theology	texts	that	discuss	the	attributes	of	God	in
general	will	be	found	in	the	bibliography	at	the	end	of	chapter	13.
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92			Litton,	58–67
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1847			Finney,	49–65
1875–76			Pope,	1:248–55,	287–325
1892–94			Miley,	1:159–80,	214–22
1940			Wiley,	1:241–393
1960			Purkiser,	127–44
3.			Baptist
1767			Gill,	25–31,	33–50,	119–22
1887			Boyce,	1:125–35,	183–90
1907			Strong,	243–303
1917			Mullins,	214–50
1983–85			Erickson,	1:263–78
1987–94			Lewis/Demarest,	1:175–248
4.			Dispensational
1947			Chafer,	1:179–191,	212–24,	260–71
1949			Thiessen,	118–28
5.			Lutheran
1917–24			Pieper,	1:427–47
1934			Mueller,	160–67
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1559			Calvin,	1:96–120
1861			Heppe,	57–104
1871–73			Hodge,	1:366–93
1878			Dabney,	
ST,	
38–45,	144–54
1887–1921			Warfield,	
SSW,	
1:69–87;	
ST,	
109–14
1889			Shedd,	1:151–94,	334–92
1909			Bavinck,	
DG,	
113–72
1938			Berkhof,	47–63
1962			Buswell,	1:36–57
7.			Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988–92			Williams,	55–59,	77–79
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955			Ott,	24–38
2.			Roman	Catholic:	Post-Vatican	II
1980			McBrien,	1:238–341
Other	Works
Bromiley,	G.	W.	“God.”	In	
ISBE,	
2:493–503.
Charnock,	Stephen.	
The	Existence	and	Attributes	of	God.	
Repr.	ed.
Evansville,	Ind.:	Sovereign	Grace	Book	Club,	n.d.,	pp.	69–180	(first
published	1655–1680).
Diehl,	D.	W.	“Process	Theology.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	880–85.
Helm,	Paul.	
Eternal	God:	A	Study	of	God	Without	Time.	
Oxford:
Clarendon,	1988.
Kaiser,	Christopher	B.	
The	Doctrine	of	God.	
Westchester,	Ill.:	Good
News,	1982.
Lewis,	Gordon	R.	“God,	Attributes	of.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	451–59.
McComiskey,	Thomas	E.	“God,	Names	of.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	464–68.
Packer,	J.	I.	
Knowing	God.	
London:	Hodder	and	Stoughton,	1973,	pp.
67–79.
Saucy,	R.	H.	“God,	Doctrine	of.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	459–64.
Tozer,	A.	W.	
The	Knowledge	of	the	Holy.	
New	York:	Harper	and	Row,
1961.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
Psalm	102:25–27:
Of	old	you	laid	the	foundation	of	the	earth,
and	the	heavens	are	the	work	of	your	hands.
They	will	perish,	but	you	endure;
they	will	all	wear	out	like	a	garment.
You	change	them	like	raiment,	and	they	pass	away;
but	you	are	the	same,	and	your	years	have	no	end.
HYMN
“Immortal,	Invisible,	God	Only	Wise”
In	several	lines	of	this	hymn	the	various	attributes	of	God	are	mentioned	in
such	rapid	succession	that	it	is	impossible	for	us	to	reflect	on	each	one
individually	as	we	sing.	That	is	not	entirely	a	disadvantage	of	the	hymn,
however,	for	it	makes	us	realize	that	when	we	finally	see	God	in	all	his	glory
in	heaven,	the	wonder	of	beholding	him	and	all	his	perfections	at	once	will
overwhelm	us	far	more	completely	than	does	this	hymn,	and	we	will	find
ourselves	lost	in	praise.
Immortal,	invisible,	God	only	wise,
In	light	inaccessible	hid	from	our	eyes,
Most	blessed,	most	glorious,	the	Ancient	of	Days,
Almighty,	victorious,	thy	great	name	we	praise.
Unresting,	unhasting,	and	silent	as	light,
Nor	wanting,	nor	wasting,	thou	rulest	in	might;
Thy	justice	like	mountains	high	soaring	above
Thy	clouds	which	are	fountains	of	goodness	and	love.
Great	Father	of	glory,	pure	Father	of	light,
Thine	angels	adore	thee,	all	veiling	their	sight;
All	praise	we	would	render;	O	help	us	to	see
’Tis	only	the	splendor	of	light	hideth	thee!
AUTHOR:	WALTER	CHALMERS	SMITH,	1867
Alternative	hymn:	“Have	You	Not	Known,	Have	You	Not	Heard?”
NOTES
1
Herman	Bavinck,	
The	Doctrine	of	God,	
trans.	and	ed.	by	William	Hendriksen	(Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1951),	pp.	86–89.
2
Although	Jesus	Christ	now	has	a	physical	body	as	God-man,	the	Father	and	Holy	Spirit	do	not,	nor	did	the	Son	before	he	was
conceived	in	Mary’s	womb.	(In	the	Old	Testament	“theophanies,”	where	God	appeared	in	human	form,	these	human	bodies	were
only	temporary	appearances	and	did	not	belong	to	the	person	of	God.)
3
“Anthropomorphic”	comes	from	two	Greek	words,	
anthrōpos,	
“man,”	and	
morphē,	
“form.”	An	anthropomorphic	description	of
God	describes	God	in	human	forms	or	human	terms.
4
This	mistake	would	be	made,	for	example,	by	people	who	argue	that	God	has	a	human	body,	because	Scripture	talks	about	his
eyes,	ears,	mouth,	etc.	By	the	same	reasoning	they	should	say	that	God	also	looks	like	a	lion,	a	lamb,	an	eagle,	a	fire,	a	rock,	a
hen,	a	fountain,	the	sun,	a	shield,	a	shadow,	and	a	temple—all	at	once!	The	mistake	is	to	fail	to	recognize	that	these	are	all
metaphors	that	tell	us	about	God’s	character,	but	that	God	himself	is	“spirit”	(John	4:24)	and	has	no	material	body.
5
The	four	key	words	(
being,	perfections,	purposes,	promises
)	used	as	a	summary	of	the	ways	in	which	God	is	unchanging	are
taken	from	Louis	Berkhof,	
Systematic	Theology	
(Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1939,	1941),	p.	
58.
6
It	is	significant	that	this	passage	is	quoted	in	Heb.	1:11–12	and	applied	to	Jesus	Christ.	Heb.	13:8	also	applies	the	attribute	of
unchangeableness	to	Christ:	“Jesus	Christ	is	the	same	yesterday	and	today	and	for	ever.”	Thus,	God	the	Son	shares	fully	in	this
divine	attribute.
7
Herman	Bavinck,	
The	Doctrine	of	God,	
trans.	by	William	Hendriksen	(Edinburgh:	Banner	of	Truth,	1977,	reprint	of	1951	ed.),	p.
149.
8
See	
BAGD,	
p.	566.
9
Charles	Hartshorne	(born	1897)	taught	at	the	University	of	Chicago,	Emory	University,	and	the	University	of	Texas.	An
introduction	to	process	theology	by	two	of	its	advocates	is	
Process	Theology:	An	Introductory	Exposition	
by	John	B.	Cobb,	Jr.,
and	David	R.	Griffin	(Philadelphia:	Westminster,	1976).	Detailed	evangelical	analyses	may	be	found	in	Carl	F.	H.	Henry,	“The
Resurgence	of	Process	Philosophy,”	in	
God,	Revelation,	and	Authority,	
6:52–75,	and	Royce	Gruenler,	
The	Inexhaustible	God:
Biblical	Faith	and	the	Challenge	of	Process	Theism	
(Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1983).
Two	excellent	recent	articles	from	an	evangelical	perspective	have	been	written	by	Bruce	A.	Ware:	“An	Exposition	and	Critique
of	the	Process	Doctrines	of	Divine	Mutability	and	Immutability,”	
WTJ	
47	(1985):	175–96	(a	critique	of	process	theology),	and
“An	Evangelical	Reformulation	of	the	Doctrine	of	the	Immutability	of	God,”	
JETS	
29	(1986):	431–46	(a	positive	restatement	of
an	orthodox	view	of	God’s	immutability).
10
See	Ware’s	revealing	discussion	of	Hartshorne’s	idea	that	we	contribute	value	to	God	that	he	would	otherwise	lack:	“Exposition
and	Critique,”	pp.	183–85.
11
See	
chapter	21
	on	the	reasons	for	the	creation	of	man.
12
Technically	speaking	we	must	recognize	that	Judaism,	so	far	as	it	is	based	on	what	we	call	the	Old	Testament,	also	has	a	view
of	God	that	shows	him	to	be	both	infinite	and	personal,	although	Judaism	has	never	recognized	the	indications	of	God’s	trinitarian
nature	that	are	present	even	in	the	Old	Testament	(see	
chapter	14
).
13
Alpha	and	omega	are	the	first	and	last	letters	of	the	Greek	alphabet,	so	when	God	says	that	he	is	the	Alpha	and	the	Omega	he
implies	that	he	is	before	everything	else	and	he	is	after	everything	else;	he	is	the	beginning	of	everything	and	will	always	be	the
end	(or	goal)	of	everything.
14
In	fact,	the	alternative	to	saying	that	time	began	when	God	created	the	universe	is	to	say	that	time	never	began,	but	there	has
always	
been	a	succession	of	moments	one	after	another,	extending	infinitely	far	back	into	the	past,	but	never	having	a	starting
point.	But	to	have	time	without	a	beginning	seems	to	many	people	to	be	absurd	and	is	probably	impossible.	Bavinck	says,
“Eternal	time	in	the	sense	of	time	without	beginning	is	inconceivable”	(
The	Doctrine	of	God,	
p.	157).
15
As	we	shall	see	below,	this	does	not	mean	that	all	events	of	history	look	to	God	as	if	they	were	present,	for	God	sees	events	
in
time	
and	acts	
in	time.
16
Carl	F.	H.	Henry	argues	for	God’s	timeless	eternity	as	the	historic	position	of	Christian	orthodoxy	in	
God,	Revelation	and
Authority	
(Waco,	Tex.:	Word,	1982),	5:235–67,	and	gives	a	detailed	analysis	of	current	challenges	from	both	nonevangelical	and
evangelical	theologians.	A	thorough	recent	philosophical	defense	of	God’s	timeless	eternity	is	Paul	Helm,	
Eternal	God:	A	Study	of
God	Without	Time	
(Oxford:	Clarendon,	1988).
17
Sometimes	theologians	have	objected	that	God	cannot	be	“timelessly	eternal”	in	the	sense	described	above,	because	the
moment	he	creates	something,	he	is	acting	in	time	and	therefore	he	must	exist	in	time.	(See,	e.g.,	Stephen	T.	Davis,	
Logic	and	the
Nature	of	God	
[Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1983],	pp.	11–24.)	But	this	objection	fails	to	distinguish	what	God	is	in	his	own	being
(he	exists	without	beginning,	end,	or	succession	of	moments)	from	what	God	does	outside	of	himself	(he	creates	in	time	and	acts
in	time	in	other	ways).	Davis	says	that	we	have	no	coherent	notion	of	“causation	in	which	an	eternal	cause	produces	a	temporal
effect”	(p.	
21),	but	that	is	simply	to	admit	that	
we	do	not	understand	
how	a	timelessly	eternal	God	can	act	in	time;	it	does	
not
prove	that	God	
cannot	
be	timeless	and	still	act	in	time.	Surely	here,	when	talking	about	the	relationship	between	God	and	time,	it
would	be	folly	to	say	that	what	we	cannot	understand	must	be	impossible!
Davis	also	falls	into	another	form	of	the	“if	God	is	infinite	he	cannot	be	personal”	mistake	mentioned	above	(see	note	12).	He
says,	“A	timeless	being	cannot	be	the	personal,	caring,	involved	God	we	read	about	in	the	Bible”	(p.	
14).	But	to	prove	this	he	just
talks	about	God’s	actions	in	time,	without	ever	showing	why	God	cannot	
both	
act	in	time	(be	personally	involved)	and	be	timeless
in	his	own	being	(be	infinite	or	unlimited	with	respect	to	time).	Finally,	while	he	mentions	the	possibility	that	time	was	created	but
will	sometime	cease	to	exist	(p.	
23),	he	fails	to	consider	the	alternative	that	seems	much	more	likely	in	view	of	the	Bible’s
promises	of	eternal	life,	namely,	that	time	was	once	created	but	will	never	cease	to	exist	in	the	future.
Those	who,	like	Davis,	deny	that	God	is	timelessly	eternal,	still	say	that	God	has	eternally	existed	but	that	he	has	always	existed	in
time	and	always	experienced	a	succession	of	moments.	But	this	position	raises	even	more	difficulties,	because	it	requires	that	time
never	began,	but	stretches	infinitely	far	into	the	past.	However,	that	does	not	seem	possible,	because	if	the	past	is	infinitely	long,
we	could	never	have	reached	this	moment.	(This	objection	is	one	form	of	saying	that	an	actual	infinite	cannot	exist,	a
philosophical	conception	that	is	explained	skillfully	by	William	Lane	Craig	in	
The	Existence	of	God	and	the	Beginning	of	the
Universe	
[San	Bernardino,	Calif.:	Here’s	Life	Publishers,	1979],	pp.	35–53,	and,	with	fuller	reference	to	philosophical	responses
to	this	argument,	by	J.	P.	Moreland,	
Scaling	the	Secular	City:	A	Defense	of	Christianity	
[Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1987],	pp.	15–34.)
18
Rev.	10:6	in	the	KJV	reads,	“that	there	should	be	time	no	longer,”	but	“delay”	is	a	better	translation	for	the	Greek	term	
chronos
in	this	context	(as	in	the	RSV,	NASB,	NIV,	and	NKJV).	In	fact,	the	next	verse	assumes	the	continuation	of	time,	for	it	talks	of
events	to	be	fulfilled	“in	the	days	of	the	trumpet	call	to	be	sounded	by	the	seventh	angel”	(Rev.	10:7).
19
The	present	participle	
pherōn,	
“carrying	along,”	in	Heb.	1:3	implies	that	Christ’s	activity	of	“carrying	along	all	things”	(that	is,
keeping	all	things	in	the	universe	existing	and	functioning	regularly)	is	a	continual	activity,	one	that	never	ceases.
20
Herman	Bavinck,	
The	Doctrine	of	God,	
p.	164.	The	citation	is	reproduced	in	the	book	with	no	indication	of	its	source.
21
Systematic	theologians	have	often	distinguished	another	aspect	of	God’s	unity	at	this	point,	namely	the	“unity”	found	in	the	fact
that	God	is	one	God,	not	many	gods.	This	fact	has	been	called	the	“unity	of	singularity,”	whereas	what	I	have	here	called	God’s
unity	has	then	been	called	the	“unity	of	simplicity.”
While	I	agree	that	God	is	one	God,	it	can	be	confusing	to	speak	of	two	different	kinds	of	unity	in	God.	Therefore,	I	have	not	used
the	term	“unity	of	singularity”	or	discussed	the	concept	here,	but	have	rather	treated	the	question	in	chapter	14,	on	the	Trinity.
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	12
The	Character	of	God:	“Communicable”
Attributes	
(Part	1)
How	is	God	like	us	in	his	being	and	in	mental	and	moral
attributes?
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
In	this	chapter	we	consider	the	attributes	of	God	that	are	“communicable,”	or
more	shared	with	us	than	those	mentioned	in	the	previous	chapter.	It	must	be
remembered	that	this	division	into	“incommunicable”	and	“communicable”	is
not	an	absolute	division	and	there	is	some	room	for	difference	of	opinion
concerning	which	attributes	should	fit	into	which	categories.
1
	The	list	of
attributes	here	put	in	the	category	“communicable”	is	a	common	one,	but
understanding	the	definition	of	each	attribute	is	more	important	than	being
able	to	categorize	them	in	exactly	the	way	presented	in	this	book.
Furthermore,	any	list	of	God’s	attributes	must	be	based	on	some
understanding	of	how	finely	one	wishes	to	make	distinctions	between	various
aspects	of	God’s	character.	Are	God’s	goodness	and	love	two	attributes	or
one?	What	about	knowledge	and	wisdom,	or	spirituality	and	invisibility?	In
this	chapter,	each	of	these	attributes	is	treated	separately,	and	the	result	is	a
rather	long	list	of	various	attributes.	Yet	in	several	cases	it	would	not	make
much	difference	if	someone	were	to	treat	these	pairs	as	various	aspects	of	the
same	attribute.	If	we	remember	that	it	is	the	entire	and	wholly	integrated
person	of	God	about	whom	we	are	talking,	it	will	be	apparent	that	the	division
into	various	attributes	is	not	a	matter	of	great	doctrinal	significance	but	is
something	that	must	be	based	on	one’s	judgment	concerning	the	most
effective	way	to	present	the	biblical	material.
This	chapter	divides	God’s	“communicable”	attributes	into	five	major
categories,	with	individual	attributes	listed	under	each	category	as	follows:
A.	Attributes	Describing	God’s	Being
	1.	Spirituality
	2.	Invisibility
B.	Mental	Attributes
	3.	Knowledge	(or	Omniscience)
	4.	Wisdom
	5.	Truthfulness	(and	Faithfulness)
C.	Moral	Attributes
	6.	Goodness
	7.	Love
	8.	Mercy	(Grace,	Patience)
	9.	Holiness
10.	Peace	(or	Order)
11.	Righteousness	(or	Justice)
12.	Jealousy
13.	Wrath
D.	Attributes	of	Purpose
14.	Will
15.	Freedom
16.	Omnipotence	(or	Power,	and	Sovereignty)
E.	“Summary”	Attributes
17.	Perfection
18.	9;Blessedness
19.	Beauty
20.	Glory
Because	God’s	communicable	attributes	are	to	be	imitated	in	our	lives,
2
	each
of	these	sections	will	include	a	short	explanation	of	the	way	in	which	the
attribute	in	question	is	to	be	imitated	by	us.
A.	Attributes	Describing	God’s	Being
1.
	Spirituality.
	People	have	often	wondered,	what	is	God	made	of	?	Is	he
made	of	flesh	and	blood	like	ourselves?	Certainly	not.	What	then	is	the
material	that	forms	his	being?	Is	God	made	of	matter	at	all?	Or	is	God	pure
energy?	Or	is	he	in	some	sense	pure	thought?
The	answer	of	Scripture	is	that	God	is	none	of	these.	Rather,	we	read	that
“God	is	
spirit”	
(John	4:24).	This	statement	is	spoken	by	Jesus	in	the	context
of	a	discussion	with	the	woman	at	the	well	in	Samaria.	The	discussion	is
about	the	
location	
where	people	should	worship	God,	and	Jesus	is	telling	her
that	true	worship	of	God	does	not	require	that	one	be	
present	
either	in
Jerusalem	or	in	Samaria	(John	4:21),	for	true	worship	has	to	do	not	with
physical	location	but	with	one’s	inner	spiritual	condition.	This	is	because
“God	is	spirit”	and	this	apparently	signifies	that	God	is	in	no	way	limited	to	a
spatial	location.
Thus,	we	should	
not	
think	of	God	as	having	
size	
or	
dimensions,	
even	infinite
ones	(see	the	discussion	on	God’s	omnipresence	in	the	previous	chapter).	We
should	not	think	of	God’s	existence	as	spirit	as	meaning	that	God	is	infinitely
large,	for	example,	for	it	is	not	
part	
of	God	but	
all	
of	God	that	is	in	every
point	of	space	(see	Ps.	139:7–10).	Nor	should	we	think	that	God’s	existence
as	spirit	means	that	God	is	infinitely	small,	for	no	place	in	the	universe	can
surround	him	or	contain	him	(see	1	Kings	8:27).	Thus,	God’s	being	cannot	be
rightly	thought	of	in	terms	of	space,	however	we	may	understand	his
existence	as	“spirit.”
We	also	find	that	God	forbids	his	people	to	think	of	
his	very	being	
as	similar
to	
anything	
else	in	the	physical	creation.	We	read	in	the	Ten	Commandments:
You	shall	not	make	for	yourself	a	graven	image,	or	
any	likeness	of
anything	
that	is	in	heaven	above,	or	that	is	in	the	earth	beneath,	or	that
is	in	the	water	under	the	earth;	you	shall	not	bow	down	to	them	or
serve	them;	
for	I	the	L
ORD
	your	God	am	a	jealous	God,	
visiting	the
iniquity	of	the	fathers	upon	the	children	to	the	third	and	the	fourth
generation	of	those	who	hate	me,	but	showing	steadfast	love	to
thousands	of	those	who	love	me	and	keep	my	commandments.	(Ex.
20:4–6)
The	creation	language	in	this	commandment	(“heaven	above,	or	.	.	.	earth
beneath,	or	.	.	.	water	under	the	earth”)	is	a	reminder	that	God’s	
being,	
his
essential	mode	of	existence,	is	different	from	everything	that	he	has	created.
To	think	of	his	being	in	terms	of	anything	else	in	the	created	universe	is	to
misrepresent	him,	to	limit	him,	to	think	of	him	as	less	than	he	really	is.	To
make	a	graven	(or	“carved”	or	“sculptured”)	image	of	God	as	a	golden	calf,
for	example,	may	have	been	an	attempt	to	portray	God	as	a	God	who	is	strong
and	full	of	life	(like	a	calf),	but	to	say	that	God	was	like	a	calf	was	a	horribly
false	statement	about	God’s	knowledge,	wisdom,	love,	mercy,	omnipresence,
eternity,	independence,	holiness,	righteousness,	justice,	and	so	forth.	Indeed,
while	we	must	say	that	God	has	made	all	creation	so	that	each	part	of	it
reflects	something	of	his	own	character,	we	must	also	now	affirm	that	to
picture	God	as	
existing	
in	a	form	or	
mode	of	being	
that	is	like	anything	else	in
creation	is	to	think	of	God	in	a	horribly	misleading	and	dishonoring	way.
This	is	why	God’s	jealousy	is	given	as	the	reason	for	the	prohibition	against
making	images	of	him:	“for	I	the	L
ORD
	your	God	am	a	jealous	God	.	.	.”	(Ex.
20:5).	God	is	jealous	to	protect	his	own	honor.	He	eagerly	seeks	for	people	to
think	of	him	as	he	is	and	to	worship	him	for	all	his	excellence,	and	he	is
angered	when	his	glory	is	diminished	or	his	character	is	falsely	represented
(cf.	Deut.	4:23–24,	where	God’s	intense	jealousy	for	his	own	honor	is	again
given	as	the	reason	for	a	prohibition	against	making	any	images	of	him).
Thus,	God	does	not	have	a	physical	body,	nor	is	he	made	of	any	kind	of
matter	like	much	of	the	rest	of	creation.	Furthermore,	God	is	not	merely
energy	or	thought	or	some	other	element	of	creation.	He	is	also	not	like	vapor
or	steam	or	air	or	space,	all	of	which	are	created	things:	
God’s	being	
is	not
like	any	of	these.	God’s	being	is	not	even	exactly	like	our	own	spirits,	for
these	are	created	things	that	apparently	are	able	to	exist	only	in	one	place	in
one	time.
Instead	of	all	these	ideas	of	God,	we	must	say	that	God	is	
spirit.	
Whatever
this	means,	it	is	a	kind	of	existence	that	is	unlike	anything	else	in	creation.	It
is	a	kind	of	existence	that	is	far	superior	to	all	our	material	existence.	We
might	say	that	God	is	“pure	being”	or	“the	fullness	or	essence	of	being.”
Furthermore,	this	kind	of	existence	is	not	less	real	or	less	desirable	than	our
own	existence.	Rather,	it	is	more	real	and	more	desirable	than	the	material
and	immaterial	existence	of	all	creation.	Before	there	was	any	creation,	God
existed	as	spirit.	His	own	being	is	so	very	real	that	it	was	able	to	cause
everything	else	to	come	into	existence!
At	this	point	we	can	define	God’s	spirituality:	
God’s	spirituality	means	that
God	exists	as	a	being	that	is	not	made	of	any	matter,	has	no	parts	or
dimensions,	is	unable	to	be	perceived	by	our	bodily	senses,	and	is	more
excellent	than	any	other	kind	of	existence.
We	may	ask	why	God’s	being	is	this	way.	Why	is	God	spirit?	All	that	we	can
say	is	that	this	is	the	greatest,	most	excellent	way	to	be!	This	is	a	form	of
existence	far	superior	to	anything	we	know.	It	is	amazing	to	meditate	on	this
fact.
These	considerations	make	us	wonder	if	God’s	spirituality	should	perhaps	be
called	an	“incommunicable”	attribute.	To	do	so	would	indeed	be	appropriate
in	some	ways,	since	God’s	being	is	so	different	from	ours.	Nevertheless,	the
fact	remains	that	God	has	given	us	spirits	in	which	we	worship	him	(John
4:24;	1	Cor.	14:14;	Phil.	3:3),	in	which	we	are	united	with	the	Lord’s	spirit	(1
Cor.	6:17),	with	which	the	Holy	Spirit	joins	to	bear	witness	to	our	adoption	in
God’s	family	(Rom.	8:16),	and	in	which	we	pass	into	the	Lord’s	presence
when	we	die	(Luke	23:46;	Eccl.	12:7;	Heb.	12:23;	cf.	Phil.	1:23–24).
Therefore	there	is	clearly	some	communication	from	God	to	us	of	a	spiritual
nature	that	is	something	like	his	own	nature,	though	certainly	not	in	all
respects.	For	this	reason	it	also	seems	appropriate	to	think	of	God’s
spirituality	as	a	communicable	attribute.
2.	Invisibility.
	Related	to	God’s	spirituality	is	the	fact	that	God	is	invisible.
Yet	we	also	must	speak	of	the	visible	ways	in	which	God	manifests	himself.
God’s	invisibility	can	be	defined	as	follows:	
God’s	invisibility	means	that
God’s	total	essence,	all	of	his	spiritual	being,	will	never	be	able	to	be	seen	by
us,	yet	God	still	shows	himself	to	us	through	visible,	created	things.
Many	passages	speak	of	the	fact	that	God	is	not	able	to	be	seen.	“No	one	has
ever	seen	God”	(John	1:18).	Jesus	says,	“Not	that	any	one	has	seen	the	Father
except	him	who	is	from	God;	he	has	seen	the	Father”	(John	6:46).	Paul	gives
the	following	words	of	praise:	“To	the	King	of	ages,	immortal,	
invisible,	
the
only	God,	be	honor	and	glory	for	ever	and	ever.	Amen”	(1	Tim.	1:17).	He
speaks	of	God	as	one	“who	alone	has	immortality	and	dwells	in
unapproachable	light,	
whom	no	man	has	ever	seen	or	can	see”	
(1	Tim.	6:16).
John	says,	“No	man	has	ever	seen	God”	(1	John	4:12).
We	must	remember	that	these	passages	were	all	written	after	events	in
Scripture	where	people	saw	some	outward	manifestation	of	God.	For
example,	very	early	in	Scripture	we	read,	“Thus	the	L
ORD
	used	to	speak	to
Moses	face	to	face,	as	a	man	speaks	to	his	friend”	(Ex.	33:11).	Yet	God	told
Moses,	“You	cannot	see	my	face;	for	man	shall	not	see	me	and	live”	(Ex.
33:20).	Nevertheless,	God	caused	his	glory	to	pass	by	Moses	while	he	hid
Moses	in	a	cleft	of	the	rock,	and	then	God	let	Moses	see	his	back	after	he	had
passed	by,	but	said,	“my	face	shall	not	be	seen”	(Ex.	33:21–23).	This
sequence	of	verses	and	others	like	it	in	the	Old	Testament	indicate	that	there
was	a	sense	in	which	God	could	not	be	seen	at	all,	but	that	there	was	also
some	outward	form	or	manifestation	of	God	which	at	least	in	part	was	able	to
be	seen	by	man.
It	is	right,	therefore,	to	say	that	although	God’s	
total	essence	
will	never	be
able	to	be	seen	by	us,	nevertheless,	God	still	shows	something	of	himself	to
us	through	visible,	created	things.	This	happens	in	a	variety	of	ways.
If	we	are	to	
think	
of	God,	we	must	think	of	him	somehow.	God	understands
this	and	gives	us	hundreds	of	different	analogies	taken	from	our	human	lives
or	from	the	creative	world.
3
	This	huge	diversity	of	analogies	from	all	parts	of
creation	reminds	us	that	we	should	not	focus	overly	much	on	any	one	of	these
analogies.	Yet	if	we	do	not	focus	exclusively	on	any	one	of	these	analogies,
all	of	them	help	to	reveal	God	to	us	in	a	somewhat	“visible”	way	(cf.	Gen.
1:27;	Ps.	19:1;	Rom.	1:20).
The	Old	Testament	also	records	a	number	of	theophanies.	A	
theophany	
is	“an
appearance	of	God.”	In	these	theophanies	God	took	on	various	visible	forms
to	show	himself	to	people.	God	appeared	to	Abraham	(Gen.	18:1–33),	Jacob
(Gen.	32:28–30),	the	people	of	Israel	(as	a	pillar	of	cloud	by	day	and	fire	by
night:	Ex.	13:21–22),	the	elders	of	Israel	(Ex.	24:9–11),	Manoah	and	his	wife
(Judg.	13:21–22),	Isaiah	(Isa.	6:1),	and	others.
A	much	greater	visible	manifestation	of	God	than	these	Old	Testament
theophanies	was	found	in	the	person	of	Jesus	Christ	himself.	He	could	say,
“He	who	has	seen	me	has	seen	the	Father”	(John	14:9).	And	John	contrasts
the	fact	that	no	one	has	ever	seen	God	with	the	fact	that	God’s	only	Son	has
made	him	known	to	us:	“No	one	has	ever	seen	God;	the	only	begotten	God,
4
who	is	in	the	bosom	of	the	Father,	he	has	made	him	known”	(John	1:18,
author’s	translation).	Furthermore,	Jesus	is	“the	image	of	the	invisible	God”
(Col.	1:15),	and	is	“the	bright	radiance	of	the	glory	of	God”	and	is	“the	exact
representation	of	his	nature”	(Heb.	1:3	author’s	translation).	Thus,	in	the
person	of	Jesus	we	have	a	unique	visible	manifestation	of	God	in	the	New
Testament	that	was	not	available	to	believers	who	saw	theophanies	in	the	Old
Testament.
But	how	will	we	see	God	in	heaven?	We	will	never	be	able	to	see	or	know	all
of	God,	for	“his	greatness	is	unsearchable”	(Ps.	145:3;	cf.	John	6:46;	1	Tim.
1:17;	6:16;	1	John	4:12,	which	were	mentioned	above).	And	we	will	not	be
able	to	see—at	least	with	our	physical	eyes—the	spiritual	being	of	God.
Nevertheless,	Scripture	says	that	we	will	see	God	himself.	Jesus	says,
“Blessed	are	the	pure	in	heart,	for	
they	shall	see	God”	
(Matt.	5:8).	We	will	be
able	to	see	the	human	nature	of	Jesus,	of	course	(Rev.	1:7).	But	it	is	not	clear
in	exactly	what	sense	we	will	be	able	to	“see”	the	Father	and	the	Holy	Spirit,
or	the	divine	nature	of	God	the	Son	(cf.	Rev.	1:4;	4:2–3,	5;	5:6).	Perhaps	the
nature	of	this	“seeing”	will	not	be	known	to	us	until	we	reach	heaven.
Although	what	we	see	will	not	be	an	exhaustive	vision	of	God,	it	will	be	a
completely	true	and	clear	and	real	vision	of	God.	We	shall	see	“face	to	face”
(1	Cor.	13:12)	and	“we	shall	see	him	as	he	is”	(1	John	3:2).	The	most
remarkable	description	of	the	open,	close	fellowship	with	God	that	we	shall
experience	is	seen	in	the	fact	that	in	the	heavenly	city	“the	throne	of	God	and
of	the	Lamb	shall	be	in	it,	and	his	servants	shall	worship	him;	
they	shall	see
his	face,	
and	his	name	shall	be	on	their	foreheads”	(Rev.	22:3–4).
When	we	realize	that	God	is	the	perfection	of	all	that	we	long	for	or	desire,
that	he	is	the	summation	of	everything	beautiful	or	desirable,	then	we	realize
that	the	greatest	joy	of	the	life	to	come	will	be	that	we	“shall	see	his	face.”
This	seeing	of	God	“face	to	face”	has	been	called	the	
beatific	vision,	
meaning
“the	vision	that	makes	us	blessed	or	happy”	(“beatific”	is	from	two	Latin
words,	
beatus,	
“blessed,”	and	
facere,	
“to	make”).	To	look	at	God	changes	us
and	makes	us	like	him:	“We	shall	be	like	him,	for	
we	shall	see	him	as	he	is”
(1	John	3:2;	cf.	2	Cor.	3:18).	This	vision	of	God	will	be	the	consummation	of
our	knowing	God	and	will	give	us	full	delight	and	joy	for	all	eternity:	“in	your
presence	there	is	fulness	of	joy,	in	your	right	hand	are	pleasures	for	evermore”
(Ps.	16:11).
B.	Mental	Attributes
3.	Knowledge	(Omniscience).
	God’s	knowledge	may	be	defined	as	follows:
God	fully	knows	himself	and	all	things	actual	and	possible	in	one	simple	and
eternal	act.
Elihu	says	that	God	is	the	one	“who	is	
perfect	in	knowledge”	
(Job	37:16),	and
John	says	that	God	
“knows	everything”	
(1	John	3:20).	The	quality	of
knowing	everything	is	called	omniscience,	and	because	God	knows
everything,	he	is	said	to	be	omniscient	(that	is,	“all-knowing”).
The	definition	given	above	explains	omniscience	in	more	detail.	It	says	first
that	God	fully	knows	himself.	This	is	an	amazing	fact	since	God’s	own	being
is	infinite	or	unlimited.	Of	course,	only	he	who	is	infinite	can	fully	know
himself	in	every	detail.	This	fact	is	implied	by	Paul	when	he	says,	“For	the
Spirit	searches	everything,	even	the	depths	of	God.	For	what	person	knows	a
man’s	thoughts	except	the	spirit	of	the	man	which	is	in	him?	So	also	no	one
comprehends	the	thoughts	of	God	except	the	Spirit	of	God”	(1	Cor.	2:10–11).
This	idea	is	also	suggested	by	John’s	statement	that	“God	is	light	and	in	him
is	no	darkness	at	all”	(1	John	1:5).	In	this	context	“light”	has	a	suggestion	of
both	moral	purity	and	full	knowledge	or	awareness.	If	there	is	“no	darkness	at
all”	in	God,	but	he	is	entirely	“light,”	then	God	is	himself	both	entirely	holy
and	also	entirely	filled	with	self-knowledge.
The	definition	also	says	that	God	knows	“all	things	
actual.”	
This	means	all
things	that	exist	and	all	things	that	happen.	This	applies	to	creation,	for	God	is
the	one	before	whom	“no	creature	is	hidden,	but	all	are	open	and	laid	bare	to
the	eyes	of	him	with	whom	we	have	to	do”	(Heb.	4:13;	cf.	2	Chron.	16:9;	Job
28:24;	Matt.	10:29–30).	God	also	knows	the	future,	for	he	is	the	one	who	can
say,	“I	am	God,	and	there	is	none	like	me,	declaring	the	end	from	the
beginning	and	from	ancient	times	things	not	yet	done”	(Isa.	46:9–10;	cf.
42:8–9	and	frequent	passages	in	the	Old	Testament	prophets).	He	knows	the
tiny	details	of	every	one	of	our	lives,	for	Jesus	tells	us,	“Your	Father	knows
what	you	need	before	you	ask	him”	(Matt.	6:8),	and,	“Even	the	hairs	of	your
head	are	all	numbered”	(Matt.	10:30).
In	Psalm	139	David	reflects	on	the	amazing	detail	of	God’s	knowledge	of	our
lives.	He	knows	our	actions	and	thoughts:	“O	L
ORD
,	you	have	searched	me
and	known	me!	You	know	when	I	sit	down	and	when	I	rise	up;	you	discern
my	thoughts	from	afar”	(Ps.	139:1–2).	He	knows	the	words	we	will	say	before
they	are	spoken:	“Even	before	a	word	is	on	my	tongue,	lo,	O	L
ORD
,	you	know
it	altogether”	(Ps.	139:4).	And	he	knows	all	the	days	of	our	lives	even	before
we	are	born:	“Your	eyes	beheld	my	unformed	substance;	in	your	book	were
written,	every	one	of	them,	the	days	that	were	formed	for	me,	when	as	yet
there	was	none	of	them”	(Ps.	139:16).
The	definition	of	God’s	knowledge	given	above	also	specifies	that	God	knows
“all	things	
possible.”	
This	is	because	there	are	some	instances	in	Scripture
where	God	gives	information	about	events	that	might	happen	but	that	do	not
actually	come	to	pass.	For	example,	when	David	was	fleeing	from	Saul	he
rescued	the	city	of	Keilah	from	the	Philistines	and	then	stayed	for	a	time	at
Keilah.	He	decided	to	ask	God	whether	Saul	would	come	to	Keilah	to	attack
him	and,	if	Saul	came,	whether	the	men	of	Keilah	would	surrender	him	into
Saul’s	hand.	David	said:
“Will	Saul	come	down,	as	your	servant	has	heard?	O	L
ORD
,	the	God
of	Israel,	I	beseech	you,	tell	your	servant.”	And	the	L
ORD
	said,	“He
will	come	down.”	Then	said	David,	“Will	the	men	of	Keilah	surrender
me	and	my	men	into	the	hand	of	Saul?”	And	the	L
ORD
	said,	“They
will	surrender	you.”	Then	David	and	his	men,	who	were	about	six
hundred,	arose	and	departed	from	Keilah,	and	they	went	wherever
they	could	go.	When	Saul	was	told	that	David	had	escaped	from
Keilah,	he	gave	up	the	expedition.	(1	Sam.	23:11–13)
Similarly,	Jesus	could	state	that	Tyre	and	Sidon	
would	have	
repented	if	Jesus’
own	miracles	had	been	done	there	in	former	days:	“Woe	to	you,	Chorazin!
woe	to	you,	Bethsaida!	for	if	the	mighty	works	done	in	you	had	been	done	in
Tyre	and	Sidon,	they	would	have	repented	long	ago	in	sackcloth	and	ashes”
(Matt.	11:21).	Similarly,	he	says,	“And	you,	Capernaum,	will	you	be	exalted
to	heaven?	You	shall	be	brought	down	to	Hades.	For	if	the	mighty	works	done
in	you	had	been	done	in	Sodom,	it	would	have	remained	until	this	day”	(Matt.
11:23;	cf.	2	Kings	13:19,	where	Elisha	tells	what	would	have	happened	if
King	Joash	had	struck	the	ground	five	or	six	times	with	the	arrows).
The	fact	that	God	knows	all	things	possible	can	also	be	deduced	from	God’s
full	knowledge	of	himself.	If	God	fully	knows	himself,	he	knows	everything
he	is	able	to	do,	which	includes	all	things	that	are	possible.	This	fact	is	indeed
amazing.	God	has	made	an	incredibly	complex	and	varied	universe.	But	there
are	thousands	upon	thousands	of	other	variations	or	kinds	of	things	that	God
could	have	created	but	did	not.	God’s	infinite	knowledge	includes	detailed
knowledge	of	what	each	of	those	other	possible	creations	would	have	been
like	and	what	would	have	happened	in	each	of	them!	“Such	knowledge	is	too
wonderful	for	me;	it	is	high,	I	cannot	attain	it”	(Ps.	139:6).	“For	as	the
heavens	are	higher	than	the	earth,	so	are	my	ways	higher	than	your	ways	and
my	thoughts	than	your	thoughts”	(Isa.	55:9).
Our	definition	of	God’s	knowledge	speaks	of	God	knowing	everything	in	one
“simple	act.”	Here	again	the	word	
simple	
is	used	in	the	sense	“not	divided
into	parts.”	This	means	that	God	is	always	fully	aware	of	everything.	If	he
should	wish	to	tell	us	the	number	of	grains	of	sand	on	the	seashore	or	the
number	of	stars	in	the	sky,	he	would	not	have	to	count	them	all	quickly	like
some	kind	of	giant	computer,	nor	would	he	have	to	call	the	number	to	mind
because	it	was	something	he	had	not	thought	about	for	a	time.	Rather,	he
always	knows	all	things	at	once.	All	of	these	facts	and	all	other	things	that	he
knows	are	always	fully	present	in	his	consciousness.	He	does	not	have	to
reason	to	conclusions	or	ponder	carefully	before	he	answers,	for	he	knows	the
end	from	the	beginning,	and	he	never	learns	and	never	forgets	anything	(cf.
Ps.	90:4;	2	Peter	3:8;	and	the	verses	cited	above	on	God’s	perfect	knowledge).
Every	bit	of	God’s	knowledge	is	always	fully	present	in	his	consciousness;	it
never	grows	dim	or	fades	into	his	nonconscious	memory.	Finally,	the
definition	talks	about	God’s	knowledge	as	not	only	a	simple	act	but	also	an
“eternal	act.”	This	means	that	God’s	knowledge	never	changes	or	grows.	If	he
were	ever	to	learn	something	new,	he	would	not	have	been	omniscient
beforehand.	Thus,	from	all	eternity	God	has	known	all	things	that	would
happen	and	all	things	that	he	would	do.
Someone	may	object	that	God	promises	to	forget	our	sins.	For	example,	he
says,	“I	will	not	remember	your	sins”	(Isa.	43:25).	Yet	passages	like	this	can
certainly	be	understood	to	mean	that	God	will	never	again	let	the	knowledge
of	these	sins	play	any	part	in	the	way	he	relates	to	us:	he	will	“forget”	them	in
his	relationship	to	us.	Another	objection	to	the	biblical	teaching	about	God’s
omniscience	has	been	brought	from	Jeremiah	7:31;	19:5;	and	31:35,	where
God	refers	to	the	horrible	practices	of	parents	who	burn	to	death	their	own
children	in	the	sacrificial	fires	of	the	pagan	god	Baal,	and	says,	“which	I	did
not	command,	
nor	did	it	come	into	my	mind
”	(Jer.	7:31).	Does	this	mean	that
before	the	time	of	Jeremiah	God	had	never	
thought	
of	the	possibility	that
parents	would	sacrifice	their	own	children?	Certainly	not,	for	that	very
practice	had	occurred	a	century	earlier	in	the	reigns	of	Ahaz	(2	Kings	16:3)
and	Hoshea	(2	Kings	17:17),	and	God	himself	had	forbidden	the	practice
eight	hundred	years	earlier	under	Moses	(Lev.	18:21).	The	verses	in	Jeremiah
are	probably	better	translated	quite	literally,	“nor	did	it	enter	into	my	
heart
”
(so	KJV	at	Jer.	7:31,	and	the	literal	translation	in	the	NASB	mg.—the	Hebrew
word	is	
lēb,	
most	frequently	translated	“heart”),	giving	the	sense,	“nor	did	I
wish	for	it,	desire	it,	think	of	it	in	a	positive	way.”
5
Another	difficulty	that	arises	in	this	connection	is	the	question	of	the
relationship	between	God’s	knowledge	of	everything	that	will	happen	in	the
future	and	the	reality	and	degree	of	freedom	we	have	in	our	actions.	If	God
knows	everything	that	will	happen,	how	can	our	choices	be	at	all	“free”?	In
fact,	this	difficulty	has	loomed	so	large	that	some	theologians	have	concluded
that	God	does	not	know	all	of	the	future.	They	have	said	that	God	does	not
know	things	that	cannot	(in	their	opinion)	be	known,	such	as	the	free	acts	of
people	that	have	not	yet	occurred	(sometimes	the	phrase	used	is	the
“contingent	acts	of	free	moral	agents,”	where	“contingent”	means	“possible
but	not	certain”).	But	such	a	position	is	unsatisfactory	because	it	essentially
denies	God’s	knowledge	of	the	future	of	human	history	at	any	point	in	time
and	thus	is	inconsistent	with	the	passages	cited	above	about	God’s	knowledge
of	the	future	and	with	dozens	of	other	Old	Testament	prophetic	passages
where	God	predicts	the	future	far	in	advance	and	in	great	detail.
6
How	then	are	we	to	resolve	this	difficulty?	Although	this	question	will	be
treated	in	much	more	detail	in	chapter	16	on	God’s	providence,	it	may	be
helpful	at	this	point	to	note	the	suggestion	of	Augustine,	who	said	that	God
has	given	us	“reasonable	self-determination.”	His	statement	does	not	involve
the	terms	
free	
or	
freedom,	
for	these	terms	are	exceptionally	difficult	to	define
in	any	way	that	satisfactorily	accounts	for	God’s	complete	knowledge	of
future	events.	But	this	statement	does	affirm	what	is	important	to	us	and	what
we	sense	to	be	true	in	our	own	experience,	that	our	choices	and	decisions	are
“reasonable.”	That	is,	we	think	about	what	to	do,	consciously	decide	what	we
will	do,	and	then	we	follow	the	course	of	action	that	we	have	chosen.
Augustine’s	statement	also	says	that	we	have	“self-determination.”	This	is
simply	affirming	that	our	choices	really	do	determine	what	will	happen.	It	is
not	as	if	events	occur	
regardless	
of	what	we	decide	or	do,	but	rather	that	they
occur	
because	of	
what	we	decide	and	do.	No	attempt	is	made	in	this	statement
to	define	the	sense	in	which	we	are	“free”	or	“not	free,”	but	that	is	not	the
really	important	issue:	for	us,	it	is	important	that	we	think,	choose,	and	act,
and	that	these	thoughts,	choices,	and	actions	are	real	and	actually	have	eternal
significance.	If	God	knows	all	our	thoughts,	words,	and	actions	long	before
they	occur,	then	there	must	be	some	sense	in	which	our	choices	are	not
absolutely	free.	But	further	definition	of	this	issue	is	better	left	until	it	can	be
treated	more	fully	in	chapter	16.
4.	Wisdom.	
God’s	wisdom	means	that	God	always	chooses	the	best	goals	and
the	best	means	to	those	goals.	
This	definition	goes	beyond	the	idea	of	God
knowing	all	things	and	specifies	that	God’s	decisions	about	what	he	will	do
are	always	wise	decisions:	that	is,	they	always	will	bring	about	the	best	results
(from	God’s	ultimate	perspective),	and	they	will	bring	about	those	results
through	the	best	possible	means.
Scripture	affirms	God’s	wisdom	in	general	in	several	places.	He	is	called	“the
only	wise	God”	(Rom.	16:27).	Job	says	that	God	“is	wise	in	heart”	(Job	9:4),
and	“With	him	are	wisdom	and	might;	he	has	counsel	and	understanding”
(Job	12:13).	God’s	wisdom	is	seen	specifically	in	creation.	The	psalmist
exclaims,	“O	L
ORD
,	how	manifold	are	your	works!	In	wisdom	you	have	made
them	all;	the	earth	is	full	of	your	creatures”	(Ps.	104:24).	As	God	created	the
universe,	it	was	perfectly	suited	to	bring	him	glory,	both	in	its	day-by-day
processes	and	in	the	goals	for	which	he	created	it.	Even	now,	while	we	still
see	the	effects	of	sin	and	the	curse	on	the	natural	world,	we	should	be	amazed
at	how	harmonious	and	intricate	God’s	creation	is.
God’s	wisdom	is	also	seen	in	his	great	plan	of	redemption.	Christ	is	“the
wisdom	of	God”	to	those	who	are	called	(1	Cor.	1:24,	30),	even	though	the
word	of	the	cross	is	“foolishness”	to	those	who	reject	it	and	think	themselves
to	be	wise	in	this	world	(1	Cor.	1:18–20).	Yet	even	this	is	a	reflection	of	God’s
wise	plan:	“For	since,	in	the	wisdom	of	God,	the	world	did	not	know	God
through	wisdom,	it	pleased	God	through	the	folly	of	what	we	preach	to	save
those	who	believe.	.	.	.	God	chose	what	is	foolish	in	the	world	to	shame	the
wise	.	.	.	so	that	no	human	being	might	boast	in	the	presence	of	God”	(1	Cor.
1:21,	27,	29).
Paul	knows	that	what	we	now	think	of	as	the	“simple”	gospel	message,
understandable	even	to	the	very	young,	reflects	an	amazing	plan	of	God,
which	in	its	depths	of	wisdom	surpasses	anything	man	could	ever	have
imagined.	At	the	end	of	eleven	chapters	of	reflection	on	the	wisdom	of	God’s
plan	of	redemption,	Paul	bursts	forth	into	spontaneous	praise:	“O	the	depth	of
the	riches	and	wisdom	and	knowledge	of	God!	How	unsearchable	are	his
judgments	and	how	inscrutable	his	ways!”	(Rom.	11:33).
When	Paul	preaches	the	gospel	both	to	Jews	and	to	Gentiles,	and	they	become
unified	in	the	one	body	of	Christ	(Eph.	3:6),	the	incredible	“mystery”	that	was
“hidden	for	ages	in	God	who	created	all	things”	(Eph.	3:9)	is	plain	for	all	to
see,	namely,	that	in	Christ	such	totally	diverse	people	become	united.	When
groups	so	different	racially	and	culturally	become	members	of	the	one	body
of	Christ,	then	God’s	purpose	is	fulfilled,	“that	through	the	church	the
manifold	
wisdom	of	God	
might	now	be	made	known	to	the	principalities	and
powers	in	the	heavenly	places”	(Eph.	3:10).
Today	this	means	that	God’s	wisdom	is	shown	even	to	angels	and	demons
(“principalities	and	powers”)	when	people	from	different	racial	and	cultural
backgrounds	are	united	in	Christ	in	the	church.	If	the	Christian	church	is
faithful	to	God’s	wise	plan,	it	will	be	always	in	the	forefront	in	breaking	down
racial	and	social	barriers	in	societies	around	the	world,	and	will	thus	be	a
visible	manifestation	of	God’s	amazingly	wise	plan	to	bring	great	unity	out	of
great	diversity	and	thereby	to	cause	all	creation	to	honor	him.
God’s	wisdom	is	also	shown	in	our	individual	lives.	“We	know	that	God
works	all	things	together	for	good	for	those	who	love	him,	who	are	called
according	to	his	purpose”	(Rom.	8:28,	author’s	translation).	Here	Paul	affirms
that	God	does	work	wisely	in	all	the	things	that	come	into	our	lives,	and	that
through	all	these	things	he	advances	us	toward	the	goal	of	conformity	to	the
image	of	Christ	(Rom.	8:29).	It	should	be	our	great	confidence	and	a	source
of	peace	day	by	day	to	know	that	God	causes	all	things	to	move	us	toward	the
ultimate	goal	he	has	for	our	lives,	namely,	that	we	might	be	like	Christ	and
thereby	bring	glory	to	him.	Such	confidence	enabled	Paul	to	accept	his	“thorn
in	the	flesh”	(2	Cor.	12:7)	as	something	that,	though	painful,	God	in	his
wisdom	had	chosen	not	to	remove	(2	Cor.	12:8–10).
Every	day	of	our	lives,	we	may	quiet	our	discouragement	with	the	comfort
that	comes	from	the	knowledge	of	God’s	infinite	wisdom:	if	we	are	his
children,	we	can	know	that	he	is	working	wisely	in	our	lives,	even	today,	to
bring	us	into	greater	conformity	into	the	image	of	Christ.
God’s	wisdom	is,	of	course,	in	part	communicable	to	us.	We	can	ask	God
confidently	for	wisdom	when	we	need	it,	for	he	promises	in	his	Word,	“If	any
of	you	lacks	wisdom,	let	him	ask	God,	who	gives	to	all	men	generously	and
without	reproaching,	and	it	will	be	given	him”	(James	1:5).	This	wisdom,	or
skill	in	living	a	life	pleasing	to	God,	comes	primarily	from	reading	and
obeying	his	Word:	“The	testimony	of	the	L
ORD
	is	sure,	making	wise	the
simple”	(Ps.	19:7;	cf.	Deut.	4:6–8).
“The	fear	of	the	L
ORD
	is	the	beginning	of	wisdom”	(Ps.	111:10;	Prov.	9:10;	cf.
Prov.	1:7),	because	if	we	fear	dishonoring	God	or	displeasing	him,	and	if	we
fear	his	fatherly	discipline,	then	we	will	have	the	motivation	that	makes	us
want	to	follow	his	ways	and	live	according	to	his	wise	commands.
Furthermore,	the	possession	of	wisdom	from	God	will	result	not	in	pride	but
in	humility	(Prov.	11:2;	James	3:13),	not	in	arrogance	but	in	a	gentle	and
peaceful	spirit	(James	3:14–18).	The	person	who	is	wise	according	to	God’s
standards	will	continually	walk	in	dependence	on	the	Lord	and	with	a	desire
to	exalt	him.
Yet	we	must	also	remember	that	God’s	wisdom	is	not	entirely	communicable:
we	can	never	fully	share	God’s	wisdom	(Rom.	11:33).	In	practical	terms,	this
means	that	there	will	frequently	be	times	in	this	life	when	we	will	not	be	able
to	understand	why	God	allowed	something	to	happen.	Then	we	have	simply
to	trust	him	and	go	on	obeying	his	wise	commands	for	our	lives:	“Therefore
let	those	who	suffer	according	to	God’s	will	do	right	and	entrust	their	souls	to
a	faithful	Creator”	(1	Peter	4:19;	cf.	Deut.	29:29;	Prov.	3:5–6).	God	is
infinitely	wise	and	we	are	not,	and	it	pleases	him	when	we	have	faith	to	trust
his	wisdom	even	when	we	do	not	understand	what	he	is	doing.
5.	Truthfulness	(and	Faithfulness).	
God’s	truthfulness	means	that	he	is	the
true	God,	and	that	all	his	knowledge	and	words	are	both	true	and	the	final
standard	of	truth.
The	term	
veracity,	
which	means	“truthfulness”	or	“reliability,”	has	sometimes
been	used	as	a	synonym	for	God’s	truthfulness.
The	first	part	of	this	definition	indicates	that	the	God	revealed	in	Scripture	is
the	true	or	real	God	and	that	all	other	so-called	gods	are	idols.	“The	L
ORD
	is
the	true	God;	he	is	the	living	God	and	the	everlasting	King.	.	.	.	The	gods	who
did	not	make	the	heavens	and	the	earth	shall	perish	from	the	earth	and	from
under	the	heavens”	(Jer.	10:10–11).	Jesus	says	to	his	Father,	“And	this	is
eternal	life,	that	they	know	you	
the	only	true	God,	
and	Jesus	Christ	whom	you
have	sent”	(John	17:3;	cf.	1	John	5:20).
We	might	ask	what	it	means	to	be	the	true	God	as	opposed	to	other	beings
who	are	not	God.	It	must	mean	that	God	in	his	own	being	or	character	is	the
one	who	fully	conforms	to	the	idea	of	what	God	should	be:	namely,	a	being
who	is	infinitely	perfect	in	power,	in	wisdom,	in	goodness,	in	lordship	over
time	and	space,	and	so	forth.	But	we	may	further	ask,	
whose	
idea	of	God	is
this?	What	idea	of	God	must	one	conform	to	in	order	to	be	the	true	God?
At	this	point	our	train	of	thought	becomes	somewhat	circular,	for	we	must	not
say	that	a	being	must	conform	to	
our	
idea	of	what	God	should	be	like	in	order
to	be	the	true	God!	We	are	mere	creatures!	We	cannot	define	what	the	true
God	must	be	like!	So	we	must	say	that	it	is	
God	himself	
who	has	the	only
perfect	idea	of	what	the	true	God	should	be	like.	And	he	himself	is	the	true
God	because	in	his	being	and	character	he	perfectly	conforms	to	his	own	idea
of	what	the	true	God	should	be.	In	addition,	he	has	implanted	in	our	minds	a
reflection	of	his	own	idea	of	what	the	true	God	must	be,	and	this	enables	us	to
recognize	him	as	God.
The	definition	given	above	also	affirms	that	all	of	God’s	
knowledge	
is	true
and	is	the	final	standard	of	truth.	Job	tells	us	that	God	is	“perfect	in
knowledge”	(Job	37:16;	see	also	the	verses	cited	above	under	the	discussion
of	God’s	omniscience).	To	say	that	God	knows	all	things	and	that	his
knowledge	is	perfect	is	to	say	that	he	is	never	mistaken	in	his	perception	or
understanding	of	the	world:	all	that	he	knows	and	thinks	is	true	and	is	a
correct	understanding	of	the	nature	of	reality.	In	fact,	since	God	knows	all
things	infinitely	well,	we	can	say	that	the	standard	of	true	knowledge	is
conformity	to	God’s	knowledge.	If	we	think	the	same	thing	God	thinks	about
anything	in	the	universe,	we	are	thinking	truthfully	about	it.
Our	definition	also	affirms	that	God’s	words	are	both	
true	
and	the	
final
standard	of	truth.	
This	means	that	God	is	reliable	and	faithful	in	his	words.
With	respect	to	his	promises,	God	always	does	what	he	promises	to	do,	and
we	can	depend	on	him	never	to	be	unfaithful	to	his	promises.	Thus,	he	is	“a
God	of	faithfulness”	(Deut.	32:4).	In	fact,	this	specific	aspect	of	God’s
truthfulness	is	sometimes	viewed	as	a	distinct	attribute:	
God’s	faithfulness
means	that	God	will	always	do	what	he	has	said	and	fulfill	what	he	has
promised	
(Num.	23:19;	cf.	2	Sam.	7:28;	Ps.	141:6;	et	al.).	He	can	be	relied
upon,	and	he	will	never	prove	unfaithful	to	those	who	trust	what	he	has	said.
Indeed,	the	essence	of	true	faith	is	taking	God	at	his	word	and	relying	on	him
to	do	as	he	has	promised.
In	addition	to	the	fact	that	God	is	faithful	to	his	promises,	we	must	also	affirm
that	all	of	God’s	
words	
about	himself	and	about	his	creation	completely
correspond	to	reality.	That	is,	God	always	speaks	truth	when	he	speaks.	He	is
“the	unlying	God”	(Titus	1:2,	author’s	translation),	the	God	for	whom	it	is
impossible	to	lie	(Heb.	6:18),	the	God	whose	every	word	is	perfectly	“pure”
(Ps.	12:6),	the	one	of	whom	it	can	be	said,	“Every	word	of	God	proves	true”
(Prov.	30:5).	God’s	words	are	not	simply	true	in	the	sense	that	they	conform
to	some	standard	of	truthfulness	outside	of	God.	Rather,	they	are	truth	itself;
they	are	the	final	standard	and	definition	of	truth.	So	Jesus	can	say	to	the
Father,	“Your	word	is	
truth”	
(John	17:17).	What	was	said	about	the
truthfulness	of	God’s	knowledge	can	also	be	said	about	God’s	words,	for	they
are	based	on	his	perfect	knowledge	and	accurately	reflect	that	perfect
knowledge:	God’s	words	are	“truth”	in	the	sense	that	they	are	the	final
standard	by	which	truthfulness	is	to	be	judged:	whatever	conforms	to	God’s
own	words	is	also	true,	and	what	fails	to	conform	to	his	words	is	not	true.
The	truthfulness	of	God	is	also	communicable	in	that	we	can	in	part	imitate	it
by	striving	to	have	true	knowledge	about	God	and	about	his	world.	In	fact,	as
we	begin	to	think	true	thoughts	about	God	and	creation,	thoughts	that	we
learn	from	Scripture	and	from	allowing	Scripture	to	guide	us	in	our
observation	and	interpretation	of	the	natural	world,	we	begin	to	think	God’s
own	thoughts	after	him!	We	can	exclaim	with	the	psalmist,	“How	precious	to
me	are	your	thoughts,	O	God!	How	vast	is	the	sum	of	them!”	(Ps.	139:17).
This	realization	should	encourage	us	in	the	pursuit	of	knowledge	in	all	areas
of	the	natural	and	social	sciences	and	the	humanities.	Whatever	the	area	of
our	investigation,	when	we	discover	more	truth	about	the	nature	of	reality,	we
discover	more	of	the	truth	that	God	already	knows.	In	this	sense	we	can
affirm	that	“all	truth	is	God’s	truth”
7
	and	rejoice	whenever	the	learning	or
discovery	of	this	truth	is	used	in	ways	pleasing	to	God.	Growth	in	knowledge
is	part	of	the	process	of	becoming	more	like	God	or	becoming	creatures	who
are	more	fully	in	God’s	image.	Paul	tells	us	that	we	have	put	on	the	“new
nature,”	which,	he	says,	“is	being	
renewed	in	knowledge	
after	the	image	of	its
creator”	(Col.	3:10).
In	a	society	that	is	exceedingly	careless	with	the	truthfulness	of	spoken	words,
we	as	God’s	children	are	to	imitate	our	Creator	and	take	great	care	to	be	sure
that	our	words	are	always	truthful.	“
Do	not	lie	to	one	another,	
seeing	that	you
have	put	off	the	old	nature	with	its	practices	and	have	put	on	the	new	nature”
(Col.	3:9–10).	Again	Paul	admonishes,	“Therefore,	putting	away	falsehood,
let	every	one	
speak	the	truth	
with	his	neighbor”	(Eph.	4:25).	In	his	own
ministry,	Paul	says	that	he	sought	to	practice	absolute	truthfulness:	“We	have
renounced	disgraceful,	underhanded	ways;	we	refuse	to	practice	cunning	or	to
tamper	with	God’s	word,	but	by	the	open	statement	of	the	truth	we	would
commend	ourselves	to	every	man’s	conscience	in	the	sight	of	God”	(2	Cor.
4:2).	God	is	pleased	when	his	people	put	“devious	talk”	far	from	them	(Prov.
4:24)	and	speak	with	words	that	are	acceptable	not	only	in	the	sight	of	people
but	also	in	the	sight	of	the	Lord	himself	(Ps.	19:14).
Furthermore,	we	should	imitate	God’s	truthfulness	in	our	own	reaction	to
truth	and	falsehood.	Like	God,	we	should	
love	
truth	and	
hate	
falsehood.	The
commandment	not	to	bear	false	witness	against	our	neighbor	(Ex.	20:16),	like
the	other	commandments,	requires	not	merely	outward	conformity	but	also
conformity	in	heart	attitude.	One	who	is	pleasing	to	God	“speaks	truth	from
his	heart”	(Ps.	15:2),	and	strives	to	be	like	the	righteous	man	who	“hates
falsehood”	(Prov.	13:5).	God	commands	his	people	through	Zechariah,	“Do
not	devise	evil	in	your	hearts	against	one	another,	and	love	no	false	oath,	for
all	these	things	I	hate,	says	the	L
ORD
”	(Zech.	8:17).
These	commands	are	given	because	God	himself	loves	truth	and	hates
falsehood:	“Lying	lips	are	an	abomination	to	the	L
ORD
,	but	those	who	act
faithfully	are	his	delight”	(Prov.	12:22;	cf.	Isa.	59:3–4).	Falsehood	and	lying
come	not	from	God	but	from	Satan,	who	delights	in	falsehood:	“When	he	lies,
he	speaks	according	to	his	own	nature,	for	he	is	a	liar	and	the	father	of	lies”
(John	8:44).	It	is	appropriate	then	that	with	“the	cowardly,	the	faithless,	the
polluted”	and	the	“murderers,	fornicators,	sorcerers,	[and]	idolaters”	who	are
found	in	“the	lake	that	burns	with	fire	and	sulphur”	far	from	the	heavenly	city,
are	found	also	“all	
liars”	
(Rev.	21:8).
Thus,	Scripture	teaches	us	that	lying	is	wrong	not	only	because	of	the	great
harm	that	comes	from	it	(and	much	more	harm	comes	from	lying	than	we
often	realize),	but	also	for	an	even	deeper	and	more	profound	reason:	when
we	lie	we	dishonor	God	and	diminish	his	glory,	for	we,	as	those	created	in
God’s	image	and	created	for	the	purpose	of	reflecting	God’s	glory	in	our
lives,	are	acting	in	a	way	that	is	contrary	to	God’s	own	character.
C.	Moral	Attributes
6.	Goodness.	
The	goodness	of	God	means	that	God	is	the	final	standard	of
good,	and	that	all	that	God	is	and	does	is	worthy	of	approval.
In	this	definition	we	find	a	situation	similar	to	the	one	we	faced	in	defining
God	as	the	true	God.	Here,	“good”	can	be	understood	to	mean	“worthy	of
approval,”	but	we	have	not	answered	the	question,	approval	by	whom?	In	one
sense,	we	can	say	that	anything	that	is	truly	good	should	be	worthy	of
approval	by	us.	But	in	a	more	ultimate	sense,	we	are	not	free	to	decide	by
ourselves	what	is	worthy	of	approval	and	what	is	not.	Ultimately,	therefore,
God’s	being	and	actions	are	perfectly	worthy	of	his	own	approval.	He	is
therefore	the	final	standard	of	good.	Jesus	implies	this	when	he	says,	“No	one
is	good	but	God	alone”	(Luke	18:19).	The	Psalms	frequently	affirm	that	“the
L
ORD
	is	good”	(Ps.	100:5)	or	exclaim,	“O	give	thanks	to	the	L
ORD
,	for	he	is
good”	(Pss.	106:1;	107:1;	et	al.).	David	encourages	us,	“O	taste	and	see	that
the	L
ORD
	is	good!”	(Ps.	34:8).
But	if	God	is	himself	good	and	therefore	the	ultimate	standard	of	good,	then
we	have	a	definition	of	the	meaning	of	“good”	that	will	greatly	help	us	in	the
study	of	ethics	and	aesthetics.	What	is	“good”?	“Good”	is	what	God
approves.	We	may	ask	then,	why	is	what	God	approves	good?	We	must
answer,	“Because	he	approves	it.”	That	is	to	say,	there	is	no	higher	standard	of
goodness	than	God’s	own	character	and	his	approval	of	whatever	is	consistent
with	that	character.	Nonetheless,	God	has	given	us	some	reflection	of	his	own
sense	of	goodness,	so	that	when	we	evaluate	things	in	the	way	God	created	us
to	evaluate	them,	we	will	also	approve	what	God	approves	and	delight	in
things	in	which	he	delights.
Our	definition	also	states	that	all	that	God	
does	
is	worthy	of	approval.	We	see
evidence	of	this	in	the	creation	narrative:	“And	God	saw	everything	that	he
had	made,	and	behold,	it	was	
very	good”	
(Gen.	1:31).	The	psalmist	connects
the	goodness	of	God	with	the	goodness	of	his	actions:	“You	are	good	and	you
do	
good;	
teach	me	your	statutes”	(Ps.	119:68).	Psalm	104	is	an	excellent
example	of	praise	to	God	for	his	goodness	in	creation,	while	many	Psalms,
such	as	Psalms	106	and	107,	give	thanks	to	God	for	his	goodness	in	all	his
actions	toward	his	people.	And	Paul	encourages	us	to	discover	in	practice
how	God’s	will	for	our	lives	is	“
good	
and	acceptable	and	perfect”	(Rom.
12:2).
Scripture	also	tells	us	that	God	is	the	source	of	all	good	in	the	world.	“Every
good	endowment	and	every	perfect	gift	is	from	above,	coming	down	from	the
Father	of	lights	with	whom	there	is	no	variation	or	shadow	due	to	change”
(James	1:17;	cf.	Ps.	145:9;	Acts	14:17).	Moreover,	God	does	only	good	things
for	his	children.	We	read,	“No	good	thing	does	the	L
ORD
	withhold	from	those
who	walk	uprightly”	(Ps.	84:11).	And	in	the	same	context	in	which	Paul
assures	us	that	“in	everything	God	works	for	good	with	those	who	love	him”
(Rom.	8:28),	he	also	says,	“He	who	did	not	spare	his	own	Son	but	gave	him
up	for	us	all,	will	he	not	also	give	us	all	things	with	him?”	(Rom.	8:32).	Much
more	than	an	earthly	father,	our	heavenly	Father	will	“give	good	things	to
those	who	ask	him”	(Matt.	7:11),	and	even	his	discipline	is	a	manifestation	of
his	love	and	is	for	our	good	(Heb.	12:10).	This	knowledge	of	God’s	great
goodness	should	encourage	us	to	“give	thanks	in	all	circumstances”	(1	Thess.
5:18).
In	imitation	of	this	communicable	attribute,	we	should	ourselves	do	good
(that	is,	we	should	do	what	God	approves)	and	thereby	imitate	the	goodness
of	our	heavenly	Father.	Paul	writes,	“So	then,	as	we	have	opportunity,	let	us
do	good	to	all	men,	and	especially	to	those	who	are	of	the	household	of	faith”
(Gal.	6:10;	cf.	Luke	6:27,	33–35;	2	Tim.	3:17).	Moreover,	when	we	realize
that	God	is	the	definition	and	source	of	all	good,	we	will	realize	that	God
himself	is	the	ultimate	good	that	we	seek.	We	will	say	with	the	psalmist,
“Whom	have	I	in	heaven	but	you?	And	there	is	nothing	upon	earth	that	I
desire	besides	you.	My	flesh	and	my	heart	may	fail,	but	God	is	the	strength	of
my	heart	and	my	portion	for	ever”	(Ps.	73:25–26;	cf.	16:11;	42:1–2).
God’s	goodness	is	closely	related	to	several	other	characteristics	of	his	nature,
among	them	love,	mercy,	patience,	and	grace.	Sometimes	these	are
considered	separate	attributes	and	are	treated	individually.	At	other	times
these	are	considered	part	of	God’s	goodness	and	are	treated	as	various	aspects
of	God’s	goodness.	In	this	chapter	we	will	treat	love	as	a	separate	attribute
since	it	is	so	prominent	in	Scripture.	The	other	three	characteristics	(mercy,
patience,	and	grace),	while	also	prominent	in	Scripture,	will	be	treated
together	as	aspects	of	God’s	goodness	to	individuals	in	specific	situations.
Thus,	God’s	
mercy	
is	
his	goodness	toward	those	in	distress,	
his	
grace	
is	
his
goodness	toward	those	who	deserve	only	punishment,	
and	his	
patience	
is	
his
goodness	toward	those	who	continue	to	sin	over	a	period	of	time	
(see	below,
section	C.8,	on	mercy,	patience,	and	grace).
7.	Love.	
God’s	love	means	that	God	eternally	gives	of	himself	to	others.
This	definition	understands	love	as	self-giving	for	the	benefit	of	others.	This
attribute	of	God	shows	that	it	is	part	of	his	nature	to	give	of	himself	in	order
to	bring	about	blessing	or	good	for	others.
John	tells	us	that	“God	is	love”	(1	John	4:8).	We	see	evidence	that	this
attribute	of	God	was	active	even	before	creation	among	the	members	of	the
Trinity.	Jesus	speaks	to	his	Father	of	“my	glory	which	you	have	given	me	in
your	
love	
for	me	
before	the	foundation	of	the	world”	
(John	17:24),	thus
indicating	that	there	was	love	and	a	giving	of	honor	from	the	Father	to	the
Son	from	all	eternity.	It	continues	at	the	present	time,	for	we	read,	“The
Father	loves	the	Son,	and	has	given	all	things	into	his	hand”	(John	3:35).
This	love	is	also	reciprocal,	for	Jesus	says,	“I	do	as	the	Father	has
commanded	me,	so	that	the	world	may	know	that	I	love	the	Father”	(John
14:31).	The	love	between	the	Father	and	the	Son	also	presumably
characterizes	their	relationship	with	the	Holy	Spirit,	even	though	it	is	not
explicitly	mentioned.	This	eternal	love	of	the	Father	for	the	Son,	the	Son	for
the	Father,	and	of	both	for	the	Holy	Spirit	makes	heaven	a	world	of	love	and
joy	because	each	person	of	the	Trinity	seeks	to	bring	joy	and	happiness	to	the
other	two.
The	self-giving	that	characterizes	the	Trinity	finds	clear	expression	in	God’s
relationship	to	mankind,	and	especially	to	sinful	men.	“In	this	is	love,	not	that
we	loved	God	but	that	he	loved	us	and	sent	his	Son	to	be	the	propitiation	for
our	sins”	(1	John	4:10,	author’s	translation).	Paul	writes,	“God	shows	his	love
for	us	in	that	while	we	were	yet	sinners	Christ	died	for	us”	(Rom.	5:8).	John
also	writes,	“For	God	so	loved	the	world	that	he	gave	his	only	Son,	that
whoever	believes	in	him	should	not	perish	but	have	eternal	life”	(John	3:16).
Paul	also	speaks	of	“the	Son	of	God,	who	
loved	me	
and	gave	himself	for	me”
(Gal.	2:20),	thus	showing	an	awareness	of	the	directly	personal	application	of
Christ’s	love	to	individual	sinners.	It	should	cause	us	great	joy	to	know	that	it
is	the	purpose	of	God	the	Father,	Son,	and	Holy	Spirit	to	give	of	themselves
to	us	to	bring	us	true	joy	and	happiness.	It	is	God’s	nature	to	act	that	way
toward	those	upon	whom	he	has	set	his	love,	and	he	will	continue	to	act	that
way	toward	us	for	all	eternity.
We	imitate	this	communicable	attribute	of	God,	first	by	loving	God	in	return,
and	second	by	loving	others	in	imitation	of	the	way	God	loves	them.	All	our
obligations	to	God	can	be	summarized	in	this:	“You	shall	love	the	Lord	your
God	with	all	your	heart,	and	with	all	your	soul,	and	with	all	your	mind.	.	.	.
You	shall	love	your	neighbor	as	yourself	“	(Matt.	22:37–38).	If	we	love	God,
we	will	obey	his	commandments	(1	John	5:3)	and	thus	do	what	is	pleasing	to
him.	We	will	love	God,	not	the	world	(1	John	2:15),	and	we	will	do	all	this
because	he	first	loved	us	(1	John	4:19).
It	is	one	of	the	most	amazing	facts	in	all	Scripture	that	just	as	God’s	love
involves	his	giving	of	himself	to	make	us	happy,	so	we	can	in	return	give	of
ourselves	and	actually	bring	joy	to	God’s	heart.	Isaiah	promises	God’s	people,
“As	the	bridegroom	rejoices	over	the	bride,	so	
shall	your	God	rejoice	over
you”	
(Isa.	62:5),	and	Zephaniah	tells	God’s	people,	“The	L
ORD
,	your	God,	is
in	your	midst	.	.	.	he	will	rejoice	over	you	with	gladness,	he	will	renew	you	in
his	love;	he	will	exult	over	you	with	loud	singing	as	on	a	day	of	festival”
(Zeph.	3:17–18).
Our	imitation	of	God’s	love	is	also	seen	in	our	love	for	others.	John	makes
this	explicit:	“Beloved,	if	God	so	loved	us,	we	also	ought	to	love	one	another”
(1	John	4:11).	In	fact,	our	love	for	others	within	the	fellowship	of	believers	is
so	evidently	an	imitation	of	Christ	that	by	it	the	world	recognizes	us	as	his:
“By	this	all	men	will	know	that	you	are	my	disciples,	if	you	have	love	for	one
another”	(John	13:35;	cf.	15:13;	Rom.	13:10;	1	Cor.	13:4–7;	Heb.	10:24).	God
himself	gives	us	his	love	to	enable	us	to	love	each	other	(John	17:26;	Rom.
5:5).	Moreover,	our	love	for	our	enemies	especially	reflects	God’s	love	(Matt.
5:43–48).
8.	Mercy,	Grace,	Patience.
	God’s	mercy,	patience,	and	grace	may	be	seen	as
three	separate	attributes,	or	as	specific	aspects	of	God’s	goodness.	The
definitions	given	here	show	these	attributes	as	special	examples	of	God’s
goodness	when	it	is	used	for	the	benefit	of	specific	classes	of	people.
God’s	
mercy	
means	God’s	goodness	toward	those	in	misery	and	distress.
God’s	
grace	
means	God’s	goodness	toward	those	who	deserve	only
punishment.
God’s	
patience	
means	God’s	goodness	in	withholding	of	punishment	toward
those	who	sin	over	a	period	of	time.
These	three	characteristics	of	God’s	nature	are	often	mentioned	together,
especially	in	the	Old	Testament.	When	God	declared	his	name	to	Moses,	he
proclaimed,	“The	L
ORD
,	the	L
ORD
,	a	God	merciful	and	gracious,	slow	to
anger,	and	abounding	in	steadfast	love	and	faithfulness”	(Ex.	34:6).	David
says	in	Psalm	103:8,	“The	L
ORD
	is	merciful	and	gracious,	slow	to	anger	and
abounding	in	steadfast	love.”
Because	these	characteristics	of	God	are	often	mentioned	together,	it	may
seem	difficult	to	distinguish	among	them.	Yet	the	characteristic	of	mercy	is
often	emphasized	where	people	are	in	misery	or	distress.	David	says,	for
example,	“I	am	in	great	distress;	let	us	fall	into	the	hand	of	the	L
ORD
	for	his
mercy	
is	great	.	.	.”	(2	Sam.	24:14).	The	two	blind	men	who	wish	Jesus	to	see
their	plight	and	heal	them	cry,	“Have	
mercy	
on	us,	Son	of	David”	(Matt.
9:27).	When	Paul	speaks	of	the	fact	that	God	comforts	us	in	affliction,	he
calls	God	the	“Father	of	
mercies	
and	God	of	all	comfort”	(2	Cor.	1:3).
8
	In
time	of	need,	we	are	to	draw	near	to	God’s	throne	so	that	we	might	receive
both	mercy	and	grace	(Heb.	4:16;	cf.	2:17;	James	5:11).	We	are	to	imitate
God’s	mercy	in	our	conduct	toward	others:	“Blessed	are	the	merciful,	for	they
shall	obtain	mercy”	(Matt.	5:7;	cf.	2	Cor.	1:3–4).
With	respect	to	the	attribute	of	
grace,	
we	find	that	Scripture	emphasizes	that
God’s	grace,	or	his	favor	toward	those	who	deserve	no	favor	but	only
punishment,	is	never	obligated	but	is	always	freely	given	on	God’s	part.	God
says,	“I	will	be	gracious	to	whom	I	will	be	gracious,	and	will	show	mercy	on
whom	I	will	show	mercy”	(Ex.	33:19;	quoted	in	Rom.	9:15).	Yet	God	is
regularly	gracious	toward	his	people:	“Turn	to	me	and	be	
gracious	
to	me,
After	Thy	manner	
with	those	who	love	Thy	name”	(Ps.	119:132	NASB).	In
fact,	Peter	can	call	God	“the	God	of	all	grace”	(1	Peter	5:10).
Grace	as	God’s	goodness	especially	shown	to	those	who	do	not	deserve	it	is
seen	frequently	in	Paul’s	writings.	He	emphasizes	that	salvation	by	grace	is
the	opposite	of	salvation	by	human	effort,	for	grace	is	a	freely	given	gift.
“Since	all	have	sinned	and	fall	short	of	the	glory	of	God,	they	are	justified	by
his	
grace	
as	a	gift,	through	the	redemption	which	is	in	Christ	Jesus”	(Rom.
3:23–24).	The	distinction	between	grace	and	a	salvation	earned	by	works	that
merit	a	reward	is	also	seen	in	Romans	11:6:	“But	if	it	is	by	grace,	it	is	no
longer	on	the	basis	of	works;	otherwise	grace	would	no	longer	be	grace.”
Grace,	then,	is	God’s	favor	freely	given	to	those	who	do	not	deserve	this
favor.
Paul	also	sees	that	if	grace	is	unmerited,	then	there	is	only	one	human	attitude
appropriate	as	an	instrument	for	receiving	such	grace,	namely,	faith:	“That	is
why	it	depends	on	faith,	in	order	that	the	promise	may	rest	on	grace.	.	.”
(Rom.	4:16).	Faith	is	the	one	human	attitude	that	is	the	opposite	of	depending
on	oneself,	for	it	involves	trust	in	or	dependence	upon	another.	Thus,	it	is
devoid	of	self-reliance	or	attempts	to	gain	righteousness	by	human	effort.	If
God’s	favor	is	to	come	to	us	apart	from	our	own	merit,	then	it	must	come
when	we	depend	not	on	our	own	merit	but	on	the	merits	of	another,	and	that	is
precisely	when	we	have	faith.
In	the	New	Testament,	and	especially	in	Paul,	not	only	the	forgiveness	of	sins,
but	also	
the	entire	living	of	the	Christian	life	
can	be	seen	to	result	from	God’s
continuous	bestowal	of	grace.	Paul	can	say,	“by	the	grace	of	God	I	am	what	I
am”	(1	Cor.	15:10).	Luke	speaks	of	Antioch	as	the	place	where	Paul	and
Barnabas	“had	been	commended	to	the	grace	of	God	for	the	work	which	they
had	fulfilled”	(Acts	14:26),	indicating	that	the	church	there,	in	sending	out
Paul	and	Barnabas,	saw	the	success	of	their	ministry	as	dependent	upon	God’s
continuing	grace.	Furthermore,	the	blessing	of	“grace”	upon	Paul’s	readers	is
the	most	frequent	apostolic	blessing	in	his	letters	(see,	e.g.,	Rom.	1:7;	16:20;
1	Cor.	1:3;	16:23;	2	Cor.	1:2;	13:14;	Gal.	1:3;	6:18).
God’s	
patience,	
similarly,	was	mentioned	in	some	of	the	verses	cited	above	in
connection	with	God’s	mercy.	The	Old	Testament	frequently	speaks	of	God	as
“
slow	to	anger”	
(Ex.	34:6;	Num.	14:18;	Pss.	86:15;	103:8;	145:8;	Jonah	4:2;
Nah.	1:3;	et	al.).	In	the	New	Testament,	Paul	speaks	about	God’s	“kindness
and	forbearance	and	patience”	(Rom.	2:4),	and	says	that	Jesus	Christ
displayed	his	“perfect	patience”	toward	Paul	himself	as	an	example	for	others
(1	Tim.	1:16;	cf.	Rom.	9:22;	1	Peter	3:20).
We	are	also	to	imitate	God’s	patience	and	be	“slow	to	anger”	(James	1:19),
and	be	patient	in	suffering	as	Christ	was	(1	Peter	2:20).	We	are	to	lead	a	life
“with	patience”	(Eph.	4:2),	and	“patience”	is	listed	among	the	fruit	of	the
Spirit	in	Galatians	5:22	(see	also	Rom.	8:25;	1	Cor.	13:4;	Col.	1:11;	3:12;	2
Tim.	3:10;	4:2;	James	5:7–8;	Rev.	2:2–3;	et	al.).	As	with	most	of	the	attributes
of	God	that	we	are	to	imitate	in	our	lives,	patience	requires	a	moment-by-
moment	trust	in	God	to	fulfill	his	promises	and	purposes	in	our	lives	at	his
chosen	time.	Our	confidence	that	the	Lord	will	soon	fulfill	his	purposes	for
our	good	and	his	glory	will	enable	us	to	be	patient.	James	makes	this
connection	when	he	says,	“You	also	be	patient.	Establish	your	hearts,	for	the
coming	of	the	Lord	is	at	hand”	(James	5:8).
9.	Holiness.	
God’s	holiness	means	that	he	is	separated	from	sin	and	devoted
to	seeking	his	own	honor.	
This	definition	contains	both	a	relational	quality
(separation	from)	and	a	moral	quality	(the	separation	is	from	sin	or	evil,	and
the	devotion	is	to	the	good	of	God’s	own	honor	or	glory).	The	idea	of	holiness
as	including	both	separation	from	evil	and	devotion	to	God’s	own	glory	is
found	in	a	number	of	Old	Testament	passages.	The	word	
holy	
is	used	to
describe	both	parts	of	the	tabernacle,	for	example.	The	tabernacle	itself	was	a
place	separate	from	the	evil	and	sin	of	the	world,	and	the	first	room	in	it	was
called	the	“holy	place.”	It	was	dedicated	to	God’s	service.	But	then	God
commanded	that	there	be	a	veil,	“and	the	veil	shall	separate	for	you	the	holy
place	from	the	most	holy”	(Ex.	26:33).	The	most	holy	place,	where	the	ark	of
the	covenant	was	kept,	was	the	place	most	separated	from	evil	and	sin	and
most	fully	devoted	to	God’s	service.
The	place	where	God	himself	dwelt	was	itself	holy:	“Who	shall	ascend	the
hill	of	the	L
ORD
?	And	who	shall	stand	in	his	holy	place?”	(Ps.	24:3).	The
element	of	dedication	to	God’s	service	is	seen	in	the	holiness	of	the	sabbath
day:	“the	L
ORD
	blessed	the	sabbath	day	and	made	it	holy”	(or	“hallowed	it”;
the	verb	is	a	Piel	form	of	
qamdash	
and	means	“to	make	holy”)	(Ex.	20:11;	cf.
Gen.	2:3).	The	sabbath	day	was	made	holy	because	it	was	set	apart	from	the
ordinary	activities	of	the	world	and	dedicated	to	God’s	service.	In	the	same
way	the	tabernacle	and	the	altar,	as	well	as	Aaron	and	his	sons,	were	to	be
“made	holy”	(Ex.	29:44),	that	is,	set	apart	from	ordinary	tasks	and	from	the
evil	and	sin	of	the	world	and	dedicated	to	God’s	service	(cf.	Ex.	30:25–33).
God	himself	is	the	Most	Holy	One.	He	is	called	the	“Holy	One	of	Israel”	(Pss.
71:22;	78:41;	89:18;	Isa.	1:4;	5:19,	24;	et	al.).	The	seraphim	around	God’s
throne	cry,	“Holy,	holy,	holy	is	the	L
ORD
	of	hosts;	the	whole	earth	is	full	of	his
glory”	(Isa.	6:3).	“The	L
ORD
	our	God	is	holy!”	exclaims	the	psalmist	(Ps.
99:9;	cf.	99:3,	5;	22:3).
God’s	holiness	provides	the	pattern	for	his	people	to	imitate.	He	commands
them,	“You	shall	be	holy;	for	I	the	L
ORD
	your	God	am	holy”	(Lev.	19:2;	cf.
11:44–45;	20:26;	1	Peter	1:16).	When	God	called	his	people	out	of	Egypt	and
brought	them	to	himself	and	commanded	them	to	obey	his	voice,	then	he	said,
“You	shall	be	to	me	a	kingdom	of	priests	and	a	
holy	nation”	
(Ex.	19:4–6).	In
this	case	the	idea	of	separation	from	evil	and	sin	(which	here	included	in	a
very	striking	way	separation	from	life	in	Egypt)	and	the	idea	of	devotion	to
God	(in	serving	him	and	in	obeying	his	statutes)	are	both	seen	in	the	example
of	a	“holy	nation.”
New	covenant	believers	are	also	to	“strive	.	.	.	for	the	
holiness	
without	which
no	one	will	see	the	Lord”	(Heb.	12:14)	and	to	know	that	God’s	discipline	is
given	to	us	“that	we	may	share	his	holiness”	(Heb.	12:10).	Paul	encourages
Christians	to	be	separate	from	the	dominating	influence	that	comes	from	close
association	with	unbelievers	(2	Cor.	6:14–18)	and	then	encourages	them,	“Let
us	cleanse	ourselves	from	every	defilement	of	body	and	spirit,	and	
make
holiness	perfect	in	the	fear	of	God”	
(2	Cor.	7:1;	cf.	Rom.	12:1).	The	church
itself	is	intended	by	God	to	grow	“into	a	holy	temple	in	the	Lord”	(Eph.	2:21),
and	Christ’s	present	work	for	the	church	is	“that	he	might	sanctify	her	.	.	.	that
he	might	present	the	church	to	himself	in	splendor	.	.	.	that	she	might	be	holy
and	without	blemish”	(Eph.	5:26–27).	Not	only	individuals	but	also	the
church	itself	must	grow	in	holiness!
Zechariah	prophesies	a	day	when	everything	on	earth	will	be	“holy	to	the
L
ORD
.”	He	says:
And	on	that	day	there	shall	be	inscribed	on	the	bells	of	the	horses,
“Holy	to	the	L
ORD
.”	And	the	pots	in	the	house	of	the	L
ORD
	shall	be	as
the	bowls	before	the	altar;	and	every	pot	in	Jerusalem	and	Judah	shall
be	sacred	to	the	L
ORD
	of	hosts.	(Zech.	14:20–21)
At	that	time,	everything	on	earth	will	be	separated	from	evil,	purified	from
sin,	and	devoted	to	the	service	of	God	in	true	moral	purity.
1
0.	Peace	(or	Order).
	In	1	Corinthians	14:33	Paul	says,	“God	is	not	a	God	of
confusion	but	of	
peace.”	
Although	“peace”	and	“order”	have	not	traditionally
been	classified	as	attributes	of	God,	Paul	here	indicates	another	quality	that
we	could	think	of	as	a	distinct	attribute	of	God.	Paul	says	that	God’s	actions
are	characterized	by	“peace”	and	not	by	“disorder”	(Gk.	
akatastasia,	
a	word
meaning	“disorder,	confusion,	unrest”).	God	himself	is	“the	God	of	peace”
(Rom.	15:33;	16:20;	Phil.	4:9;	1	Thess.	5:23;	Heb.	13:20;	cf.	Eph.	2:14;	2
Thess.	3:16).	But	those	who	walk	in	wickedness	do	not	have	peace:	“	‘There
is	no	peace,’	says	the	L
ORD
,	‘for	the	wicked’	”	(Isa.	48:22;	57:21;	cf.	59:8).
However,	when	God	looks	with	compassion	upon	the	people	whom	he	loves,
he	sees	them	as	“afflicted	.	.	.	storm-tossed	(LXX,	
akatastatos,	
“in	disorder,	in
confusion”),	and	not	comforted”	(Isa.	54:11),	and	promises	to	establish	their
foundations	with	precious	stones	(Isa.	54:11–12)	and	lead	them	forth	in
“peace”	(Isa.	55:12).	The	proclamation	of	God’s	plan	of	redemption	contains
the	promise	of	peace	to	God’s	people	(Pss.	29:11;	85:8;	119:165;	Prov.	3:17;
Isa.	9:6–7;	26:3;	57:19;	John	14:27;	Rom.	8:6;	2	Thess.	3:16;	et	al.).	In	fact,
the	third	element	that	Paul	lists	as	part	of	the	fruit	of	the	Spirit	is	“peace”
(Gal.	5:22).
This	peace	certainly	does	not	imply	inactivity,	for	it	was	at	a	time	of	intense
growth	and	activity	that	Luke	could	say	that	“the	church	throughout	all	Judea
and	Galilee	and	Samaria	had	peace	and	was	built	up”	(Acts	9:31).
Furthermore,	although	God	is	a	God	of	peace,	he	is	also	the	one	who	“will
neither	slumber	nor	sleep”	(Ps.	121:4).	He	is	the	God	who	is	continually
working	(John	5:17).	And	even	though	heaven	is	a	place	of	peace,	it	is	a	place
also	of	continual	praise	to	God	and	service	for	him.
Thus,	God’s	peace	can	be	defined	as	follows:	
God’s	peace	means	that	in
God’s	being	and	in	his	actions	he	is	separate	from	all	confusion	and	disorder,
yet	he	is	continually	active	in	innumerable	well-ordered,	fully	controlled,
simultaneous	actions.
This	definition	indicates	that	God’s	peace	does	not	have	to	do	with	inactivity,
but	with	ordered	and	controlled	activity.	To	engage	in	infinite	activity	of	this
sort,	of	course,	requires	God’s	infinite	wisdom,	knowledge,	and	power.
When	we	understand	God’s	peace	in	this	way	we	can	see	an	imitation	of	this
attribute	of	God	not	only	in	“peace”	as	part	of	the	fruit	of	the	Spirit	in
Galatians	5:22–23,	but	also	in	the	last-mentioned	element	in	the	fruit	of	the
Spirit,	namely,	“self-control”	(Gal.	5:23).	When	we	as	God’s	people	walk	in
his	ways,	we	come	to	know	more	and	more	fully	by	experience	that	the
kingdom	of	God	is	indeed	“righteousness	and	
peace	
and	joy	in	the	Holy
Spirit”	(Rom.	14:17),	and	we	can	say	of	the	path	of	God’s	wisdom,	“Her	ways
are	ways	of	pleasantness,	and	all	her	paths	are	
peace”	
(Prov.	3:17).
11.
	Righteousness,	Justice.
	In	English	the	terms	
righteousness	
and	
justice	
are
different	words,	but	in	both	the	Hebrew	Old	Testament	and	the	Greek	New
Testament	there	is	only	one	word	group	behind	these	two	English	terms.	(In
the	Old	Testament	the	terms	primarily	translate	forms	of	the	
tsedek	
word
group,	and	the	New	Testament	members	of	the	
dikaios	
word	group.)
Therefore,	these	two	terms	will	be	considered	together	as	speaking	of	one
attribute	of	God.
God’s	righteousness	means	that	God	always	acts	in	accordance	with	what	is
right	and	is	himself	the	final	standard	of	what	is	right.
Speaking	of	God,	Moses	says,	“All	his	ways	are	
justice.	
A	God	of	faithfulness
and	without	iniquity,	
just	
and	
right	
is	he”	(Deut.	32:4).	Abraham	successfully
appeals	to	God’s	own	character	of	righteousness	when	he	says,	“Shall	not	the
Judge	of	all	the	earth	do	right?”	(Gen.	18:25).	God	also	speaks	and	commands
what	is	right:	“The	precepts	of	the	L
ORD
	are	
right,	
rejoicing	the	heart”	(Ps.
19:8).	And	God	says	of	himself,	“I	the	L
ORD
	speak	the	truth,	I	declare	what	is
right”	
(Isa.	45:19).	As	a	result	of	God’s	righteousness,	it	is	necessary	that	he
treat	people	according	to	what	they	deserve.	Thus,	it	is	necessary	that	God
punish	sin,	for	it	does	not	deserve	reward;	it	is	wrong	and	deserves
punishment.
When	God	does	not	punish	sin,	it	seems	to	indicate	that	he	is	unrighteous,
unless	some	other	means	of	punishing	sin	can	be	seen.	This	is	why	Paul	says
that	when	God	sent	Christ	as	a	sacrifice	to	bear	the	punishment	for	sin,	it
“was	to	show	God’s	righteousness,	because	in	his	divine	forbearance	he	had
passed	over	former	sins;	it	was	to	prove	at	the	present	time	that	he	himself	is
righteous	and	that	he	justifies	him	who	has	faith	in	Jesus”	(Rom.	3:25–26).
When	Christ	died	to	pay	the	penalty	for	our	sins	it	showed	that	God	was	truly
righteous,	because	he	did	give	appropriate	punishment	to	sin,	even	though	he
did	forgive	his	people	their	sins.
With	respect	to	the	definition	of	righteousness	given	above,	we	may	ask,	what
is	“right”?	In	other	words,	what	
ought	
to	happen	and	what	
ought	
to	be?	Here
we	must	respond	that	
whatever	conforms	to	God’s	moral	character	is	right.
But	why	is	whatever	conforms	to	God’s	moral	character	right?	It	is	right
because	it	conforms	to	his	moral	character!	If	indeed	God	is	the	final	standard
of	righteousness,	then	there	can	be	no	standard	outside	of	God	by	which	we
measure	righteousness	or	justice.	He	himself	is	the	final	standard.	(This	is
similar	to	the	situation	we	encountered	with	respect	to	truth	and	God	being
the	ultimate	standard	of	truth.)	Whenever	Scripture	confronts	the	question	of
whether	God	himself	is	righteous	or	not,	the	ultimate	answer	is	always	that
we	as	God’s	creatures	have	no	right	to	say	that	God	is	unrighteous	or	unjust.
The	creature	cannot	say	that	of	the	Creator.	Paul	responds	to	a	very	difficult
question	about	God’s	righteousness	by	saying,	“But	who	are	you,	a	man,	to
answer	back	to	God?	Will	what	is	molded	say	to	its	molder,	‘Why	have	you
made	me	thus?’	Has	the	potter	no	right	over	the	clay,	to	make	out	of	the	same
lump	one	vessel	for	beauty	and	another	for	menial	use?”	(Rom.	9:20–21).
In	answer	to	Job’s	questioning	about	whether	God	has	been	righteous	in	his
dealings	with	him,	God	answers	Job,	“Shall	a	faultfinder	contend	with	the
Almighty?	
.	.	.	Will	you	even	put	me	in	the	wrong?	Will	you	condemn	me	that
you	may	be	justified?”	(Job	40:2,	8).	Then	God	answers	
not	
in	terms	of	an
explanation	that	would	allow	Job	to	
understand	
why	God’s	actions	were	right,
but	rather	in	terms	of	a	statement	of	God’s	own	majesty	and	power!	God	does
not	need	to	explain	the	rightness	of	his	actions	to	Job,	for	God	is	the	Creator
and	Job	is	the	creature.	“Have	you	an	arm	like	God,	and	can	you	thunder	with
a	voice	like	his?”	(Job	40:9).	“Have	you	commanded	the	morning	since	your
days	began,	and	caused	the	dawn	to	know	its	place	.	.	.	?”	(Job	38:12).	“Can
you	lift	up	your	voice	to	the	clouds,	that	a	flood	of	waters	may	cover	you?
Can	you	send	forth	lightnings,	that	they	may	go	and	say	to	you,	‘Here	we
are’?”	(Job	38:34–35).	“Do	you	give	the	horse	his	might?”	(Job	39:19).	“Is	it
by	your	wisdom	that	the	hawk	soars,	and	spreads	his	wings	toward	the
south?”	(Job	39:26).	Job	answers,	“Behold,	I	am	of	small	account;	what	shall
I	answer	you?	I	lay	my	hand	on	my	mouth”	(Job	40:4).
Nevertheless,	it	should	be	a	cause	for	thanksgiving	and	gratitude	when	we
realize	that	righteousness	and	omnipotence	are	both	possessed	by	God.	If	he
were	a	God	of	perfect	righteousness	without	power	to	carry	out	that
righteousness,	he	would	not	be	worthy	of	worship	and	we	would	have	no
guarantee	that	justice	will	ultimately	prevail	in	the	universe.	But	if	he	were	a
God	of	unlimited	power,	yet	without	righteousness	in	his	character,	how
unthinkably	horrible	the	universe	would	be!	There	would	be	unrighteousness
at	the	center	of	all	existence	and	there	would	be	nothing	anyone	could	do	to
change	it.	Existence	would	become	meaningless,	and	we	would	be	driven	to
the	most	utter	despair.	We	ought	therefore	continually	to	thank	and	praise	God
for	who	he	is,	“for	
all	his	ways	are	justice.	
A	God	of	faithfulness	and	without
iniquity,	just	and	right	is	he”	(Deut.	32:4).
1
2.	Jealousy.
	Although	the	word	
jealous	
is	frequently	used	in	a	negative
sense	in	English,	it	also	takes	a	positive	sense	at	times.	For	example,	Paul
says	to	the	Corinthians,	“I	feel	a	divine	jealousy	for	you”	(2	Cor.	11:2).	Here
the	sense	is	“earnestly	protective	or	watchful.”	It	has	the	meaning	of	being
deeply	committed	to	seeking	the	honor	or	welfare	of	someone,	whether
oneself	or	someone	else.
Scripture	represents	God	as	being	jealous	in	this	way.	He	continually	and
earnestly	seeks	to	protect	his	own	honor.	He	commands	his	people	not	to	bow
down	to	idols	or	serve	them,	saying,	“for	I	the	L
ORD
	your	God	am	a	
jealous
God”	(Ex.	20:5).	He	desires	that	worship	be	given	to	himself	and	not	to	false
gods.	Therefore,	he	commands	the	people	of	Israel	to	tear	down	the	altars	of
pagan	gods	in	the	land	of	Canaan,	giving	the	following	reason:	“For	you	shall
worship	no	other	god,	for	the	L
ORD
,	whose	name	is	Jealous,	is	a	jealous	God”
(Ex.	34:14;	cf.	Deut.	4:24;	5:9).
Thus,	God’s	jealousy	may	be	defined	as	follows:	
God’s	jealousy	means	that
God	continually	seeks	to	protect	his	own	honor.
People	sometimes	have	trouble	thinking	that	jealousy	is	a	desirable	attribute
in	God.	This	is	because	jealousy	for	our	own	honor	as	human	beings	is	almost
always	wrong.	We	are	not	to	be	proud,	but	humble.	Yet	we	must	realize	that
the	reason	pride	is	wrong	is	a	theological	reason:	it	is	that	we	do	not	deserve
the	honor	that	belongs	to	God	alone	(cf.	1	Cor.	4:7;	Rev.	4:11).
It	is	not	wrong	for	God	to	seek	his	own	honor,	however,	for	he	deserves	it
fully.	God	freely	admits	that	his	actions	in	creation	and	redemption	are	done
for	his	own	honor.	Speaking	of	his	decision	to	withhold	judgment	from	his
people,	God	says,	“For	my	own	sake,	for	my	own	sake,	I	do	it.	.	.	.	
My	glory	I
will	not	give	to	another”	
(Isa.	48:11).	It	is	healthy	for	us	spiritually	when	we
settle	in	our	hearts	the	fact	that	God	deserves	all	honor	and	glory	from	his
creation,	and	that	it	is	right	for	him	to	seek	this	honor.	He	alone	is	infinitely
worthy	of	being	praised.	To	realize	this	fact	and	to	delight	in	it	is	to	find	the
secret	of	true	worship.
1
3.	Wrath.
	It	may	surprise	us	to	find	how	frequently	the	Bible	talks	about	the
wrath	of	God.	Yet	if	God	loves	all	that	is	right	and	good,	and	all	that	conforms
to	his	moral	character,	then	it	should	not	be	surprising	that	he	would	hate
everything	that	is	opposed	to	his	moral	character.	God’s	wrath	directed
against	sin	is	therefore	closely	related	to	God’s	holiness	and	justice.	God’s
wrath	may	be	defined	as	follows:	
God’s	wrath	means	that	he	intensely	hates
all	sin.
Descriptions	of	God’s	wrath	are	found	frequently	in	the	narrative	passages	of
Scripture,	especially	when	God’s	people	sin	greatly	against	him.	God	sees	the
idolatry	of	the	people	of	Israel	and	says	to	Moses,	“I	have	seen	this	people	.	.	.
;	now	therefore	let	me	alone,	that	my	
wrath	
may	burn	hot	against	them	and	I
may	consume	them”	(Ex.	32:9–10).	Later	Moses	tells	the	people,	“Remember
and	do	not	forget	how	you	provoked	the	L
ORD
	your	God	to	
wrath	
in	the
wilderness.	.	.	.	Even	at	Horeb	you	provoked	the	L
ORD
	to	
wrath,	
and	the	L
ORD
was	so	angry	with	you	that	he	was	ready	to	destroy	you”	(Deut.	9:7–8;	cf.
29:23;	2	Kings	22:13).
The	doctrine	of	the	wrath	of	God	in	Scripture	is	not	limited	to	the	Old
Testament,	however,	as	some	have	falsely	imagined.	We	read	in	John	3:36,
“He	who	believes	in	the	Son	has	eternal	life;	he	who	does	not	obey	the	Son
shall	not	see	life,	but	
the	wrath	of	God	rests	upon	him.”	
Paul	says,	“For	the
wrath	of	God	
is	revealed	from	heaven	against	all	ungodliness	and	wickedness
of	men”	(Rom.	1:18;	cf.	2:5,	8;	5:9;	9:22;	Col.	3:6;	1	Thess.	1:10;	2:16;	5:9;
Heb.	3:11;	Rev.	6:16–17;	19:15).	Many	more	New	Testament	verses	also
indicate	God’s	wrath	against	sin.
As	with	the	other	attributes	of	God,	this	is	an	attribute	for	which	we	should
thank	and	praise	God.	It	may	not	immediately	appear	to	us	how	this	can	be
done,	since	wrath	seems	to	be	such	a	negative	concept.	Viewed	alone,	it
would	arouse	only	fear	and	dread.	Yet	it	is	helpful	for	us	to	ask	what	God
would	be	like	if	he	were	a	God	that	did	not	hate	sin.	He	would	then	be	a	God
who	either	delighted	in	sin	or	at	least	was	not	troubled	by	it.	Such	a	God
would	not	be	worthy	of	our	worship,	for	sin	is	hateful	and	it	is	
worthy	
of
being	hated.	Sin	ought	not	to	be.	It	is	in	fact	a	virtue	to	hate	evil	and	sin	(cf.
Heb.	1:9;	Zech.	8:17;	et	al.),	and	we	rightly	imitate	this	attribute	of	God	when
we	feel	hatred	against	great	evil,	injustice,	and	sin.
9
Furthermore,	we	should	feel	no	fear	of	God’s	wrath	as	Christians,	for
although	“we	were	by	nature	children	of	wrath,	like	the	rest	of	mankind”
(Eph.	2:3),	we	now	have	trusted	in	Jesus,	“who	delivers	us	from	the	wrath	to
come”	(1	Thess.	1:10;	cf.	Rom.	5:10).	When	we	meditate	on	the	wrath	of
God,	we	will	be	amazed	to	think	that	our	Lord	Jesus	Christ	bore	the	wrath	of
God	that	was	due	to	our	sin,	in	order	that	we	might	be	saved	(Rom.	3:25–
26).
10
Moreover,	in	thinking	about	God’s	wrath	we	must	also	bear	in	mind	his
patience.	Both	patience	and	wrath	are	mentioned	together	in	Psalm	103:	“The
L
ORD
	is	.	.	.	
slow	to	anger	
and	abounding	in	steadfast	love.	He	will	not	always
chide,	nor	will	he	keep	his	anger	for	ever”	(Ps.	103:8–9).	In	fact,	the	delay	of
the	execution	of	God’s	wrath	upon	evil	is	for	the	purpose	of	leading	people	to
repentance	(see	Rom.	2:4).
Thus,	when	we	think	of	God’s	wrath	to	come,	we	should	simultaneously	be
thankful	for	his	patience	in	waiting	to	execute	that	wrath	in	order	that	yet
more	people	may	be	saved:	“The	Lord	is	not	slow	about	his	promise	as	some
count	slowness,	but	is	forbearing	toward	you,	not	wishing	that	any	should
perish,	but	that	all	should	reach	repentance.	But	the	day	of	the	Lord	will	come
like	a	thief,	and	then	the	heavens	will	pass	away	with	a	loud	noise	.	.	.”	(2
Peter	3:9–10).	God’s	wrath	should	motivate	us	to	evangelism	and	should	also
cause	us	to	be	thankful	that	God	finally	will	punish	all	wrongdoing	and	will
reign	over	new	heavens	and	a	new	earth	in	which	there	will	be	no
unrighteousness.
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
Spirituality
	1.		Why	is	God	so	strongly	displeased	at	carved	idols,	even	those	that	are
intended	to	represent	him?	How	then	shall	we	picture	God	or	think	of
God	in	our	minds	when	we	pray	to	him?
	2.		What	is	it	about	our	culture	or	our	way	of	thinking	today	that	makes
us	think	of	the	physical	world	as	more	real	and	more	permanent	than	the
spiritual	world?	What	can	we	do	to	change	our	intuitive	perspective	on
the	reality	of	the	spiritual	world?
Knowledge
	3.		When	should	we	try	to	hide	our	thoughts	and	deeds	from	God?	How
is	your	answer	to	this	question	a	blessing	for	your	life?
	4.		With	regard	to	the	circumstances	of	your	life,	will	God	ever	make	a
mistake,	or	fail	to	plan	ahead,	or	fail	to	take	into	account	all	the
eventualities	that	occur?	How	is	the	answer	to	this	question	a	blessing	in
your	life?
	5.		When	did	God	learn	that	you	would	be	at	the	location	you	are	now	in,
reading	this	sentence,	at	this	time	on	this	day?	How	is	the	realization	of
your	answer	to	this	question	a	blessing	to	your	life?
Wisdom
	6.		Do	you	really	believe	that	God	is	working	wisely	today	in	your	life?
In	the	world?	If	you	find	this	difficult	to	believe	at	times,	what	might	you
do	to	change	your	attitude?
Truthfulness
	7.		Why	are	people	in	our	society,	sometimes	even	Christians,	quite
careless	with	regard	to	truthfulness	in	speech?	Why	do	we	not	very	often
realize	that	the	greatest	harm	of	all	that	comes	from	lying	is	the	fact	that
God	himself	is	dishonored?	Do	you	need	to	ask	God’s	help	to	more	fully
reflect	his	truthfulness	in	speech	in	any	of	the	following	areas:	promising
to	pray	for	someone;	saying	that	you	will	be	some	place	at	a	certain	time;
exaggerating	events	to	make	a	more	exciting	story;	taking	care	to
remember	and	then	be	faithful	to	what	you	have	said	in	business
commitments;	reporting	what	other	people	have	said	or	what	you	think
someone	else	is	thinking;	fairly	representing	your	opponent’s	viewpoint	in
an	argument?
Goodness
	8.		Remembering	that	every	good	and	perfect	gift	is	from	God	(James
1:17),	see	how	many	good	gifts	from	God	you	can	list	on	a	piece	of	paper
in	five	minutes.	When	you	have	finished,	ask	yourself	how	often	you	have
an	attitude	of	thankfulness	to	God	for	most	of	these	gifts.	Why	do	you
think	we	tend	to	forget	that	these	blessings	come	from	God?	What	can	we
do	to	remember	more	frequently?
Love
	9.		Is	it	appropriate	to	define	love	as	“self-giving”	with	respect	to	our
own	interpersonal	relationships?	In	what	ways	could	you	imitate	God’s
love	specifically	today?
10.		Is	it	possible	to	decide	to	love	someone	and	then	to	act	on	that
decision,	or	does	love	between	human	beings	simply	depend	on
spontaneous	emotional	feelings?
Mercy
11.		If	you	were	to	reflect	God’s	mercy	more	fully,	for	whom	among	those
you	know	would	you	show	special	care	during	the	next	week?
Holiness
12.		Are	there	activities	or	relationships	in	your	present	pattern	of	life	that
are	hindering	your	growth	in	holiness	because	they	make	it	difficult	for
you	to	be	separated	from	sin	and	devoted	to	seeking	God’s	honor?
Peace
13.		As	you	think	about	reflecting	God’s	peace	in	your	own	life,	think	first
about	your	own	emotional,	mental,	and	spiritual	state.	Can	you	say	that
by-and-large	you	have	God’s	peace	in	the	sense	that	your	inner	life	is
separate	from	confusion	and	disorder,	and	is	frequently	or	continually
active	in	well-ordered	and	well-controlled	actions	that	further	God’s
glory?	Then	ask	the	same	questions	concerning	what	may	be	called	the
“external	circumstances”	of	your	life,	that	is,	your	family	relationships,
your	relationships	with	neighbors,	your	activities	in	studying	or	at	your
job,	and	your	relationships	in	church	activities.	What	about	the	overall
picture	of	your	life,	viewed	as	a	whole?	Does	it	exhibit	God’s	peace?
What	might	you	do	to	reflect	God’s	peace	more	fully?
Righteousness
14.		Do	you	ever	find	yourself	wishing	that	some	of	God’s	laws	were
different	than	they	are?	If	so,	does	such	a	wish	reflect	a	dislike	for	some
aspect	of	God’s	moral	character?	What	passages	of	Scripture	might	you
read	to	convince	yourself	more	fully	that	God’s	character	and	his	laws	are
right	in	these	areas?
Jealousy
15.		Do	you	reflect	God’s	jealousy	for	his	own	honor	instinctively	when
you	hear	him	dishonored	in	conversation	or	on	television	or	in	other
contexts?	What	can	we	do	to	deepen	our	jealousy	for	God’s	honor?
Wrath
16.		Should	we	love	the	fact	that	God	is	a	God	of	wrath	who	hates	sin?	In
what	ways	is	it	right	for	us	to	imitate	this	wrath,	and	in	what	ways	is	it
wrong	for	us	to	do	so?
SPECIAL	TERMS
attributes	of	being
	
jealousy
	
patience
beatific	vision
	
justice
	
peace
communicable	attributes
	
knowledge
	
reasonable	self-
faithfulness
	
love
	
determination
good
	
mental	attributes
	
righteousness
goodness
	
mercy
	
spirituality
grace
	
moral	attributes
	
theophany
holiness
	
omniscience
	
truthfulness
impassible
	
one	simple	and	eternal
	
veracity
invisibility
	
act
	
wisdom
	
	
order
	
wrath
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Since	chapters	12	and	13	are	so	closely	related	in	subject	matter,	the
bibliographic	material	for	both	is	at	the	end	of	chapter	13.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
Exodus	34:6–7:	
The	L
ORD
	passed	before	him,	and	proclaimed,	“The	L
ORD
,
the	L
ORD
,	a	God	merciful	and	gracious,	slow	to	anger,	and	abounding	in
steadfast	love	and	faithfulness,	keeping	steadfast	love	for	thousands,	forgiving
iniquity	and	transgression	and	sin,	but	who	will	by	no	means	clear	the	guilty,
visiting	the	iniquity	of	the	fathers	upon	the	children	and	the	children’s
children,	to	the	third	and	the	fourth	generation.”
Note:	The	last	section	of	this	passage	speaks	of	God	“visiting	the	iniquity	of
the	fathers	upon	the	children	and	the	children’s	children.”	Some	might	want	to
stop	short	of	this	part	in	memorizing	the	passage,	but	we	should	remember
that	this,	too,	is	Scripture	and	is	written	for	our	edification.	This	statement
shows	the	horrible	nature	of	sin	in	the	way	it	has	effects	far	beyond	the
individual	sinner,	also	harming	those	around	the	sinner	and	harming	future
generations	as	well.	We	see	this	in	tragic	ways	in	ordinary	life,	where	the
children	of	alcoholics	often	become	alcoholics	and	the	children	of	abusive
parents	often	become	abusive	parents.
Christians	who	are	forgiven	by	Christ	should	not	think	of	these	phrases	as
applying	to	them,	however,	for	they	are	in	the	other	category	of	people
mentioned	just	before	this	section	on	“the	guilty”:	they	are	among	the
“thousands”	to	whom	God	continually	shows	“steadfast	love,”	and	is
continually	“forgiving	iniquity	and	transgression	and	sin”	(v.	
7).	When
someone	comes	to	Christ	the	chain	of	sin	is	broken.	Here	it	is	important	to
remember	Peter’s	words:	“You	know	that	
you	were	ransomed	from	the	futile
ways	inherited	from	your	fathers,	
not	with	perishable	things	such	as	silver	or
gold,	but	with	the	precious	blood	of	Christ”	(1	Peter	1:18–19).
HYMN
“O	Worship	the	King”
Almost	the	entire	hymnbook	could	be	used	to	sing	of	one	aspect	or	another	of
God’s	character.	Literally	hundreds	of	hymns	would	be	appropriate.	Yet	this
hymn	contains	a	listing	of	many	of	God’s	attributes	and	combines	them	in
such	a	way	that	the	hymn	is	worthy	of	being	sung	again	and	again.	Verse	1
speaks	of	God’s	glory,	power,	love;	verse	2	speaks	of	his	might,	grace,	wrath;
and	so	forth.	In	verse	6,	“ineffable”	means	“incapable	of	being	expressed
fully.”	The	hymn	is	written	as	an	encouragement	for	Christians	to	sing	to	one
another,	exhorting	each	other	to	“worship	the	King,	all	glorious	above.”	Yet	in
the	process	of	such	exhortation	the	song	itself	also	contains	much	high	praise.
O	worship	the	King	all	glorious	above,
O	gratefully	sing	his	pow’r	and	his	love;
Our	shield	and	defender,	the	Ancient	of	Days,
Pavilioned	in	splendor,	and	girded	with	praise.
O	tell	of	his	might,	O	sing	of	his	grace,
Whose	robe	is	the	light,	whose	canopy	space.
His	chariots	of	wrath	the	deep	thunder-clouds	form,
And	dark	is	his	path	on	the	wings	of	the	storm.
The	earth	with	its	store	of	wonders	untold,
Almighty,	your	power	has	founded	of	old;
Has	‘stablished	it	fast	by	a	changeless	decree,
And	round	it	has	cast,	like	a	mantle,	the	sea.
Your	bountiful	care	what	tongue	can	recite?
It	breathes	in	the	air;	it	shines	in	the	light;
It	streams	from	the	hills;	it	descends	to	the	plain;
And	sweetly	distills	in	the	dew	and	the	rain.
Frail	children	of	dust,	and	feeble	as	frail,
In	you	do	we	trust,	nor	find	you	to	fail;
Your	mercies	how	tender,	how	firm	to	the	end,
Our	maker,	defender,	redeemer,	and	friend!
O	measureless	might!	Ineffable	love!
While	angels	delight	to	hymn	you	above,
The	humbler	creation,	though	feeble	their	ways,
With	true	adoration	shall	lisp	to	your	praise.
AUTHOR:	SIR	ROBERT	GRANT,	1833	(BASED	ON	PSALM	104)
Alternative	hymn:	“Round	the	Lord	in	Glory	Seated”
NOTES
1
See	discussion	of	communicable	and	incommunicable	attributes	in	
chapter	11
.
2
Note	that	Eph.	5:1	tells	us	to	“be	imitators	of	God,	as	beloved	children.”	See	also	the	discussion	of	the	fact	that	God	created	us	to
reflect	his	character	in	our	lives,	in	
chapter	21
.
3
See	the	discussion	of	the	names	of	God	taken	from	creation	in	
chapter	11
.
4
There	is	a	textual	variant	at	this	point,	but	“the	only	begotten	God”	(
monogenēs	theos
)	is	better	attested	than	“the	only	begotten
Son,”	and	this	reading	is	not	foreign	to	the	context:	see	Leon	Morris,	
The	Gospel	According	to	John	
(Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,
1971),	pp.	113–14.
5
The	same	phrase	(“to	have	a	thought	enter	into	the	heart”)	seems	to	have	the	sense	“desire,	wish	for,	long	for”	in	all	five	of	its
occurrences	in	the	Hebrew	Old	Testament:	Isa.	65:17;	Jer.	3:16	(where	it	cannot	mean	simply	“have	a	factual	knowledge	of”);
7:31;	19:5;	32:35;	as	well	as	in	the	equivalent	Greek	phrase	
anebē	epi	tēn	kardian	
in	Acts	7:23.
6
See	additional	discussion	of	this	question	in	
chapter	16
.
7
See	
All	Truth	Is	God’s	Truth	
by	Arthur	Holmes	(Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1977).
8
This	verse	uses	
oiktirmos,	
“compassion,	mercy,”	rather	than	
eleos,	
“mercy,”	but	the	terms	are	closely	related	in	meaning	and	both
refer	to	compassion	or	goodness	toward	those	in	distress.
9
It	is	appropriate	for	us	in	this	regard	to	“hate	the	sin	but	love	the	sinner,”	as	a	popular	slogan	puts	it.
10
See	the	discussion	of	Christ’s	bearing	of	the	wrath	of	God	in	
chapter	27
.
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	13
The	Character	of	God:	“Communicable”
Attributes	
(Part	2)
How	is	God	like	us	in	attributes	of	will	and	in	attributes	that
summarize	his	excellence?
In	the	previous	chapter	we	discussed	the	attributes	of	God	that	described	his
being	
(spirituality,	invisibility),	his	
mental	
attributes	(knowledge,	wisdom,
and	truthfulness),	and	his	
moral	
attributes	(goodness,	love,	mercy,	grace,
patience,	holiness,	peace,	righteousness,	jealousy,	and	wrath).	In	this	chapter
we	will	examine	God’s	attributes	of	
purpose,	
that	is,	attributes	that	have	to	do
with	making	and	carrying	out	decisions	(will,	freedom,	and	omnipotence)	and
his	
summary	
attributes	(perfection,	blessedness,	beauty,	and	glory).
D.	Attributes	of	Purpose
In	this	category	of	attributes	we	will	discuss	first	God’s	will	in	general,	then
the	freedom	of	God’s	will,	and	finally	the	omnipotence	(or	infinite	power)	of
God’s	will.
1
4.	Will.	
God’s	will	is	that	attribute	of	God	whereby	he	approves	and
determines	to	bring	about	every	action	necessary	for	the	existence	and
activity	of	himself	and	all	creation.
This	definition	indicates	that	God’s	will	has	to	do	with	deciding	and
approving	the	things	that	God	is	and	does.	It	concerns	God’s	choices	of	what
to	do	and	what	not	to	do.
a.	God’s	Will	in	General:
	Scripture	frequently	indicates	God’s	will	as	the
final	or	most	ultimate	reason	for	everything	that	happens.	Paul	refers	to	God
as	the	one	“who	accomplishes	all	things	
according	to	the	counsel	of	his	will”
(Eph.	1:11).	The	phrase	here	translated	“all	things”	(
ta	panta
)	is	used
frequently	by	Paul	to	refer	to	everything	that	exists	or	everything	in	creation
(see,	for	example,	Eph.	1:10,	23;	3:9;	4:10;	Col.	1:16	[twice],	17;	Rom.	11:36;
1	Cor.	8:6	[twice];	15:27–28	[twice]).
1
	The	word	translated	“accomplishes”
(
energeō,	
“works,	works	out,	brings	about,	produces”)	is	a	present	participle
and	suggests	continual	activity.	The	phrase	might	more	explicitly	be
translated,	“who	continually	brings	about	everything	in	the	universe
according	to	the	counsel	of	his	will.”
More	specifically,	all	things	were	created	by	God’s	will:	“For	you	created	all
things,	and	
by	your	will	they	existed	and	were	created”	
(Rev.	4:11).	Both	Old
and	New	Testaments	speak	of	human	government	as	coming	about	according
to	God’s	will:	the	voice	from	heaven	tells	Nebuchadnezzar	that	he	is	to	learn
“that	the	Most	High	rules	the	kingdom	of	men	and	gives	it	to	whom	he	will”
(Dan.	4:32),	and	Paul	says	that	“there	is	no	authority	except	from	God,	and
those	that	exist	have	been	instituted	by	God”	(Rom.	13:1).
All	the	events	connected	with	the	death	of	Christ	were	according	to	God’s
will,	the	church	at	Jerusalem	believed,	for	in	their	prayer	they	said,	“truly	in
this	city	there	were	gathered	together	against	your	holy	servant	Jesus,	whom
you	anointed,	both	Herod	and	Pontius	Pilate,	with	all	the	Gentiles	and	the
peoples	of	Israel,	to	do	
whatever	your	hand	and	your	plan	had	predestined	to
take	place”	
(Acts	4:27–28).	The	specific	mention	of	the	various	parties
involved	at	different	stages	of	the	crucifixion,	together	with	the	indefiniteness
of	the	plural	relative	pronoun	“whatever”	(Gk.	
hosa,	
“the	things	which”)
implies	that	not	simply	the	fact	of	Jesus’	death	but	all	the	detailed	events
connected	with	it	are	comprehended	in	this	statement:	God’s	hand	and	will
had	predestined	that	all	those	things	would	come	about.
Sometimes	it	is	God’s	will	that	Christians	suffer,	as	is	seen	in	1	Peter	3:17,	for
example:	“For	it	is	better	to	suffer	for	doing	right,	
if	that	should	be	God’s	will,
than	for	doing	wrong.”	Then	in	the	next	chapter	Peter	says,	“Therefore	let
those	who	suffer	
according	to	God’s	will	
do	right	and	entrust	their	souls	to	a
faithful	Creator”	(1	Peter	4:19).	In	this	verse,	the	phrase	“according	to	God’s
will”	cannot	refer	to	the	manner	in	which	Christians	endure	suffering,	for	then
it	would	make	the	verse	say	essentially,	“Let	those	who	suffer	
while	doing
right,	do	right	
and	entrust	their	souls.	.	.	.”	This	would	make	the	phrase
“according	to	God’s	will”	redundant.	Rather,	the	phrase	“according	to	God’s
will”	must	refer	to	the	fact	that	these	Christians	are	suffering,	just	as	“God’s
will”	referred	to	suffering	in	the	previous	chapter	(1	Peter	3:17).
James	encourages	us	to	see	all	the	events	of	our	lives	as	subject	to	God’s	will.
To	those	who	say,	“Today	or	tomorrow	we	will	go	into	such	and	such	a	town
and	spend	a	year	there	and	trade	and	get	gain,”	James	says,	“You	do	not	know
about	tomorrow.	.	.	.	Instead	you	ought	to	say,	‘
if	the	Lord	wills,	
we	shall	live
and	we	shall	do	this	or	that’	”	(James	4:13–15).	To	attribute	so	many	events,
even	evil	events,	to	the	will	of	God	often	causes	misunderstanding	and
difficulty	for	Christians.	Some	of	the	difficulties	connected	with	this	subject
will	be	treated	here	and	others	will	be	dealt	with	in	chapter	16	on	God’s
providence.
b.	Distinctions	in	Aspects	of	God’s	Will:	
(1)	Necessary	will	and	free	will:
Some	distinctions	made	in	the	past	may	help	us	understand	various	aspects	of
God’s	will.	Just	as	we	can	will	or	choose	something	eagerly	or	reluctantly,
happily	or	with	regret,	secretly	or	publicly,	so	also	God	in	the	infinite
greatness	of	his	personality	is	able	to	will	different	things	in	different	ways.
One	helpful	distinction	applied	to	aspects	of	God’s	will	is	the	distinction
between	God’s	
necessary	will	
and	God’s	
free	will.	
God’s	necessary	will
includes	everything	that	he	must	will	according	to	his	own	nature.	What	does
God	will	necessarily?	He	wills	himself.	God	eternally	wills	to	be,	or	wants	to
be,	who	he	is	and	what	he	is.	He	says,	“I	AM	WHO	I	AM”	or,	“I	WILL	BE
WHAT	I	WILL	BE”	(Ex.	3:14).	God	
cannot	
choose	to	be	different	than	he	is
or	to	cease	to	exist.
God’s	
free	will	
includes	all	things	that	God	decided	to	will	but	had	no
necessity	to	will	according	to	his	nature.	Here	we	must	put	God’s	decision	to
create	the	universe,	and	all	the	decisions	relating	to	the	details	of	that	creation.
Here	we	must	also	place	all	God’s	acts	of	redemption.	There	was	nothing	in
God’s	own	nature	that	required	him	to	decide	to	create	the	universe	or	to
redeem	out	of	sinful	mankind	a	people	for	himself	(see	the	discussion	above
concerning	God’s	independence).	However,	God	did	decide	to	create	and	to
redeem,	and	these	were	totally	free	choices	on	his	part.	Though	within	the
members	of	the	Trinity	love	and	fellowship	and	glory	exist	in	infinite	measure
for	all	eternity	(see	John	17:5,	24),	nonetheless	God	decided	to	create	the
universe	and	to	redeem	us	for	his	own	glory	(cf.	Isa.	43:7;	48:9–11;	Rom.
11:36;	1	Cor.	8:6;	Eph.	1:12;	Rev.	4:11).	It	would	be	wrong	for	us	ever	to	try
to	find	a	necessary	cause	for	creation	or	redemption	in	the	being	of	God
himself,	for	that	would	rob	God	of	his	total	independence.	It	would	be	to	say
that	without	us	God	could	not	truly	be	God.	God’s	decisions	to	create	and	to
redeem	were	totally	free	decisions.
(2)	Secret	will	and	revealed	will:
	Another	helpful	distinction	applied	to
different	aspects	of	God’s	will	is	the	distinction	between	God’s	
secret	will	
and
his	
revealed	will.	
Even	in	our	own	experience	we	know	that	we	are	able	to
will	some	things	secretly	and	then	only	later	make	this	will	known	to	others.
Sometimes	we	tell	others	before	the	thing	that	we	have	willed	comes	about,
and	at	other	times	we	do	not	reveal	our	secret	will	until	the	event	we	willed
has	happened.
Surely	a	distinction	between	aspects	of	God’s	will	is	evident	in	many
passages	of	Scripture.	According	to	Moses,	“The	
secret	things	
belong	to	the
L
ORD
	our	God;	but	the	
things	that	are	revealed	
belong	to	us	and	to	our
children	for	ever,	that	we	may	do	all	the	words	of	this	law”	(Deut.	29:29).
Those	things	that	God	has	revealed	are	given	for	the	purpose	of	obeying
God’s	will:	“that	we	may	
do	
all	the	words	of	this	law.”	There	were	many
other	aspects	of	his	plan,	however,	that	he	had	not	revealed	to	them:	many
details	about	future	events,	specific	details	of	hardship	or	of	blessing	in	their
lives,	and	so	forth.	With	regard	to	these	matters,	they	were	simply	to	trust
him.
Because	God’s	revealed	will	usually	contains	his	commands	or	“precepts”	for
our	moral	conduct,	God’s	revealed	will	is	sometimes	also	called	God’s	
will	of
precept	
or	will	of	command.	This	revealed	will	of	God	is	God’s	declared	will
concerning	
what	we	should	do	
or	what	God	
commands	
us	to	do.
On	the	other	hand,	God’s	secret	will	usually	includes	his	hidden	decrees	by
which	he	governs	the	universe	and	determines	everything	that	will	happen.
He	does	not	ordinarily	reveal	these	decrees	to	us	(except	in	prophecies	of	the
future),	so	these	decrees	really	are	God’s	“secret”	will.	We	find	out	what	God
has	decreed	when	events	actually	happen.	Because	this	secret	will	of	God	has
to	do	with	his	decreeing	of	events	in	the	world,	this	aspect	of	God’s	will	is
sometimes	also	called	God’s	
will	of	decree.
2
There	are	several	instances	where	Scripture	mentions	God’s	revealed	will.	In
the	Lord’s	prayer	the	petition,	“
Your	will	be	done,	
On	earth	as	it	is	in	heaven”
(Matt.	6:10)	is	a	prayer	that	people	would	obey	God’s	
revealed	
will,	his
commands,	on	earth	just	as	they	do	in	heaven	(that	is,	fully	and	completely).
This	could	not	be	a	prayer	that	God’s	secret	will	(that	is,	his	decrees	for
events	that	he	has	planned)	would	in	fact	be	fulfilled,	for	what	God	has
decreed	in	his	secret	will	shall	certainly	come	to	pass.	To	ask	God	to	bring
about	what	he	has	already	decreed	to	happen	would	simply	be	to	pray,	“May
what	is	going	to	happen	happen.”	That	would	be	a	hollow	prayer	indeed,	for	it
would	not	be	asking	for	anything	at	all.	Furthermore,	since	we	do	not	know
God’s	secret	will	regarding	the	future,	the	person	praying	a	prayer	for	God’s
secret	will	to	be	done	would	never	know	for	what	he	or	she	was	praying.	It
would	be	a	prayer	without	understandable	content	and	without	effect.	Rather,
the	prayer	“
Your	will	
be	done”	must	be	understood	as	an	appeal	for	the
revealed	
will	of	God	to	be	followed	on	earth.
If	the	phrase	is	understood	in	this	way,	it	provides	a	pattern	for	us	to	pray	on
the	basis	of	God’s	commands	in	Scripture.	In	this	sense,	Jesus	provides	us
with	a	guide	for	an	exceedingly	broad	range	of	prayer	requests.	We	are
encouraged	by	Christ	here	to	pray	that	people	would	obey	God’s	laws,	that
they	would	follow	his	principles	for	life,	that	they	would	obey	his	commands
to	repent	of	sin	and	trust	in	Christ	as	Savior.	To	pray	these	things	is	to	pray
that	God’s	will	would	be	done	on	earth	as	it	is	in	heaven.
A	little	later,	Jesus	says,	“Not	every	one	who	says	to	me,	‘Lord,	Lord,’	shall
enter	the	kingdom	of	heaven,	but	he	who	does	the	
will	
of	my	Father	who	is	in
heaven”	(Matt.	7:21).	Once	again,	the	reference	cannot	be	to	God’s	secret	will
or	will	of	decree	(for	all	mankind	follows	this,	even	if	unknowingly),	but	to
God’s	
revealed	
will,	namely,	the	moral	law	of	God	that	Christ’s	followers	are
to	obey	(cf.	Matt.	12:50;	probably	also	18:14).	When	Paul	commands	the
Ephesians	to	“understand	
what	the	will	of	the	Lord	is”	
(Eph.	5:17;	cf.	Rom.
2:18),	he	again	is	speaking	of	God’s	revealed	will.	So	also	is	John	when	he
says,	“If	we	ask	anything	
according	to	his	will	
he	hears	us”	(1	John	5:14).
It	is	probably	best	to	put	1	Timothy	2:4	and	2	Peter	3:9	in	this	category	as
well.	Paul	says	that	God	“
desires	
[or	‘wills,	wishes,’	Gk.	
theleō
]	all	men	to	be
saved	and	to	come	to	the	knowledge	of	the	truth”	(1	Tim.	2:4).	Peter	says	that
the	Lord	“is	not	slow	about	his	promise	as	some	count	slowness,	but	is
forbearing	toward	you,	not	wishing	that	any	should	perish,	but	that	all	should
reach	repentance”	(2	Peter	3:9).	In	neither	of	these	verses	can	God’s	will	be
understood	to	be	his	secret	will,	his	decree	concerning	what	will	certainly
occur.	This	is	because	the	New	Testament	is	clear	that	there	will	be	a	final
judgment	and	not	all	will	be	saved.	It	is	best	therefore	to	understand	these
references	as	speaking	of	God’s	
revealed	will,	
his	commands	for	mankind	to
obey	and	his	declaration	to	us	of	what	is	pleasing	in	his	sight.
On	the	other	hand,	many	passages	speak	of	God’s	secret	will.	When	James
tells	us	to	say,	“
If	the	Lord	wills,	
we	shall	live	and	we	shall	do	this	or	that”
(James	4:15),	he	cannot	be	talking	about	God’s	revealed	will	or	will	of
precept,	for	with	regard	to	many	of	our	actions	we	
know	
that	it	is	according	to
God’s	command	that	we	do	one	or	another	activity	that	we	have	planned.
Rather,	to	trust	in	the	secret	will	of	God	overcomes	pride	and	expresses
humble	dependence	on	God’s	sovereign	control	over	the	events	of	our	lives.
Another	instance	is	found	in	Genesis	50:20.	Joseph	says	to	his	brothers,	“As
for	you,	you	meant	evil	against	me;	but	
God	meant	it	for	good,	
to	bring	it
about	that	many	people	should	be	kept	alive,	as	they	are	today.”	Here	God’s
revealed	
will	to	Joseph’s	brothers	was	that	they	should	love	him	and	not	steal
from	him	or	sell	him	into	slavery	or	make	plans	to	murder	him.	But	God’s
secret	
will	was	that	in	the	disobedience	of	Joseph’s	brothers	a	greater	good
would	be	done	when	Joseph,	having	been	sold	into	slavery	into	Egypt,	gained
authority	over	the	land	and	was	able	to	save	his	family.
When	Paul	says	to	the	Corinthians,	“I	will	come	to	you	soon,	
if	the	Lord
wills”	
(1	Cor.	4:19),	he	is	not	speaking	of	God’s	revealed	will,	for	Paul	has
already	determined,	in	obedience	to	God	and	in	fulfillment	of	his	apostolic
office,	to	come	to	visit	the	Corinthians.	He	is	speaking	rather	of	God’s	secret
will,	his	hidden	plan	for	the	future,	which	is	unknown	to	Paul	and	which	will
be	known	only	as	it	comes	to	pass	(cf.	Acts	21:14;	Rom.	1:10;	15:32;	Eph.
1:11;	1	Peter	3:17;	4:19).
3
Both	the	revealing	of	the	good	news	of	the	gospel	to	some	and	its	hiding	from
others	are	said	to	be	according	to	God’s	will.	Jesus	says,	“I	thank	you,	Father,
Lord	of	heaven	and	earth,	that	you	have	hidden	these	things	from	the	wise	and
understanding	and	revealed	them	to	babes;	yea,	Father,	
for	such	was	your
gracious	will”	
(Matt.	11:25–26).	This	again	must	refer	to	God’s	secret	will,
for	his	revealed	will	is	that	all	come	to	salvation.	Indeed,	only	two	verses
later,	Jesus	commands	everyone,	“Come	to	me,	all	who	labor	and	are	heavy
laden,	and	I	will	give	you	rest”	(Matt.	11:28).	And	both	Paul	and	Peter	tell	us
that	God	wills	all	people	to	be	saved	(see	1	Tim.	2:4;	2	Peter	3:9).	Thus,	the
fact	that	some	are	not	saved	and	some	have	the	gospel	hidden	from	them	must
be	understood	as	happening	according	to	God’s	secret	will,	unknown	to	us
and	inappropriate	for	us	to	seek	to	pry	into.	In	the	same	way	we	must
understand	the	mention	of	God’s	will	in	Romans	9:18	(“He	has	mercy	upon
whomever	he	wills,	and	he	hardens	the	heart	of	whomever	he	wills”)	and	Acts
4:28	(“to	do	whatever	your	hand	and	your	plan	had	predestined	to	take
place”)	as	references	to	God’s	secret	will.
There	is	danger	in	speaking	about	evil	events	as	happening	according	to	the
will	of	God,	even	though	we	see	Scripture	speaking	of	them	in	this	way.	One
danger	is	that	we	might	begin	to	think	that	God	takes	pleasure	in	evil,	which
he	does	not	do	(see	Ezek.	33:11),	though	he	can	use	it	for	his	good	purposes
(see	
chapter	16
	for	further	discussion).	Another	danger	is	that	we	might	begin
to	blame	God	for	sin,	rather	than	ourselves,	or	to	think	that	we	are	not
responsible	for	our	evil	actions.	Scripture,	however,	does	not	hesitate	to
couple	statements	of	God’s	sovereign	will	with	statements	of	man’s
responsibility	for	evil.	Peter	could	say	in	the	same	sentence	that	Jesus	was
“delivered	up	according	to	the	definite	plan	and	foreknowledge	of	God,”	and
also	that	“this	Jesus	.	.	.	
you	crucified	and	killed	
by	the	hands	of	
lawless	men”
(Acts	2:23).	Both	God’s	hidden	will	of	decree	and	the	culpable	wickedness	of
“lawless	men”	in	carrying	it	out	are	affirmed	in	the	same	statement.	However
we	may	understand	the	secret	workings	of	God’s	hidden	will,	we	must	never
understand	it	to	imply	that	we	are	freed	from	responsibility	for	evil,	or	that
God	is	ever	to	be	blamed	for	sin.	Scripture	never	speaks	that	way,	and	we	may
not	either,	even	though	how	this	can	be	so	may	remain	a	mystery	for	us	in	this
age.
4
1
5.	Freedom.	
God’s	freedom	is	that	attribute	of	God	whereby	he	does
whatever	he	pleases.	
This	definition	implies	that	nothing	in	all	creation	can
hinder	God	from	doing	his	will.	This	attribute	of	God	is	therefore	closely
related	to	his	will	and	his	power.	Yet	this	aspect	of	freedom	focuses	on	the
fact	that	God	is	not	constrained	by	anything	external	to	himself	and	that	he	is
free	to	do	whatever	he	wishes	to	do.	There	is	no	person	or	force	that	can	ever
dictate	to	God	what	he	should	do.	He	is	under	no	authority	or	external
restraint.
God’s	freedom	is	mentioned	in	Psalm	115,	where	his	great	power	is
contrasted	with	the	weakness	of	idols:	“Our	God	is	in	the	heavens;	
he	does
whatever	he	pleases”	
(Ps.	115:3).	Human	rulers	are	not	able	to	stand	against
God	and	effectively	oppose	his	will,	for	“the	king’s	heart	is	a	stream	of	water
in	the	hand	of	the	L
ORD
;	he	turns	it	wherever	he	will”	(Prov.	21:1).	Similarly,
Nebuchadnezzar	learns	in	his	repentance	that	it	is	true	to	say	of	God,	“
he	does
according	to	his	will	
in	the	host	of	heaven	and	among	the	inhabitants	of	the
earth;	and	none	can	stay	his	hand	or	say	to	him,	‘What	are	you	doing?’	”
(Dan.	4:35).
Because	God	is	free	we	should	not	try	to	seek	any	more	ultimate	answer	for
God’s	actions	in	creation	than	the	fact	that	he	willed	to	do	something	and	that
his	will	has	perfect	freedom	(so	long	as	the	actions	he	takes	are	consistent
with	his	own	moral	character).	Sometimes	people	try	to	discover	the	reason
why	God	had	to	do	one	or	another	action	(such	as	create	the	world	or	save
us).	It	is	better	simply	to	say	that	it	was	God’s	totally	free	will	(working	in	a
way	consistent	with	his	character)	that	was	the	final	reason	why	he	chose	to
create	the	world	and	to	save	sinners.
1
6.	Omnipotence	(Power,	Sovereignty).	
God’s	omnipotence	means	that	God
is	able	to	do	all	his	holy	will.	
The	word	
omnipotence	
is	derived	from	two
Latin	words,	
omni,	
“all,”	and	
potens,	
“powerful,”	and	means	“all-powerful.”
Whereas	God’s	freedom	referred	to	the	fact	that	there	are	no	external
constraints	on	God’s	decisions,	God’s	omnipotence	has	reference	to	his	own
power	to	do	what	he	decides	to	do.
This	power	is	frequently	mentioned	in	Scripture.	God	is	“The	L
ORD
,	strong
and	mighty,	the	L
ORD
,	mighty	in	battle!”	(Ps.	24:8).	The	rhetorical	question,
“Is	anything	too	hard	for	the	L
ORD
?”	(Gen.	18:14;	Jer.	32:27)	certainly
implies	(in	the	contexts	in	which	it	occurs)	that	nothing	is	too	hard	for	the
L
ORD
.	In	fact,	Jeremiah	says	to	God,	“
nothing	
is	too	hard	for	you”	(Jer.
32:17).
Paul	says	that	God	is	“able	to	do	far	more	abundantly	than	all	that	we	ask	or
think”	(Eph.	3:20),	and	God	is	called	the	“Almighty”	(2	Cor.	6:18;	Rev.	1:8),
a	term	(Gk.	
pantokratōr
)	that	suggests	the	possession	of	all	power	and
authority.	Furthermore,	the	angel	Gabriel	says	to	Mary,	“With	God	nothing
will	be	impossible”	(Luke	1:37),	and	Jesus	says,	“With	God	
all	things	are
possible”	
(Matt.	19:26).
These	passages	indicate	that	God’s	power	is	infinite,	and	that	he	is	therefore
not	limited	to	doing	only	what	he	actually	has	done.	In	fact,	God	is	able	to	do
more	than	he	actually	does.	For	example,	John	the	Baptist	says	in	Matthew
3:9,	“God	is	able	from	these	stones	to	raise	up	children	to	Abraham.”	God	is
one	who	“does	whatever	he	pleases”	(Ps.	115:3);	he	could	have	destroyed
Israel	and	raised	up	a	great	nation	from	Moses	(cf.	Ex.	32:10),	but	he	did	not
do	so.
However,	there	are	some	things	that	God	cannot	do.	God	cannot	will	or	do
anything	that	would	deny	his	own	character.	This	is	why	the	definition	of
omnipotence	is	stated	in	terms	of	God’s	ability	to	do	“all	his	holy	will.”	It	is
not	absolutely	everything	that	God	is	able	to	do,	but	everything	that	is
consistent	with	his	character.	For	example,	God	cannot	lie.	In	Titus	1:2	he	is
called	(literally)	“the	unlying	God”	or	the	“God	who	never	lies.”	The	author
of	Hebrews	says	that	in	God’s	oath	and	promise	“it	is	impossible	for	God	to
lie”	(Heb.	6:18,	author’s	translation).	Second	Timothy	2:13	says	of	Christ,
“He	cannot	deny	himself.”	Furthermore,	James	says,	“God	cannot	be	tempted
with	evil	and	he	himself	tempts	no	one”	(James	1:13).	Thus,	God	cannot	lie,
sin,	deny	himself,	or	be	tempted	with	evil.	He	cannot	cease	to	exist,	or	cease
to	be	God,	or	act	in	a	way	inconsistent	with	any	of	his	attributes.
This	means	that	it	is	not	entirely	accurate	to	say	that	God	can	do	anything.
Even	the	Scripture	passages	quoted	above	that	use	phrases	similar	to	this	must
be	understood	in	their	contexts	to	mean	that	God	can	do	anything	he	wills	to
do	or	anything	that	is	consistent	with	his	character.	Although	God’s	power	is
infinite,	his	use	of	that	power	is	qualified	by	his	other	attributes	(just	as	all
God’s	attributes	qualify	all	his	actions).	This	is	therefore	another	instance
where	misunderstanding	would	result	if	one	attribute	were	isolated	from	the
rest	of	God’s	character	and	emphasized	in	a	disproportionate	way.
God’s	exercise	of	power	over	his	creation	is	also	called	God’s	
sovereignty.
God’s	sovereignty	is	his	exercise	of	rule	(as	“sovereign”	or	“king”)	over	his
creation.	This	subject	will	be	discussed	in	more	detail	in	chapter	16,	on	God’s
providence.
As	we	conclude	our	treatment	of	God’s	attributes	of	purpose,	it	is	appropriate
to	realize	that	he	has	made	us	in	such	a	way	that	we	show	in	our	lives	some
faint	reflection	of	each	of	them.	God	has	made	us	as	creatures	with	a	
will.	
We
exercise	choice	and	make	real	decisions	regarding	the	events	of	our	lives.
Although	our	will	is	not	absolutely	free	in	the	way	God’s	is,	God	has
nonetheless	given	us	
relative	freedom	
within	our	spheres	of	activity	in	the
universe	he	has	created.
In	fact,	we	have	an	intuitive	sense	that	it	is	our	ability	to	exercise	our	wills
and	make	choices,	and	to	do	so	in	a	relatively	free	way,	that	is	one	of	the	most
significant	marks	of	God-likeness	in	our	existence.	Of	course	our	desire	to
exercise	our	wills	and	our	desire	to	be	free	from	restraint	can	show
themselves	in	sinful	ways.	People	can	become	proud	and	can	desire	a	kind	of
freedom	that	involves	rebellion	against	God’s	authority	and	a	refusal	to	obey
his	will.	Nonetheless,	when	we	use	our	will	and	our	freedom	to	make	choices
that	are	pleasing	to	God,	we	reflect	his	character	and	bring	glory	to	him.
When	human	beings	are	deprived	of	their	ability	to	make	free	choices	by	evil
governments	or	by	other	circumstances,	a	significant	part	of	their	God-
likeness	is	suppressed.	It	is	not	surprising	that	they	will	pay	almost	any	price
to	regain	their	freedom.	American	revolutionary	Patrick	Henry’s	cry,	“Give
me	liberty	or	give	me	death!”	finds	an	echo	deep	within	every	soul	created	in
the	image	of	God.
We	do	not	of	course	have	infinite	power	or	omnipotence	any	more	than	we
have	infinite	freedom	or	any	of	God’s	other	attributes	to	an	infinite	degree.
But	even	though	we	do	not	have	omnipotence,	God	has	given	us	
power	
to
bring	about	results,	both	physical	power	and	other	kinds	of	power:	mental
power,	spiritual	power,	persuasive	power,	and	power	in	various	kinds	of
authority	structures	(family,	church,	civil	government,	and	so	forth).	In	all	of
these	areas,	the	use	of	power	in	ways	pleasing	to	God	and	consistent	with	his
will	is	again	something	that	brings	him	glory	as	it	reflects	his	own	character.
E.	“Summary”	Attributes
1
7.	Perfection.	
God’s	perfection	means	that	God	completely	possesses	all
excellent	qualities	and	lacks	no	part	of	any	qualities	that	would	be	desirable
for	him.
It	is	difficult	to	decide	whether	this	should	be	listed	as	a	separate	attribute	or
simply	be	included	in	the	description	of	the	other	attributes.	Some	passages
say	that	God	is	“perfect”	or	“complete.”	Jesus	tells	us,	“You,	therefore,	must
be	perfect,	
as	your	heavenly	Father	is	perfect
”	(Matt.	5:48).	And	David	says
of	God,	“His	way	is	
perfect
”	(Ps.	18:30;	cf.	Deut.	32:4).	There	is	some
scriptural	precedent,	therefore,	for	stating	explicitly	that	God	lacks	nothing	in
his	excellence:	he	fully	possesses	all	of	his	attributes	and	lacks	nothing	from
any	one	of	those	attributes.	Furthermore,	there	is	no	quality	of	excellence	that
it	would	be	desirable	for	God	to	have	that	he	does	not	have:	he	is	“complete”
or	“perfect”	in	every	way.
This	attribute	is	the	first	of	those	classified	as	a	“summary”	attribute	because
it	does	not	fit	well	into	the	other	categories	that	have	been	listed.	Even	though
all	the	attributes	of	God	modify	all	the	others	in	some	senses,	those	that	fit	in
this	category	seem	more	directly	to	apply	to	all	the	attributes	or	to	describe
some	aspect	of	all	of	the	attributes	that	it	is	worthwhile	to	state	explicitly.
1
8.	Blessedness.
	To	be	“blessed”	is	to	be	happy	in	a	very	full	and	rich	sense.
Often	Scripture	talks	about	the	blessedness	of	those	people	who	walk	in
God’s	ways.	Yet	in	1	Timothy	Paul	calls	God	“the	
blessed	
and	only
Sovereign”	(1	Tim.	6:15)	and	speaks	of	“the	glorious	gospel	of	the	
blessed
God”	(1	Tim.	1:11).	In	both	instances	the	word	is	not	
eulogētos	
(which	is
often	translated	“blessed”),	but	
makarios	
(which	means	“happy”).
Thus,	God’s	blessedness	may	be	defined	as	follows:	
God’s	blessedness	means
that	God	delights	fully	in	himself	and	in	all	that	reflects	his	character.	
In	this
definition	the	idea	of	God’s	happiness	or	blessedness	is	connected	directly	to
his	own	person	as	the	focus	of	all	that	is	worthy	of	joy	or	delight.	This
definition	indicates	that	God	is	perfectly	happy,	that	he	has	fullness	of	joy	in
himself.
The	definition	reflects	the	fact	that	God	takes	pleasure	in	everything	in
creation	that	mirrors	his	own	excellence.	When	he	finished	his	work	of
creation,	he	looked	at	everything	that	he	had	made	and	saw	that	it	was	“very
good”	(Gen.	1:31).	This	indicates	God’s	delight	in	and	approval	of	his
creation.	Then	in	Isaiah	we	read	a	promise	of	God’s	future	rejoicing	over	his
people:	“As	the	bridegroom	rejoices	over	the	bride,	so	shall	your	God	rejoice
over	you”	(Isa.	62:5;	cf.	Prov.	8:30–31;	Zeph.	3:17).
It	may	at	first	seem	strange	or	even	somewhat	disappointing	to	us	that	when
God	rejoices	in	his	creation,	or	even	when	he	rejoices	in	us,	it	is	really	the
reflection	of	his	own	excellent	qualities	in	which	he	is	rejoicing.	But	when	we
remember	that	the	sum	of	everything	that	is	desirable	or	excellent	is	found	in
infinite	measure	in	God	himself,	then	we	realize	that	it	could	not	be
otherwise:	
whatever	
excellence	there	is	in	the	universe,	
whatever	
is	desirable,
must	ultimately	have	come	from	him,	for	he	is	the	Creator	of	all	and	he	is	the
source	of	all	good.	“
Every	
good	endowment	and	
every	
perfect	gift	is	from
above,	coming	down	from	the	Father	of	lights	with	whom	there	is	no
variation	or	shadow	due	to	change”	(James	1:17).
We	ought	therefore	to	say	to	ourselves,	as	Paul	says	to	the	Corinthians,	“What
have	you	that	you	did	not	receive?	If	then	you	received	it,	why	do	you	boast
as	if	it	were	not	a	gift?”	(1	Cor.	4:7).	“For	from	him	and	through	him	and	to
him	are	all	things.	To	him	be	glory	for	ever”	(Rom.	11:36).
We	imitate	God’s	blessedness	when	we	find	delight	and	happiness	in	all	that
is	pleasing	to	God,	both	those	aspects	of	our	own	lives	that	are	pleasing	to
God	and	the	deeds	of	others.	In	fact,	when	we	are	thankful	for	and	delight	in
the	specific	abilities,	preferences,	and	other	characteristics	with	which	God
has	created	us	as	individuals,	then	we	also	imitate	his	attribute	of	blessedness.
Furthermore,	we	imitate	God’s	blessedness	by	rejoicing	in	the	creation	as	it
reflects	various	aspects	of	his	excellent	character.	And	we	find	our	greatest
blessedness,	our	greatest	happiness,	in	delighting	in	the	source	of	all	good
qualities,	God	himself.
1
9.	Beauty.	
God’s	beauty	is	that	attribute	of	God	whereby	he	is	the	sum	of	all
desirable	qualities.	
This	attribute	of	God	has	been	implicit	in	a	number	of	the
preceding	attributes,	and	is	especially	related	to	God’s	perfection.	However,
God’s	perfection	was	defined	in	such	a	way	as	to	show	that	he	does	not	
lack
anything	that	would	be	desirable	for	him.	This	attribute,	beauty,	is	defined	in
a	positive	way	to	show	that	God	actually	does	possess	all	desirable	qualities:
“perfection”	means	that	God	doesn’t	lack	anything	desirable;	“beauty”	means
that	God	has	everything	desirable.	They	are	two	different	ways	of	affirming
the	same	truth.
Nevertheless,	there	is	value	in	affirming	this	positive	aspect	of	God’s
possession	of	everything	that	is	desirable.	It	reminds	us	that	all	of	our	good
and	righteous	desires,	all	of	the	desires	that	really	ought	to	be	in	us	or	in	any
other	creature,	find	their	ultimate	fulfillment	in	God	and	in	no	one	else.
David	speaks	of	the	beauty	of	the	L
ORD
	in	Psalm	27:4:	“One	thing	have	I
asked	of	the	L
ORD
,	that	will	I	seek	after;	that	I	may	dwell	in	the	house	of	the
L
ORD
	all	the	days	of	my	life,	to	behold	
the	beauty	of	the	L
ORD
,	
and	to	inquire
in	his	temple.”	A	similar	idea	is	expressed	in	another	psalm:	“Whom	have	I	in
heaven	but	you?	And	there	is	nothing	upon	earth	that	I	desire	besides	you”
(Ps.	73:25).	In	both	cases,	the	psalmist	recognizes	that	his	desire	for	God,	who
is	the	sum	of	everything	desirable,	far	surpasses	all	other	desires.	This	desire
culminates	in	a	longing	to	be	near	God	and	to	enjoy	his	presence	forevermore.
Thus,	the	greatest	blessing	of	the	heavenly	city	shall	be	this:	“They	shall	see
his	face”	(Rev.	22:4).
Anne	R.	Cousin	certainly	had	a	proper	perspective	on	heaven,	for	in	the	last
stanza	of	her	hymn,	“The	Sands	of	Time	are	Sinking”	she	wrote:
The	bride	eyes	not	her	garment,
But	her	dear	bridegroom’s	face.
I	will	not	gaze	at	glory,
But	on	my	King	of	grace;
Not	at	the	crown	he	giveth,
But	on	his	pierced	hand:
The	Lamb	is	all	the	glory
Of	Emmanuel’s	land.
We	reflect	God’s	beauty	in	our	own	lives	when	we	exhibit	conduct	that	is
pleasing	to	him.	Thus,	Peter	tells	wives	in	the	churches	to	which	he	writes
that	their	“adorning”	(that	is,	their	source	of	beauty)	should	be	“the	hidden
person	of	the	heart	with	the	imperishable	jewel	of	a	gentle	and	quiet	spirit,
which	in	God’s	sight	is	very	precious”	(1	Peter	3:4).	Similarly,	Paul	instructs
servants	that	by	their	conduct	they	should	“
adorn	
the	doctrine	of	God	our
Savior”	(Titus	2:10).
The	beauty	of	our	lives	is	so	important	to	Christ	that	his	purpose	now	is	to
sanctify	the	entire	church	“that	he	might	present	the	church	to	himself	in
splendor,	without	spot	or	wrinkle	or	any	such	thing,	that	she	might	be	holy
and	without	blemish”	(Eph.	5:27).	Thus,	we	individually	and	corporately
reflect	God’s	beauty	in	every	way	in	which	we	exhibit	his	character.	When	we
reflect	his	character,	he	delights	in	us	and	finds	us	beautiful	in	his	sight.
But	we	also	delight	in	God’s	excellence	as	we	see	it	manifested	in	the	lives	of
our	brothers	and	sisters	in	the	Lord.	Therefore	it	is	right	that	we	feel	joy	and
delight	in	the	fellowship	of	one	another,	and	that	this	joy	deepens	as	our
conformity	to	the	life	of	Christ	increases.	It	is	right	that	we	long	to	be	in	the
fellowship	of	God’s	people	in	which	God’s	character	is	manifested,	for	when
we	delight	in	the	godliness	of	God’s	people,	we	are	ultimately	delighting	in
God	himself	as	we	see	his	character	evidenced	in	the	lives	of	his	people.
20.	Glory.
	In	one	sense	of	the	word	
glory	
it	simply	means	“honor”	or
“excellent	reputation.”	This	is	the	meaning	of	the	term	in	Isaiah	43:7,	where
God	speaks	of	his	children,	“whom	I	created	for	my	
glory,”	
or	Romans	3:23,
which	says	that	all	“have	sinned	and	fall	short	of	the	
glory	
of	God.”	It	also	has
that	meaning	in	John	17:5,	where	Jesus	speaks	to	the	Father	of	“the	
glory
which	I	had	with	you	before	the	world	was	made,”	and	in	Hebrews	1:3,	which
says	that	the	Son	“is	the	radiance	of	God’s	
glory”	
(author’s	translation).	In
this	sense,	the	glory	of	God	is	not	exactly	an	attribute	of	his	being	but	rather
describes	the	superlative	honor	that	should	be	given	to	God	by	everything	in
the	universe	(including,	in	Heb.	1:3	and	John	17:5,	the	honor	that	is	shared
among	the	members	of	the	Trinity).	But	that	is	not	the	sense	of	the	word	
glory
that	we	are	concerned	with	in	this	section.
In	another	sense,	God’s	“glory”	means	the	bright	light	that	surrounds	God’s
presence.	Since	God	is	spirit,	and	not	energy	or	matter,	this	visible	light	is	not
part	of	God’s	being	but	is	something	that	was	created.	We	may	define	it	as
follows:	
God’s	glory	is	the	created	brightness	that	surrounds	God’s	revelation
of	himself.
This	“attribute”	of	God	is	really	not	an	attribute	of	God	in	the	sense	that	the
others	were,	for	here	we	are	speaking	not	of	God’s	own	character	but	of	the
created	
light	or	brilliance	that	surrounds	God	as	he	manifests	himself	in	his
creation.	Thus,	God’s	glory	in	this	sense	is	not	actually	an	attribute	of	God	in
himself.	Nevertheless,	God’s	glory	is	something	that	belongs	to	him	alone	and
is	the	appropriate	outward	expression	of	his	own	excellence.	It	seems	right
therefore	to	treat	it	here	immediately	after	the	attributes	of	God.
Scripture	often	speaks	of	God’s	glory.	David	asks,	“Who	is	this	King	of
glory?	The	L
ORD
	of	hosts,	
he	is	the	King	of	glory!”	
(Ps.	24:10).	We	read	in
Psalm	104:1–2,	“O	L
ORD
	my	God,	you	are	very	great!	You	are	clothed	with
honor	and	majesty,	you	who	cover	yourself	with	light	as	with	a	garment.	.	.	.”
This	glory	of	God	is	frequently	mentioned	in	the	Old	Testament.
It	is	mentioned	again	in	the	New	Testament	in	connection	with	the
annunciation	of	Jesus’	birth	to	the	shepherds:	“And	an	angel	of	the	Lord
appeared	to	them,	and	
the	glory	of	the	Lord	shone	around	them,	
and	they	were
filled	with	fear”	(Luke	2:9).	God’s	glory	was	also	evident	at	the
transfiguration	of	Christ	(cf.	Matt.	17:2),	and	we	find	in	the	heavenly	city	yet
to	come	that	“the	city	has	no	need	of	sun	or	moon	to	shine	upon	it,	for	
the
glory	of	God	is	its	light,	
and	its	lamp	is	the	Lamb”	(Rev.	21:23).
It	is	very	appropriate	that	God’s	revelation	of	himself	should	be	accompanied
by	such	splendor	and	brightness,	for	this	glory	of	God	is	the	visible
manifestation	of	the	excellence	of	God’s	character.	The	greatness	of	God’s
being,	the	perfection	of	all	his	attributes,	is	something	that	we	can	never	fully
comprehend,	but	before	which	we	can	only	stand	in	awe	and	worship.	Thus,	it
is	appropriate	indeed	that	the	visible	manifestation	of	God	be	such	that	we
would	be	unable	to	gaze	fully	upon	it,	and	that	it	would	be	so	bright	that	it
would	call	forth	both	great	delight	and	deep	awe	from	us	when	we	behold	it
only	in	part.
Quite	amazingly,	God	made	us	to	reflect	his	glory.	Paul	tells	us	that	even	now
in	our	Christian	lives	we	all	are	being	“changed	into	his	likeness	from	one
degree	of	glory	to	another”	(2	Cor.	3:18;	cf.	Matt.	5:16;	Phil.	2:15).	Though
we	do	not	now	find	ourselves	surrounded	by	a	visible	light,	there	is	a
brightness,	a	splendor,	or	a	beauty	about	the	manner	of	life	of	a	person	who
deeply	loves	God,	and	it	is	often	evident	to	those	around	such	a	person.	In	the
life	to	come,	such	brightness	will	be	intensified,	so	that	as	we	reign	with
Christ,	it	seems	that	we	also	will	receive	an	outward	appearance	that	is
appropriate	to	that	reign	and	to	our	status	as	image	bearers	of	God	and
servants	of	the	Lord	Jesus	Christ	(cf.	Prov.	4:18;	Dan.	12:3;	Matt.	13:43;	1
Cor.	15:43).
5
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
Will,	Freedom
1.			As	children	grow	toward	adulthood,	what	are	proper	and	improper
ways	for	them	to	show	in	their	own	lives	greater	and	greater	exercise	of
individual	will	and	freedom	from	parental	control?	Are	these	to	be
expected	as	evidence	of	our	creation	in	the	image	of	God?
Power
2.			If	God’s	power	is	his	ability	to	do	what	he	wills	to	do,	then	is	power
for	us	the	ability	to	obey	God’s	will	and	bring	about	results	in	the	world
that	are	pleasing	to	him?	Name	several	ways	in	which	we	can	increase	in
such	power	in	our	lives.
Perfection
3.			How	does	God’s	attribute	of	perfection	remind	us	that	we	can	never
be	satisfied	with	the	reflection	of	only	some	of	God’s	character	in	our
own	lives?	Can	you	describe	some	aspects	of	what	it	would	mean	to	“be
perfect”	as	our	heavenly	Father	is	perfect,	with	respect	to	your	own	life?
Blessedness
4.			Are	you	happy	with	the	way	God	created	you—with	the	physical,
emotional,	mental,	and	relational	traits	he	gave	you?	With	the	sex	he	gave
you	(whether	masculine	or	feminine)?	With	the	spiritual	gifts	he	has	given
you?	In	what	ways	is	it	right	to	be	happy	or	pleased	with	our	own
personalities,	physical	characteristics,	abilities,	positions,	etc.?	In	what
ways	is	it	wrong	to	be	pleased	or	happy	about	these	things?	Will	we	ever
be	fully	“blessed”	or	happy?	When	will	that	be	and	why?
5.			Think	about	the	qualities	that	you	admire	in	other	people,	both
Christians	and	non-Christians.	Which	of	these	are	right	to	admire	and
which	are	not?	How	can	you	decide?	How	can	we	come	to	delight	more
frequently	and	more	fully	in	God	himself?
Beauty
6.			If	we	refuse	to	accept	our	society’s	definition	of	beauty,	or	even	the
definitions	that	we	ourselves	may	have	worked	with	previously,	and
decide	that	that	which	is	truly	beautiful	is	the	character	of	God	himself,
then	how	will	our	understanding	of	beauty	be	different	from	the	one	we
previously	held?	Will	we	still	be	able	to	rightly	apply	our	new	idea	of
beauty	to	some	of	the	things	we	previously	thought	to	be	beautiful?	Why
or	why	not?
7.			Can	you	understand	why	David’s	one	desire	above	all	others	in	life
was	“that	I	may	dwell	in	the	house	of	the	L
ORD
	all	the	days	of	my	life,	to
behold	the	beauty	of	the	L
ORD
,	and	to	inquire	in	his	temple”	(Ps.	27:4)?
Glory
8.			When	the	shepherds	near	Bethlehem	experienced	the	glory	of	the
Lord	shining	around	them,	“they	were	filled	with	fear”	(Luke	2:9).	Yet
when	we	come	to	live	forever	in	the	heavenly	city,	we	will	continually	be
surrounded	by	the	light	of	the	glory	of	the	Lord	(Rev.	21:23).	Will	we
then	continually	feel	this	same	fear	the	shepherds	felt?	Why	or	why	not?
Would	you	like	to	live	in	the	presence	of	this	glory?	Can	we	experience
any	of	it	in	this	life?
SPECIAL	TERMS
attributes	of	purpose
	
	
	
	
	
blessedness
beauty
	
	
	
	
	
freedom
free	will
	
	
	
	
	
reasonable	self-determination
glory
	
	
	
	
	
revealed	will
necessary	will
	
	
	
	
	
secret	will
omnipotence
	
	
	
	
	
sovereignty
perfection
	
	
	
	
	
“summary	attributes”
power
	
	
	
	
	
will
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the	
bibliography	to
chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be	found	in	
Appendix	4
.)
Because	systematic	theologies	have	different	ways	of	classifying	the
attributes	of	God,	some	of	the	sections	listed	below	discuss	only	the
communicable	attributes	of	God,	and	some	discuss	all	the	attributes	of	God.
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92			Litton,	58–74
1930			Thomas,	14–20,	495–500
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1847			Finney,	49–65,	135–80,	524–44
1875–76			Pope,	1:248–55,	287–360
1892–94			Miley,	1:159–222
1940			Wiley,	1:241–393
1960			Purkiser,	127–42
1983			Carter,	1:111–27
1983–			Cottrell,	1:192–305,	388–468;	3:175–400,	461–528
1987–90			Oden,	1:15–130
3.			Baptist
1767			Gill,	1:37–187,	359–65
1887			Boyce,	54–115
1907			Strong,	243–303
1917			Mullins,	214–50
1976–83			Henry,	2:151–246;	5:9–164,	214–375;
6:35–89,	251–417
1983–85			Erickson,	263–320
1987–94			Lewis/Demarest,	1:175–248
4.			Dispensational
1947			Chafer,	1:179–224,	260–71
1949			Thiessen,	75–88
1986			Ryrie,	35–50
5.			Lutheran
1917–24			Pieper,	1:405–66
1934			Mueller,	160–75
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1559			Calvin,	1:96–120	(1.10–12)
1861			Heppe,	57–104
1871–73			Hodge,	1:366–441
1878			Dabney,	38–54,	144–74
1887–1921			Warfield,	
BTS,	
505–22;	
SSW,	
1:69–81;
ST,	
109–14
1889			Shedd,	1:151–94,	334–92;	3:89–248
1909			Bavinck,	
DG,	
175–251	(this	is	an
exceptionally	valuable	discussion	of	the	attributes	of
God)
1938			Berkhof,	41–81
1962			Buswell,	1:29–71
7.			Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988–92			Williams,	1:47–82
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955			Ott,	24–49
2.			Roman	Catholic:	Post-Vatican	II
1980			McBrien,	1:283–342
Other	Works
Bray,	Gerald	L.	
The	Doctrine	of	God.	
Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity
Press,	1993.
Bromiley,	G.	W.	“God.”	In	
ISBE,	
2:493–503.
Charnock,	Stephen.	
The	Existence	and	Attributes	of	God.	
Repr.	ed.
Evansville,	Ind.:	Sovereign	Grace	Book	Club,	n.d.,	pp.	181–802	(first
published	1655–1680).
Kaiser,	Christopher	B.	
The	Doctrine	of	God.	
Westchester,	Ill.:	Good
News,	1982.
Lewis,	Gordon	R.	“God,	Attributes	of.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	451–59.
_____.	“Impassibility	of	God.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	553–54.
Packer,	J.	I.	“God.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	274–77.
_____.	
Knowing	God.	
London:	Inter-Varsity	Press,	1973,	pp.	80–254.
Piper,	John.	
Desiring	God.	
Portland,	Ore.:	Multnomah,	1986.
_____.	
The	Pleasures	of	God.	
Portland,	Ore.:	Multnomah,	1991.
Saucy,	R.	L.	“God,	Doctrine	of.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	459–64.
Tozer,	A.	W.	
The	Knowledge	of	the	Holy.	
New	York:	Harper	and	Row,
1961.
Van	Til,	Cornelius.	
In	Defense	of	the	Faith,	
vol.	5:	
An	Introduction	to
Systematic	Theology.	
Phillipsburg,	N.J.:	Presbyterian	and	Reformed,
1976,	pp.	200–252.
Wenham,	John	W.	
The	Goodness	of	God.	
London:	Inter-Varsity	Press,
1974.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
Psalm	73:25–26:	
Whom	have	I	in	heaven	but	you?	And	there	is	nothing	upon
earth	that	I	desire	besides	you.	My	flesh	and	my	heart	may	fail,	but	God	is	the
strength	of	my	heart	and	my	portion	for	ever.
HYMN
“If	Thou	but	Suffer	God	to	Guide	Thee”
This	is	undoubtedly	one	of	the	most	beautiful	hymns	ever	written	that
expresses	trust	in	God	for	his	sovereignty.
If	thou	but	suffer	God	to	guide	thee,
And	hope	in	him	through	all	thy	ways,
He’ll	give	thee	strength,	whate’er	betide	thee,
And	bear	thee	through	the	evil	days:
Who	trusts	in	God’s	unchanging	love
Builds	on	the	rock	that	naught	can	move.
What	can	these	anxious	cares	avail	thee,
These	never-ceasing	moans	and	sighs?
What	can	it	help,	if	thou	bewail	thee
O’er	each	dark	moment	as	it	flies?
Our	cross	and	trials	do	but	press
The	heavier	for	our	bitterness.
Only	be	still,	and	wait	his	leisure
In	cheerful	hope,	with	heart	content
To	take	whate’er	thy	Father’s	pleasure
And	all-deserving	love	hath	sent;
Nor	doubt	our	inmost	wants	are	known
To	him	who	chose	us	for	his	own.
All	are	alike	before	the	highest;
’	Tis	easy	to	our	God,	we	know,
To	raise	thee	up	though	low	thou	liest,
To	make	the	rich	man	poor	and	low;
True	wonders	still	by	him	are	wrought
Who	setteth	up	and	brings	to	naught.
Sing,	pray,	and	keep	his	ways	unswerving,
So	do	thine	own	part	faithfully,
And	trust	his	Word,	though	undeserving,
Thou	yet	shalt	find	it	true	for	thee;
God	never	yet	forsook	at	need
The	soul	that	trusted	him	indeed.
AUTHOR:	GEORG	NEUMARK,	1641
Alternative	hymns:	“God	Moves	in	a	Mysterious	Way”	(printed	at	the	end	of
chapter	16);	“Crown	Him	With	Many	Crowns”
NOTES
1
The	phrase	does	not	always	carry	that	meaning	(cf.	Rom.	11:32;	1	Cor.	12:6;	2	Cor.	12:19),	but	in	contexts	where	the	scope	of
Paul’s	thought	is	cosmic	or	universal	in	nature	(as	in	this	passage),	the	phrase	does	seem	quite	clearly	to	refer	to	everything	in	all
creation.
2
See	the	discussion	of	God’s	decrees	in	
chapter	16
.
3
In	Eph.	1:9–10	Paul	says	that	God	“has	made	known	to	us	.	.	.	the	mystery	of	his	will	.	.	.	to	unite	all	things	in	him.”	Here	he	tells
us	that	part	of	God’s	secret	will	has	become	God’s	revealed	will	because	God	made	it	known	to	the	apostles	and	then	to	the
church.
4
See	
chapter	16
	for	further	discussion	of	the	relationship	between	the	will	of	God	and	evil.	See	also	the	excellent	essay	by	John
Piper,	“Are	There	Two	Wills	in	God?	Divine	Election	and	God’s	Desire	for	All	to	Be	Saved,”	in	
The	Grace	of	God,	the	Bondage
of	the	Will,	
vol.	2,	ed.	by	Tom	Schreiner	and	Bruce	Ware	(forthcoming:	Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1995).
5
See	the	discussion	of	glorification	in	
chapter	42
.
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	14
God	in	Three	Persons:	The	Trinity
How	can	God	be	three	persons,	yet	one	God?
The	preceding	chapters	have	discussed	many	attributes	of	God.	But	if	we
understood	only	those	attributes,	we	would	not	rightly	understand	God	at	all,
for	we	would	not	understand	that	God,	in	his	very	being,	has	always	existed
as	more	than	one	person.	In	fact,	God	exists	as	three	persons,	yet	he	is	one
God.
It	is	important	to	remember	the	doctrine	of	the	Trinity	in	connection	with	the
study	of	God’s	attributes.	When	we	think	of	God	as	eternal,	omnipresent,
omnipotent,	and	so	forth,	we	may	have	a	tendency	to	think	only	of	God	the
Father	in	connection	with	these	attributes.	But	the	biblical	teaching	on	the
Trinity	tells	us	that	all	of	God’s	attributes	are	true	of	all	three	persons,	for
each	is	fully	God.	Thus,	God	the	Son	and	God	the	Holy	Spirit	are	also	eternal,
omnipresent,	omnipotent,	infinitely	wise,	infinitely	holy,	infinitely	loving,
omniscient,	and	so	forth.
The	doctrine	of	the	Trinity	is	one	of	the	most	important	doctrines	of	the
Christian	faith.	To	study	the	Bible’s	teachings	on	the	Trinity	gives	us	great
insight	into	the	question	that	is	at	the	center	of	all	of	our	seeking	after	God:
What	is	God	like	in	himself?	Here	we	learn	that	in	himself,	in	his	very	being,
God	exists	in	the	persons	of	Father,	Son,	and	Holy	Spirit,	yet	he	is	one	God.
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
We	may	define	the	doctrine	of	the	Trinity	as	follows:	
God	eternally	exists	as
three	persons,	Father,	Son,	and	Holy	Spirit,	and	each	person	is	fully	God,	and
there	is	one	God.
A.	The	Doctrine	of	the	Trinity	Is	Progressively	Revealed	in	Scripture
1.
	Partial	Revelation	in	the	Old	Testament.
	The	word	
trinity	
is	never	found
in	the	Bible,	though	the	idea	represented	by	the	word	is	taught	in	many
places.	The	word	
trinity	
means	“tri-unity”	or	“three-in-oneness.”	It	is	used	to
summarize	the	teaching	of	Scripture	that	God	is	three	persons	yet	one	God.
Sometimes	people	think	the	doctrine	of	the	Trinity	is	found	only	in	the	New
Testament,	not	in	the	Old.	If	God	has	eternally	existed	as	three	persons,	it
would	be	surprising	to	find	no	indications	of	that	in	the	Old	Testament.
Although	the	doctrine	of	the	Trinity	is	not	explicitly	found	in	the	Old
Testament,	several	passages	suggest	or	even	imply	that	God	exists	as	more
than	one	person.
For	instance,	according	to	Genesis	1:26,	God	said,	“Let	
us	
make	man	in	
our
image,	after	
our	
likeness.”	What	do	the	plural	verb	(“let	us”)	and	the	plural
pronoun	(“our”)	mean?	Some	have	suggested	they	are	plurals	of	majesty,	a
form	of	speech	a	king	would	use	in	saying,	for	example,	“We	are	pleased	to
grant	your	request.”
1
	However,	in	Old	Testament	Hebrew	there	are	no	other
examples	of	a	monarch	using	plural	verbs	or	plural	pronouns	of	himself	in
such	a	“plural	of	majesty,”	so	this	suggestion	has	no	evidence	to	support	it.
2
Another	suggestion	is	that	God	is	here	speaking	to	angels.	But	angels	did	not
participate	in	the	creation	of	man,	nor	was	man	created	in	the	image	and
likeness	of	angels,	so	this	suggestion	is	not	convincing.	The	best	explanation
is	that	already	in	the	first	chapter	of	Genesis	we	have	an	indication	of	a
plurality	of	persons	in	God	himself.
3
	We	are	not	told	how	many	persons,	and
we	have	nothing	approaching	a	complete	doctrine	of	the	Trinity,	but	it	is
implied	that	more	than	one	person	is	involved.	The	same	can	be	said	of
Genesis	3:22	(“Behold,	the	man	has	become	like	one	of	
us,	
knowing	good	and
evil”),	Genesis	11:7	(“Come,	let	
us	
go	down,	and	there	confuse	their
language”),	and	Isaiah	6:8	(“Whom	shall	I	send,	and	who	will	go	for	
us
?”).
(Note	the	combination	of	singular	and	plural	in	the	same	sentence	in	the	last
passage.)
Moreover,	there	are	passages	where	one	person	is	called	“God”	or	“the	Lord”
and	is	distinguished	from	another	person	who	is	also	said	to	be	God.	In	Psalm
45:6–7	(NIV),	the	psalmist	says,	“Your	throne,	O	God,	will	last	for	ever	and
ever.	.	.	.	You	love	righteousness	and	hate	wickedness;	therefore	God,	your
God,	has	set	you	above	your	companions	by	anointing	you	with	the	oil	of
joy.”	Here	the	psalm	passes	beyond	describing	anything	that	could	be	true	of
an	earthly	king	and	calls	the	king	“God”	(v.	
6),	whose	throne	will	last
“forever	and	ever.”	But	then,	still	speaking	to	the	person	called	“God,”	the
author	says	that	“God,	your	God,	has	set	you	above	your	companions”	(v.	
7).
So	two	separate	persons	are	called	“God”	(Heb.	
’Elōhîm
).	In	the	New
Testament,	the	author	of	Hebrews	quotes	this	passage	and	applies	it	to	Christ:
“Your	throne,	O	God,	is	for	ever	and	ever”	(Heb.	1:8).
4
Similarly,	in	Psalm	110:1,	David	says,	“The	L
ORD
	says	to	my	lord:	‘Sit	at	my
right	hand	until	I	make	your	enemies	a	footstool	for	your	feet’	”	(NIV).	Jesus
rightly	understands	that	David	is	referring	to	two	separate	persons	as	“Lord”
(Matt.	22:41–46),	but	who	is	David’s	“Lord”	if	not	God	himself	?	And	who
could	be	saying	to	God,	“Sit	at	my	right	hand”	except	someone	else	who	is
also	fully	God?	From	a	New	Testament	perspective,	we	can	paraphrase	this
verse:	“God	the	Father	said	to	God	the	Son,	‘Sit	at	my	right	hand.’	”	But	even
without	the	New	Testament	teaching	on	the	Trinity,	it	seems	clear	that	David
was	aware	of	a	plurality	of	persons	in	one	God.	Jesus,	of	course,	understood
this,	but	when	he	asked	the	Pharisees	for	an	explanation	of	this	passage,	“no
one	was	able	to	answer	him	a	word,	nor	from	that	day	did	any	one	dare	to	ask
him	any	more	questions”	(Matt.	22:46).	Unless	they	are	willing	to	admit	a
plurality	of	persons	in	one	God,	Jewish	interpreters	of	Scripture	to	this	day
will	have	no	more	satisfactory	explanation	of	Psalm	110:1	(or	of	Gen.	1:26,	or
of	the	other	passages	just	discussed)	than	they	did	in	Jesus	day.
Isaiah	63:10	says	that	God’s	people	“rebelled	and	grieved	his	Holy	Spirit”
(NIV),	apparently	suggesting	both	that	the	Holy	Spirit	is	distinct	from	God
himself	(it	is	“his	Holy	Spirit”),	and	that	this	Holy	Spirit	can	be	“grieved,”
thus	suggesting	emotional	capabilities	characteristic	of	a	distinct	person.	(Isa.
61:1	also	distinguishes	“The	Spirit	of	the	Lord	GOD”	from	“the	L
ORD
,”	even
though	no	personal	qualities	are	attributed	to	the	Spirit	of	the	Lord	in	that
verse.)
Similar	evidence	is	found	in	Malachi,	when	the	Lord	says,	“The	Lord	whom
you	seek	will	suddenly	come	to	his	temple;	the	messenger	of	the	covenant	in
whom	you	delight,	behold,	he	is	coming,	says	the	L
ORD
	of	hosts.	But	who	can
endure	the	day	of	his	coming,	and	who	can	stand	when	he	appears?”	(Mal.
3:1–2).	Here	again	the	one	speaking	(“the	L
ORD
	of	hosts”)	distinguishes
himself	from	“the	Lord	whom	you	seek,”	suggesting	two	separate	persons,
both	of	whom	can	be	called	“Lord.”
In	Hosea	1:7,	the	Lord	is	speaking,	and	says	of	the	house	of	Judah,	“I	will
deliver	them	by	the	L
ORD
	their	God,”	once	again	suggesting	that	more	than
one	person	can	be	called	“Lord”	(Heb.	
Yahweh
)	and	“God”	(
’Elōhîm
).
And	in	Isaiah	48:16,	the	speaker	(apparently	the	servant	of	the	Lord)	says,
“And	now	the	Lord	GOD	has	sent	me	and	his	Spirit.”
5
	Here	the	Spirit	of	the
Lord,	like	the	servant	of	the	Lord,	has	been	“sent”	by	the	Lord	GOD	on	a
particular	mission.	The	parallel	between	the	two	objects	of	sending	(“me”	and
“his	Spirit”)	would	be	consistent	with	seeing	them	both	as	distinct	persons:	it
seems	to	mean	more	than	simply	“the	Lord	has	sent	me	and	his	power.”
6
	In
fact,	from	a	full	New	Testament	perspective	(which	recognizes	Jesus	the
Messiah	to	be	the	true	servant	of	the	Lord	predicted	in	Isaiah’s	prophecies),
Isaiah	48:16	has	trinitarian	implications:	“And	now	the	Lord	GOD	has	sent
me	and	his	Spirit,”	if	spoken	by	Jesus	the	Son	of	God,	refers	to	all	three
persons	of	the	Trinity.
Furthermore,	several	Old	Testament	passages	about	“the	angel	of	the	L
ORD
”
suggest	a	plurality	of	persons	in	God.	The	word	translated	“angel”	(Heb.
mal’ak
)	means	simply	“messenger.”	If	this	angel	of	the	L
ORD
	is	a
“messenger”	of	the	L
ORD
,	he	is	then	distinct	from	the	L
ORD
	himself.	Yet	at
some	points	the	angel	of	the	L
ORD
	is	called	“God”	or	“the	L
ORD
”	(see	Gen.
16:13;	Ex.	3:2–6;	23:20–22	[note	“my	name	is	in	him”	in	v.	
21];	Num.	22:35
with	38;	Judg.	2:1–2;	6:11	with	14).	At	other	points	in	the	Old	Testament	“the
angel	of	the	L
ORD
”	simply	refers	to	a	created	angel,	but	at	least	at	these	texts
the	special	angel	(or	“messenger”)	of	the	L
ORD
	seems	to	be	a	distinct	person
who	is	fully	divine.
One	of	the	most	disputed	Old	Testament	texts	that	could	show	distinct
personality	for	more	than	one	person	is	Proverbs	8:22–31.	Although	the
earlier	part	of	the	chapter	could	be	understood	as	merely	a	personification	of
“wisdom”	for	literary	effect,	showing	wisdom	calling	to	the	simple	and
inviting	them	to	learn,	vv.	22–31,	one	could	argue,	say	things	about	“wisdom”
that	seem	to	go	far	beyond	mere	personification.	Speaking	of	the	time	when
God	created	the	earth,	“wisdom”	says,	“Then	I	was	the	craftsman	at	his	side.	I
was	filled	with	delight	day	after	day,	rejoicing	always	in	his	presence,
rejoicing	in	his	whole	world	and	delighting	in	mankind”	(Prov.	8:30–31	NIV).
To	work	as	a	“craftsman”	at	God’s	side	in	the	creation	suggests	in	itself	the
idea	of	distinct	personhood,	and	the	following	phrases	might	seem	even	more
convincing,	for	only	real	persons	can	be	“filled	with	delight	day	after	day”
and	can	rejoice	in	the	world	and	delight	in	mankind.
7
But	if	we	decide	that	“wisdom”	here	really	refers	to	the	Son	of	God	before	he
became	man,	there	is	a	difficulty.	Verses	22–25	(RSV)	seem	to	speak	of	the
creation	of	this	person	who	is	called	“wisdom”:
The	L
ORD
	created	me	at	the	beginning	of	his	work,
the	first	of	his	acts	of	old.
Ages	ago	I	was	set	up,
at	the	first,	before	the	beginning	of	the	earth.
When	there	were	no	depths	I	was	brought	forth,
when	there	were	no	springs	abounding	with	water.
Before	the	mountains	had	been	shaped,
before	the	hills,	I	was	brought	forth.
Does	this	not	indicate	that	this	“wisdom”	was	created?
In	fact,	it	does	not.	The	Hebrew	word	that	commonly	means	“create”	(
bārā’
)
is	not	used	in	verse	22;	rather	the	word	is	
qānāh,	
which	occurs	eighty-four
times	in	the	Old	Testament	and	almost	always	means	“to	get,	acquire.”	The
NASB	is	most	clear	here:	“The	Lord	possessed	me	at	the	beginning	of	his
way”	(similarly	KJV).	(Note	this	sense	of	the	word	in	Gen.	39:1;	Ex.	21:2;
Prov.	4:5,	7;	23:23;	Eccl.	2:7;	Isa.	1:3	[”owner”].)	This	is	a	legitimate	sense
and,	if	wisdom	is	understood	as	a	real	person,	would	mean	only	that	God	the
Father	began	to	direct	and	make	use	of	the	powerful	creative	work	of	God	the
Son	at	the	time	creation	began
8
:	the	Father	summoned	the	Son	to	work	with
him	in	the	activity	of	creation.	The	expression	“brought	forth”	in	verses	24
and	25	is	a	different	term	but	could	carry	a	similar	meaning:	the	Father	began
to	direct	and	make	use	of	the	powerful	creative	work	of	the	Son	in	the
creation	of	the	universe.
2.	More	Complete	Revelation	of	the	Trinity	in	the	New	Testament.
	When
the	New	Testament	opens,	we	enter	into	the	history	of	the	coming	of	the	Son
of	God	to	earth.	It	is	to	be	expected	that	this	great	event	would	be
accompanied	by	more	explicit	teaching	about	the	trinitarian	nature	of	God,
and	that	is	in	fact	what	we	find.	Before	looking	at	this	in	detail,	we	can	simply
list	several	passages	where	all	three	persons	of	the	Trinity	are	named	together.
When	Jesus	was	baptized,	“the	heavens	were	opened	and	he	saw	the	Spirit	of
God	descending	like	a	dove,	and	alighting	on	him;	and	lo,	a	voice	from
heaven,	saying,	‘This	is	my	beloved	Son,	with	whom	I	am	well	pleased’	”
(Matt.	3:16–17).	Here	at	one	moment	we	have	three	members	of	the	Trinity
performing	three	distinct	activities.	God	the	Father	is	speaking	from	heaven;
God	the	Son	is	being	baptized	and	is	then	spoken	to	from	heaven	by	God	the
Father;	and	God	the	Holy	Spirit	is	descending	from	heaven	to	rest	upon	and
empower	Jesus	for	his	ministry.
At	the	end	of	Jesus’	earthly	ministry,	he	tells	the	disciples	that	they	should	go
“and	make	disciples	of	all	nations,	baptizing	them	in	the	name	of	the	Father
and	of	the	Son	and	of	the	Holy	Spirit”	(Matt.	28:19).	The	very	names
“Father”	and	“Son,”	drawn	as	they	are	from	the	family,	the	most	familiar	of
human	institutions,	indicate	very	strongly	the	distinct	personhood	of	both	the
Father	and	the	Son.	When	“the	Holy	Spirit”	is	put	in	the	same	expression	and
on	the	same	level	as	the	other	two	persons,	it	is	hard	to	avoid	the	conclusion
that	the	Holy	Spirit	is	also	viewed	as	a	person	and	of	equal	standing	with	the
Father	and	the	Son.
When	we	realize	that	the	New	Testament	authors	generally	use	the	name
“God”	(Gk.	
theos
)	to	refer	to	God	the	Father	and	the	name	“Lord”	(Gk.
kyrios
)	to	refer	to	God	the	Son,	then	it	is	clear	that	there	is	another	trinitarian
expression	in	1	Corinthians	12:4–6:	“Now	there	are	varieties	of	gifts,	but	the
same	
Spirit;	
and	there	are	varieties	of	service,	but	the	same	
Lord;	
and	there
are	varieties	of	working,	but	it	is	the	same	
God	
who	inspires	them	all	in	every
one.”
Similarly,	the	last	verse	of	2	Corinthians	is	trinitarian	in	its	expression:	“The
grace	of	the	
Lord	Jesus	Christ	
and	the	love	of	
God	
and	the	fellowship	of	the
Holy	Spirit	
be	with	you	all”	(2	Cor.	13:14).	We	see	the	three	persons
mentioned	separately	in	Ephesians	4:4–6	as	well:	“There	is	one	body	and	one
Spirit,	
just	as	you	were	called	to	the	one	hope	that	belongs	to	your	call,	one
Lord,	
one	faith,	one	baptism,	one	
God	and	Father	
of	us	all,	who	is	above	all
and	through	all	and	in	all.”
All	three	persons	of	the	Trinity	are	mentioned	together	in	the	opening
sentence	of	1	Peter:	“According	to	the	foreknowledge	of	God	the	Father,	by
the	sanctifying	work	of	the	Spirit,	that	you	may	obey	Jesus	Christ	and	be
sprinkled	with	his	blood”	(1	Peter	1:2	NASB).	And	in	Jude	20–21,	we	read:
“But	you,	beloved,	build	yourselves	up	on	your	most	holy	faith;	pray	in	the
Holy	Spirit;	keep	yourselves	in	the	love	of	God;	wait	for	the	mercy	of	our
Lord	Jesus	Christ	unto	eternal	life.”
However,	the	KJV	translation	of	1	John	5:7	should	not	be	used	in	this
connection.	It	reads,	“For	there	are	three	that	bear	record	in	heaven,	the
Father,	the	Word,	and	the	Holy	Ghost:	and	these	three	are	one.”
The	problem	with	this	translation	is	that	it	is	based	on	a	very	small	number	of
unreliable	Greek	manuscripts,	the	earliest	of	which	comes	from	the	fourteenth
century	A.D.	No	modern	translation	includes	this	KJV	reading,	but	all	omit	it,
as	do	the	vast	majority	of	Greek	manuscripts	from	all	major	text	traditions,
including	several	very	reliable	manuscripts	from	the	fourth	and	fifth	century
A.D.,	and	also	including	quotations	by	church	fathers	such	as	Irenaeus	(d.	ca.
A.D.	202),	Clement	of	Alexandria	(d.	ca.	A.D.	212),	Tertullian	(died	after
A.D.	220),	and	the	great	defender	of	the	Trinity,	Athanasius	(d.	A.D.	373).
B.	Three	Statements	Summarize	the	Biblical	Teaching
In	one	sense	the	doctrine	of	the	Trinity	is	a	mystery	that	we	will	never	be	able
to	understand	fully.	However,	we	can	understand	something	of	its	truth	by
summarizing	the	teaching	of	Scripture	in	three	statements:
1.	God	is	three	persons.
2.	Each	person	is	fully	God.
3.	There	is	one	God.
The	following	section	will	develop	each	of	these	statements	in	more	detail.
1.
	God	Is	Three	Persons.
	The	fact	that	God	is	three	persons	means	that	the
Father	is	not	the	Son;	they	are	distinct	persons.	It	also	means	that	the	Father	is
not	the	Holy	Spirit,	but	that	they	are	distinct	persons.	And	it	means	that	the
Son	is	not	the	Holy	Spirit.	These	distinctions	are	seen	in	a	number	of	the
passages	quoted	in	the	earlier	section	as	well	as	in	many	additional	New
Testament	passages.
John	1:1–2	tells	us:	“In	the	beginning	was	the	Word,	and	the	Word	was	with
God,	and	the	Word	was	God.	He	was	in	the	beginning	with	God.”	The	fact
that	the	“Word”	(who	is	seen	to	be	Christ	in	vv.	9–18)	is	“with”	God	shows
distinction	from	God	the	Father.	In	John	17:24	(NIV),	Jesus	speaks	to	God	the
Father	about	“my	glory,	the	glory	you	have	given	me	because	you	loved	me
before	the	creation	of	the	world,”	thus	showing	distinction	of	persons,	sharing
of	glory,	and	a	relationship	of	love	between	the	Father	and	the	Son	before	the
world	was	created.
We	are	told	that	Jesus	continues	as	our	High	Priest	and	Advocate	before	God
the	Father:	“If	any	one	does	sin,	we	have	an	advocate	with	the	Father,	Jesus
Christ	the	righteous”	(1	John	2:1).	Christ	is	the	one	who	“is	able	for	all	time
to	save	those	who	draw	near	to	God	through	him,	since	he	always	lives	to
make	intercession	for	them”	(Heb.	7:25).	Yet	in	order	to	intercede	for	us
before	God	the	Father,	it	is	necessary	that	Christ	be	a	person	distinct	from	the
Father.
Moreover,	the	Father	is	not	the	Holy	Spirit,	and	the	Son	is	not	the	Holy	Spirit.
They	are	distinguished	in	several	verses.	Jesus	says,	“But	the	Counselor,	the
Holy	Spirit,	whom	the	Father	will	send	in	my	name,	he	will	teach	you	all
things,	and	bring	to	your	remembrance	all	that	I	have	said	to	you”	(John
14:26).	The	Holy	Spirit	also	prays	or	“intercedes”	for	us	(Rom.	8:27),
indicating	a	distinction	between	the	Holy	Spirit	and	God	the	Father	to	whom
the	intercession	is	made.
Finally,	the	fact	that	the	Son	is	not	the	Holy	Spirit	is	also	indicated	in	the
several	trinitarian	passages	mentioned	earlier,	such	as	the	Great	Commission
(Matt.	28:19),	and	in	passages	that	indicate	that	Christ	went	back	to	heaven
and	then	sent	the	Holy	Spirit	to	the	church.	Jesus	said,	“It	is	to	your	advantage
that	I	go	away,	for	if	I	do	not	go	away,	the	Counselor	will	not	come	to	you;
but	if	I	go,	I	will	send	him	to	you”	(John	16:7).
Some	have	questioned	whether	the	Holy	Spirit	is	indeed	a	distinct	person,
rather	than	just	the	“power”	or	“force”	of	God	at	work	in	the	world.	But	the
New	Testament	evidence	is	quite	clear	and	strong.
9
	First	are	the	several	verses
mentioned	earlier	where	the	Holy	Spirit	is	put	in	a	coordinate	relationship
with	the	Father	and	the	Son	(Matt.	28:19;	1	Cor.	12:4–6;	2	Cor.	13:14;	Eph.
4:4–6;	1	Peter	1:2):	since	the	Father	and	Son	are	both	persons,	the	coordinate
expression	strongly	intimates	that	the	Holy	Spirit	is	a	person	also.	Then	there
are	places	where	the	masculine	pronoun	
he	
(Gk.	
ekeinos
)	is	applied	to	the
Holy	Spirit	(John	14:26;	15:26;	16:13–14),	which	one	would	not	expect	from
the	rules	of	Greek	grammar,	for	the	word	“
spirit
”	(Gk.	
pneuma
)	is	neuter,	not
masculine,	and	would	ordinarily	be	referred	to	with	the	neuter	pronoun
ekeino.	
Moreover,	the	name	
counselor	
or	
comforter	
(Gk.	
paraklētos
)	is	a	term
commonly	used	to	speak	of	a	person	who	helps	or	gives	comfort	or	counsel	to
another	person	or	persons,	but	is	used	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in	John’s	gospel
(14:16,	26;	15:26;	16:7).
Other	personal	activities	are	ascribed	to	the	Holy	Spirit,	such	as	teaching
(John	14:26),	bearing	witness	(John	15:26;	Rom.	8:16),	interceding	or	praying
on	behalf	of	others	(Rom.	8:26–27),	searching	the	depths	of	God	(1	Cor.
2:10),	knowing	the	thoughts	of	God	(1	Cor.	2:11),	willing	to	distribute	some
gifts	to	some	and	other	gifts	to	others	(1	Cor.	12:11),	forbidding	or	not
allowing	certain	activities	(Acts	16:6–7),	speaking	(Acts	8:29;	13:2;	and	many
times	in	both	Old	and	New	Testaments),	evaluating	and	approving	a	wise
course	of	action	(Acts	15:28),	and	being	grieved	by	sin	in	the	lives	of
Christians	(Eph.	4:30).
Finally,	if	the	Holy	Spirit	is	understood	simply	to	be	the	power	of	God,	rather
than	a	distinct	person,	then	a	number	of	passages	would	simply	not	make
sense,	because	in	them	the	Holy	Spirit	and	his	power	or	the	power	of	God	are
both	mentioned.	For	example,	Luke	4:14,	“And	Jesus	returned	in	the	power	of
the	Spirit	into	Galilee,”	would	have	to	mean,	“Jesus	returned	in	the	power	of
the	power	of	God	into	Galilee.”	In	Acts	10:38,	“God	anointed	Jesus	of
Nazareth	with	the	Holy	Spirit	and	with	power,”	would	mean,	“God	anointed
Jesus	with	the	power	of	God	and	with	power”	(see	also	Rom.	15:13;	1	Cor.
2:4).
Although	so	many	passages	clearly	distinguish	the	Holy	Spirit	from	the	other
members	of	the	Trinity,	one	puzzling	verse	has	been	2	Corinthians	3:17:
“Now	the	Lord	is	the	Spirit,	and	where	the	Spirit	of	the	Lord	is,	there	is
freedom.”	Interpreters	often	assume	that	“the	Lord”	here	must	mean	Christ,
because	Paul	frequently	uses	“the	Lord”	to	refer	to	Christ.	But	that	is
probably	not	the	case	here,	for	a	good	argument	can	be	made	from	grammar
and	context	to	say	that	this	verse	is	better	translated	with	the	Holy	Spirit	as
subject,	“Now	the	Spirit	is	the	Lord.	.	.	.”
10
	In	this	case,	Paul	would	be	saying
that	the	Holy	Spirit	is	also	“Yahweh”	(or	“Jehovah”),	the	Lord	of	the	Old
Testament	(note	the	clear	Old	Testament	background	of	this	context,
beginning	at	v.	
7).	Theologically	this	would	be	quite	acceptable,	for	it	could
truly	be	said	that	just	as	God	the	Father	is	“Lord”	and	God	the	Son	is	“Lord”
(in	the	full	Old	Testament	sense	of	“Lord”	as	a	name	for	God),	so	also	the
Holy	Spirit	is	the	one	called	“Lord”	in	the	Old	Testament—and	it	is	the	Holy
Spirit	who	especially	manifests	the	presence	of	the	Lord	to	us	in	the	new
covenant	age.
11
2.	Each	Person	Is	Fully	God.
	In	addition	to	the	fact	that	all	three	persons	are
distinct,	the	abundant	testimony	of	Scripture	is	that	each	person	is	fully	God
as	well.
First,	
God	the	Father	is	clearly	God.	
This	is	evident	from	the	first	verse	of	the
Bible,	where	God	created	the	heaven	and	the	earth.	It	is	evident	through	the
Old	and	New	Testaments,	where	God	the	Father	is	clearly	viewed	as
sovereign	Lord	over	all	and	where	Jesus	prays	to	his	Father	in	heaven.
Next,	
the	Son	is	fully	God.	
Although	this	point	will	be	developed	in	greater
detail	in	chapter	26,	“The	Person	of	Christ,”	we	can	briefly	note	several
explicit	passages	at	this	point.	John	1:1–4	clearly	affirms	the	full	deity	of
Christ:
In	the	beginning	was	the	Word,	and	the	Word	was	with	God,	and	the
Word	was	God.	He	was	in	the	beginning	with	God;	all	things	were
made	through	him,	and	without	him	was	not	anything	made	that	was
made.	In	him	was	life,	and	the	life	was	the	light	of	men.
Here	Christ	is	referred	to	as	“the	Word,”	and	John	says	both	that	he	was	“with
God”	and	that	he	“was	God.”	The	Greek	text	echoes	the	opening	words	of
Genesis	1:1	(“In	the	beginning	.	.	.”)	and	reminds	us	that	John	is	talking	about
something	that	was	true	before	the	world	was	made.	God	the	Son	was	always
fully	God.
The	translation	“the	Word	was	God”	has	been	challenged	by	the	Jehovah’s
Witnesses,	who	translate	it	“the	Word	was	
a	god,
”	implying	that	the	Word
was	simply	a	heavenly	being	but	not	fully	divine.	They	justify	this	translation
by	pointing	to	the	fact	that	the	definite	article	(Gk.	
ho,	
“the”)	does	not	occur
before	the	Greek	word	
theos	
(“God”).	They	say	therefore	that	
theos	
should	be
translated	“a	god.”	However,	their	interpretation	has	been	followed	by	no
recognized	Greek	scholar	anywhere,	for	it	is	commonly	known	that	the
sentence	follows	a	regular	rule	of	Greek	grammar,	and	the	absence	of	the
definite	article	merely	indicates	that	“God”	is	the	predicate	rather	than	the
subject	of	the	sentence.
12
	(A	recent	publication	by	the	Jehovah’s	Witnesses
now	acknowledges	the	relevant	grammatical	rule	but	continues	to	affirm	their
position	on	John	1:1	nonetheless.)
13
The	inconsistency	of	the	Jehovah’s	Witnesses’	position	can	further	be	seen	in
their	translation	of	the	rest	of	the	chapter.	For	various	other	grammatical
reasons	the	word	
theos	
also	lacks	the	definite	article	at	other	places	in	this
chapter,	such	as	verse	6	(“There	was	a	man	sent	from	God”),	verse	12
(“power	to	become	children	of	God”),	verse	13	(“but	of	God”),	and	verse	18
(“No	one	has	ever	seen	God”).	If	the	Jehovah’s	Witnesses	were	consistent
with	their	argument	about	the	absence	of	the	definite	article,	they	would	have
to	translate	all	of	these	with	the	phrase	“a	god,”	but	they	translate	“God”	in
every	case.
John	20:28	in	its	context	is	also	a	strong	proof	for	the	deity	of	Christ.	Thomas
had	doubted	the	reports	of	the	other	disciples	that	they	had	seen	Jesus	raised
from	the	dead,	and	he	said	he	would	not	believe	unless	he	could	see	the	nail
prints	in	Jesus’	hands	and	place	his	hand	in	his	wounded	side	(John	20:25).
Then	Jesus	appeared	to	the	disciples	when	Thomas	was	with	them.	He	said	to
Thomas,	“Put	your	finger	here,	and	see	my	hands;	and	put	out	your	hand,	and
place	it	in	my	side;	do	not	be	faithless,	but	believing”	(John	20:27).	In
response	to	this,	we	read,	“Thomas	answered	him,	‘My	Lord	and	my	God!’	”
(John	20:28).	Here	Thomas	calls	Jesus	“my	God.”	The	narrative	shows	that
both	John	in	writing	his	gospel	and	Jesus	himself	approve	of	what	Thomas
has	said	and	encourage	everyone	who	hears	about	Thomas	to	believe	the
same	things	that	Thomas	did.	Jesus	immediately	responds	to	Thomas,	“Have
you	believed	because	you	have	seen	me?	Blessed	are	those	who	have	not	seen
and	yet	believe”	(John	20:29).	As	far	as	John	is	concerned,	this	is	the
dramatic	high	point	of	the	gospel,	for	he	immediately	tells	the	reader—in	the
very	next	verse—that	this	was	the	reason	he	wrote	it:
Now	Jesus	did	many	other	signs	in	the	presence	of	the	disciples,
which	are	not	written	in	this	book;	but	these	are	written	that	you	may
believe	that	Jesus	is	the	Christ,	the	Son	of	God,	and	that	believing	you
may	have	life	in	his	name.	(John	20:30–31)
Jesus	speaks	of	those	who	will	not	see	him	and	will	yet	believe,	and	John
immediately	tells	the	reader	that	he	recorded	the	events	written	in	his	gospel
in	order	that	they	may	believe	in	just	this	way,	imitating	Thomas	in	his
confession	of	faith.	In	other	words,	the	entire	gospel	is	written	to	persuade
people	to	imitate	Thomas,	who	sincerely	called	Jesus	“My	Lord	and	my
God.”	Because	this	is	set	out	by	John	as	the	purpose	of	his	gospel,	the
sentence	takes	on	added	force.
14
Other	passages	speaking	of	Jesus	as	fully	divine	include	Hebrews	1,	where
the	author	says	that	Christ	is	the	“exact	representation”	(Gk.	
charaktēr,	
“exact
duplicate”)	of	the	nature	or	being	(Gk.	
hypostasis
)	of	God—meaning	that	God
the	Son	exactly	duplicates	the	being	or	nature	of	God	the	Father	in	every	way:
whatever	attributes	or	power	God	the	Father	has,	God	the	Son	has	them	as
well.	The	author	goes	on	to	refer	to	the	Son	as	“God”	in	verse	8	(“But	of	the
Son	he	says,	‘Your	throne,	O	God,	is	for	ever	and	ever’	”),	and	he	attributes
the	creation	of	the	heavens	to	Christ	when	he	says	of	him,	“You,	Lord,	did
found	the	earth	in	the	beginning,	and	the	heavens	are	the	work	of	your	hands”
(Heb.	1:10,	quoting	Ps.	102:25).	Titus	2:13	refers	to	“our	great	
God	
and
Savior	Jesus	Christ,”	and	2	Peter	1:1	speaks	of	“the	righteousness	of	our	
God
and	Savior	Jesus	Christ.”
15
	Romans	9:5,	speaking	of	the	Jewish	people,	says,
“Theirs	are	the	patriarchs,	and	from	them	is	traced	the	human	ancestry	of
Christ,	who	is	God	over	all,	forever	praised!	Amen”	(NIV).
16
In	the	Old	Testament,	Isaiah	9:6	predicts,
“For	to	us	a	child	is	born,
to	us	a	son	is	given;
and	the	government	will	be	upon	his	shoulder,
and	his	name	will	be	called
‘Wonderful	Counselor,	Mighty	God.’	”
As	this	prophecy	is	applied	to	Christ,	it	refers	to	him	as	“Mighty	God.”	Note
the	similar	application	of	the	titles	“L
ORD
”	and	“God”	in	the	prophecy	of	the
coming	of	the	Messiah	in	Isaiah	40:3,	“In	the	wilderness	prepare	the	way	of
the	L
ORD
,	make	straight	in	the	desert	a	highway	for	our	God,”	quoted	by	John
the	Baptist	in	preparation	for	the	coming	of	Christ	in	Matthew	3:3.
Many	other	passages	will	be	discussed	in	chapter	26	below,	but	these	should
be	sufficient	to	demonstrate	that	the	New	Testament	clearly	refers	to	Christ	as
fully	God.	As	Paul	says	in	Colossians	2:9,	“In	him	the	whole	fulness	of	deity
dwells	bodily.”
Next,	
the	Holy	Spirit	is	also	fully	God.	
Once	we	understand	God	the	Father
and	God	the	Son	to	be	fully	God,	then	the	trinitarian	expressions	in	verses	like
Matthew	28:19	(“baptizing	them	in	the	name	of	the	Father	and	of	the	Son	and
of	the	Holy	Spirit”)	assume	significance	for	the	doctrine	of	the	Holy	Spirit,
because	they	show	that	the	Holy	Spirit	is	classified	on	an	equal	level	with	the
Father	and	the	Son.	This	can	be	seen	if	we	recognize	how	unthinkable	it
would	have	been	for	Jesus	to	say	something	like,	“baptizing	them	in	the	name
of	the	Father	and	of	the	Son	and	of	the	archangel	Michael”—this	would	give
to	a	created	being	a	status	entirely	inappropriate	even	to	an	archangel.
Believers	throughout	all	ages	can	only	be	baptized	into	the	name	(and	thus
into	a	taking	on	of	the	character)	of	God	himself.
17
	(Note	also	the	other
trinitarian	passages	mentioned	above:	1	Cor.	12:4–6;	2	Cor.	13:14;	Eph.	4:4–
6;	1	Peter	1:2;	Jude	20–21.)
In	Acts	5:3–4,	Peter	asks	Ananias,	“Why	has	Satan	filled	your	heart	to	lie	to
the	Holy	Spirit	.	.	.	?	You	have	not	lied	to	men	but	
to	God.”	
According	to
Peter’s	words,	to	lie	to	the	Holy	Spirit	is	to	lie	to	God.	Paul	says	in	1
Corinthians	3:16,	“Do	you	not	know	that	you	are	God’s	temple	and	that	God’s
Spirit	dwells	in	you?”	God’s	temple	is	the	place	where	God	himself	dwells,
which	Paul	explains	by	the	fact	that	“God’s	Spirit”	dwells	in	it,	thus
apparently	equating	God’s	Spirit	with	God	himself.
David	asks	in	Psalm	139:7–8,	“Whither	shall	I	go	from	your	Spirit?	Or
whither	shall	I	flee	from	your	presence?	If	I	ascend	to	heaven,	you	are	there!”
This	passage	attributes	the	divine	characteristic	of	omnipresence	to	the	Holy
Spirit,	something	that	is	not	true	of	any	of	God’s	creatures.	It	seems	that
David	is	equating	God’s	Spirit	with	God’s	presence.	To	go	from	God’s	Spirit
is	to	go	from	his	presence,	but	if	there	is	nowhere	that	David	can	flee	from
God’s	Spirit,	then	he	knows	that	wherever	he	goes	he	will	have	to	say,	“You
are	there.”
Paul	attributes	the	divine	characteristic	of	omniscience	to	the	Holy	Spirit	in	1
Corinthians	2:10–11:	“For	the	Spirit	searches	everything,	even	the	depths	of
God.	For	what	person	knows	a	man’s	thoughts	except	the	spirit	of	the	man
which	is	in	him?	So	also	no	one	comprehends	the	thoughts	of	God	[Gk.,
literally	‘the	things	of	God’]	except	the	Spirit	of	God.”
Moreover,	the	activity	of	giving	new	birth	to	everyone	who	is	born	again	is
the	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit.	Jesus	said,	“unless	one	is	born	of	water	and	the
Spirit,	he	cannot	enter	the	kingdom	of	God.	That	which	is	born	of	the	flesh	is
flesh,	and	that	which	is	born	of	the	Spirit	is	spirit.	Do	not	marvel	that	I	said	to
you,	‘You	must	be	born	anew’	”	(John	3:5–7).	But	the	work	of	giving	new
spiritual	life	to	people	when	they	become	Christians	is	something	that	only
God	can	do	(cf.	1	John	3:9,	“born	of	God”).	This	passage	therefore	gives
another	indication	that	the	Holy	Spirit	is	fully	God.
Up	to	this	point	we	have	two	conclusions,	both	abundantly	taught	throughout
Scripture:
1.	God	is	three	persons.
2.	Each	person	is	fully	God.
If	the	Bible	taught	only	these	two	facts,	there	would	be	no	logical	problem	at
all	in	fitting	them	together,	for	the	obvious	solution	would	be	that	there	are
three	Gods.	The	Father	is	fully	God,	the	Son	is	fully	God,	and	the	Holy	Spirit
is	fully	God.	We	would	have	a	system	where	there	are	three	equally	divine
beings.	Such	a	system	of	belief	would	be	called	polytheism—or,	more
specifically,	“tritheism,”	or	belief	in	three	Gods.	But	that	is	far	from	what	the
Bible	teaches.
3.	There	Is	One	God.
	Scripture	is	abundantly	clear	that	there	is	one	and	only
one	God.	The	three	different	persons	of	the	Trinity	are	one	not	only	in
purpose	and	in	agreement	on	what	they	think,	but	they	are	one	in	essence,	one
in	their	essential	nature.	In	other	words,	God	is	only	one	being.	There	are	not
three	Gods.	There	is	only	one	God.
One	of	the	most	familiar	passages	of	the	Old	Testament	is	Deuteronomy	6:4–
5	(NIV):	“Hear,	O	Israel:	The	L
ORD
	our	God,	
the	L
ORD
	is	one.	
Love	the	L
ORD
your	God	with	all	your	heart	and	with	all	your	soul	and	with	all	your
strength.”
When	Moses	sings,
“Who	is	like	you,	O	L
ORD
,	among	the	gods?
Who	is	like	you,	majestic	in	holiness,
terrible	in	glorious	deeds,	doing	wonders?”	(Ex.	15:11)
the	answer	obviously	is	“No	one.”	God	is	unique,	and	there	is	no	one	like	him
and	there	can	be	no	one	like	him.	In	fact,	Solomon	prays	“that	all	the	peoples
of	the	earth	may	know	that	the	L
ORD
	is	God;	there	is	no	other”	(1	Kings	8:60).
When	God	speaks,	he	repeatedly	makes	it	clear	that	he	is	the	only	true	God;
the	idea	that	there	are	three	Gods	to	be	worshiped	rather	than	one	would	be
unthinkable	in	the	light	of	these	extremely	strong	statements.	God	alone	is	the
one	true	God	and	there	is	no	one	like	him.	When	he	speaks,	he	alone	is
speaking—he	is	not	speaking	as	one	God	among	three	who	are	to	be
worshiped.	He	says:
“I	am	the	L
ORD
,	and	there	is	no	other,
besides	me	there	is	no	God;
I	gird	you,	though	you	do	not	know	me,
that	men	may	know,	from	the	rising	of	the	sun
and	from	the	west,	that	there	is	none	besides	me;
I	am	the	L
ORD
,	and	there	is	no	other.”	(Isa.	45:5–6)
Similarly,	he	calls	everyone	on	earth	to	turn	to	him:
“There	is	no	other	god	besides	me,
a	righteous	God	and	a	Savior;
there	is	none	besides	me.
“Turn	to	me	and	be	saved,
all	the	ends	of	the	earth!
For	I	am	God,	and	there	is	no	other.”
(Isa.	45:21–22;	cf.	44:6–8)
The	New	Testament	also	affirms	that	there	is	one	God.	Paul	writes,	“For	
there
is	one	God,	
and	there	is	one	mediator	between	God	and	men,	the	man	Christ
Jesus”	(1	Tim.	2:5).	Paul	affirms	that	“God	is	one”	(Rom.	3:30),	and	that
“there	is	one	God,	the	Father,	from	whom	are	all	things	and	for	whom	we
exist”	(1	Cor.	8:6).
18
	Finally,	James	acknowledges	that	even	demons
recognize	that	there	is	one	God,	even	though	their	intellectual	assent	to	that
fact	is	not	enough	to	save	them:	“You	believe	that	God	is	one;	you	do	well.
Even	the	demons	believe—and	shudder”	(James	2:19).	But	clearly	James
affirms	that	one	“does	well”	to	believe	that	“God	is	one.”
4.	Simplistic	Solutions	Must	All	Deny	One	Strand	of	Biblical	Teaching.
We	now	have	three	statements,	all	of	which	are	taught	in	Scripture:
1.	God	is	three	persons.
2.	Each	person	is	fully	God.
3.	There	is	one	God.
Throughout	the	history	of	the	church	there	have	been	attempts	to	come	up
with	a	simple	solution	to	the	doctrine	of	the	Trinity	by	denying	one	or	another
of	these	statements.	If	someone	
denies	the	first	statement,	
then	we	are	simply
left	with	the	fact	that	each	of	the	persons	named	in	Scripture	(Father,	Son,	and
Holy	Spirit)	is	God,	and	there	is	one	God.	But	if	we	do	not	have	to	say	that
they	are	distinct	persons,	then	there	is	an	easy	solution:	these	are	just	different
names	for	one	person	who	acts	differently	at	different	times.	Sometimes	this
person	calls	himself	Father,	sometimes	he	calls	himself	Son,	and	sometimes
he	calls	himself	Spirit.
19
	We	have	no	difficulty	in	understanding	that,	for	in
our	own	experience	the	same	person	can	act	at	one	time	as	a	lawyer	(for
example),	at	another	time	as	a	father	to	his	own	children,	and	at	another	time
as	a	son	with	respect	to	his	parents:	The	same	person	is	a	lawyer,	a	father,	and
a	son.	But	such	a	solution	would	deny	the	fact	that	the	three	persons	are
distinct	individuals,	that	God	the	Father	sends	God	the	Son	into	the	world,
that	the	Son	prays	to	the	Father,	and	that	the	Holy	Spirit	intercedes	before	the
Father	for	us.
Another	simple	solution	might	be	found	by	
denying	the	second	statement,	
that
is,	denying	that	some	of	the	persons	named	in	Scripture	are	really	fully	God.
If	we	simply	hold	that	God	is	three	persons,	and	that	there	is	one	God,	then
we	might	be	tempted	to	say	that	some	of	the	“persons”	in	this	one	God	are	not
fully	God,	but	are	only	subordinate	or	created	parts	of	God.	This	solution
would	be	taken,	for	example,	by	those	who	deny	the	full	deity	of	the	Son	(and
of	the	Holy	Spirit).
20
	But,	as	we	saw	above,	this	solution	would	have	to	deny
an	entire	category	of	biblical	teaching.
Finally,	as	we	noted	above,	a	simple	solution	could	come	by	
denying	that
there	is	one	God.	
But	this	would	result	in	a	belief	in	three	Gods,	something
clearly	contrary	to	Scripture.
Though	the	third	error	has	not	been	common,	as	we	shall	see	below,	each	of
the	first	two	errors	has	appeared	at	one	time	or	another	in	the	history	of	the
church	and	they	still	persist	today	in	some	groups.
5.	All	Analogies	Have	Shortcomings.
	If	we	cannot	adopt	any	of	these	simple
solutions,	then	how	can	we	put	the	three	truths	of	Scripture	together	and
maintain	the	doctrine	of	the	Trinity?	Sometimes	people	have	used	several
analogies	drawn	from	nature	or	human	experience	to	attempt	to	explain	this
doctrine.	Although	these	analogies	are	helpful	at	an	elementary	level	of
understanding,	they	all	turn	out	to	be	inadequate	or	misleading	on	further
reflection.	To	say,	for	example,	that	God	is	like	a	three-leaf	clover,	which	has
three	parts	yet	remains	one	clover,	fails	because	each	leaf	is	only	part	of	the
clover,	and	any	one	leaf	cannot	be	said	to	be	the	whole	clover.	But	in	the
Trinity,	each	of	the	persons	is	not	just	a	separate	part	of	God,	each	person	is
fully	God.	Moreover,	the	leaf	of	a	clover	is	impersonal	and	does	not	have
distinct	and	complex	personality	in	the	way	each	person	of	the	Trinity	does.
Others	have	used	the	analogy	of	a	tree	with	three	parts:	the	roots,	trunk,	and
branches	all	constitute	one	tree.	But	a	similar	problem	arises,	for	these	are
only	parts	of	a	tree,	and	none	of	the	parts	can	be	said	to	be	the	whole	tree.
Moreover,	in	this	analogy	the	parts	have	different	properties,	unlike	the
persons	of	the	Trinity,	all	of	whom	possess	all	of	the	attributes	of	God	in
equal	measure.	And	the	lack	of	personality	in	each	part	is	a	deficiency	as
well.
The	analogy	of	the	three	forms	of	water	(steam,	water,	and	ice)	is	also
inadequate	because	(a)	no	quantity	of	water	is	ever	all	three	of	these	at	the
same	time,
21
	(b)	they	have	different	properties	or	characteristics,	(c)	the
analogy	has	nothing	that	corresponds	to	the	fact	that	there	is	only	one	God
(there	is	no	such	thing	as	“one	water”	or	“all	the	water	in	the	universe”),	and
(d)	the	element	of	intelligent	personality	is	lacking.
Other	analogies	have	been	drawn	from	human	experience.	It	might	be	said
that	the	Trinity	is	something	like	a	man	who	is	both	a	farmer,	the	mayor	of	his
town,	and	an	elder	in	his	church.	He	functions	in	different	roles	at	different
times,	but	he	is	one	man.	However,	this	analogy	is	very	deficient	because
there	is	only	one	person	doing	these	three	activities	at	different	times,	and	the
analogy	cannot	deal	with	the	personal	interaction	among	the	members	of	the
Trinity.	(In	fact,	this	analogy	simply	teaches	the	heresy	called	modalism,
discussed	below.)
Another	analogy	taken	from	human	life	is	the	union	of	the	intellect,	the
emotions,	and	the	will	in	one	human	person.	While	these	are	parts	of	a
personality,	however,	no	one	factor	constitutes	the	entire	person.	And	the
parts	are	not	identical	in	characteristics	but	have	different	abilities.
So	what	analogy	shall	we	use	to	teach	the	Trinity?	Although	the	Bible	uses
many	analogies	from	nature	and	life	to	teach	us	various	aspects	of	God’s
character	(God	is	like	a	rock	in	his	faithfulness,	he	is	like	a	shepherd	in	his
care,	etc.),	it	is	interesting	that	Scripture	nowhere	uses	any	analogies	to	teach
the	doctrine	of	the	Trinity.	The	closest	we	come	to	an	analogy	is	found	in	the
titles	“Father”	and	“Son”	themselves,	titles	that	clearly	speak	of	distinct
persons	and	of	the	close	relationship	that	exists	between	them	in	a	human
family.	But	on	the	human	level,	of	course,	we	have	two	entirely	separate
human	beings,	not	one	being	comprised	of	three	distinct	persons.	It	is	best	to
conclude	that	no	analogy	adequately	teaches	about	the	Trinity,	and	all	are
misleading	in	significant	ways.
6.	God	Eternally	and	Necessarily	Exists	as	the	Trinity.
	When	the	universe
was	created	God	the	Father	spoke	the	powerful	creative	words	that	brought	it
into	being,	God	the	Son	was	the	divine	agent	who	carried	out	these	words
(John	1:3;	1	Cor.	8:6;	Col.	1:16;	Heb.	1:2),	and	God	the	Holy	Spirit	was	active
“moving	over	the	face	of	the	waters”	(Gen.	1:2).	So	it	is	as	we	would	expect:
if	all	three	members	of	the	Trinity	are	equally	and	fully	divine,	then	they	have
all	three	existed	for	all	eternity,	and	God	has	eternally	existed	as	a	Trinity	(cf.
also	John	17:5,	24).	Moreover,	God	cannot	be	other	than	he	is,	for	he	is
unchanging	(see	
chapter	11
	above).	Therefore	it	seems	right	to	conclude	that
God	necessarily	exists	as	a	Trinity—he	cannot	be	other	than	he	is.
C.	Errors	Have	Come	By	Denying	Any	of	the	Three	Statements
Summarizing	the	Biblical	Teaching
In	the	previous	section	we	saw	how	the	Bible	requires	that	we	affirm	the
following	three	statements:
1.	God	is	three	persons.
2.	Each	person	is	fully	God.
3.	There	is	one	God.
Before	we	discuss	further	the	differences	between	the	Father,	Son,	and	Holy
Spirit,	and	the	way	they	relate	to	one	another,	it	is	important	that	we	recall
some	of	the	doctrinal	errors	about	the	Trinity	that	have	been	made	in	the
history	of	the	church.	In	this	historical	survey	we	will	see	some	of	the
mistakes	that	we	ourselves	should	avoid	in	any	further	thinking	about	this
doctrine.	In	fact,	the	major	trinitarian	errors	that	have	arisen	have	come
through	a	denial	of	one	or	another	of	these	three	primary	statements.
22
1.
	Modalism	Claims	That	There	Is	One	Person	Who	Appears	to	Us	in
Three	Different	Forms	(or	“Modes”).
	At	various	times	people	have	taught
that	God	is	not	really	three	distinct	persons,	but	only	one	person	who	appears
to	people	in	different	“modes”	at	different	times.	For	example,	in	the	Old
Testament	God	appeared	as	“Father.”	Throughout	the	Gospels,	this	same
divine	person	appeared	as	“the	Son”	as	seen	in	the	human	life	and	ministry	of
Jesus.	After	Pentecost,	this	same	person	then	revealed	himself	as	the	“Spirit”
active	in	the	church.
This	teaching	is	also	referred	to	by	two	other	names.	Sometimes	it	is	called
Sabellianism,	after	a	teacher	named	Sabellius	who	lived	in	Rome	in	the	early
third	century	A.D.	Another	term	for	modalism	is	“modalistic
monarchianism,”	because	this	teaching	not	only	says	that	God	revealed
himself	in	different	“modes”	but	it	also	says	that	there	is	only	one	supreme
ruler	(“monarch”)	in	the	universe	and	that	is	God	himself,	who	consists	of
only	one	person.
Modalism	gains	its	attractiveness	from	the	desire	to	emphasize	clearly	the	fact
that	there	is	only	one	God.	It	may	claim	support	not	only	from	the	passages
talking	about	one	God,	but	also	from	passages	such	as	John	10:30	(“I	and	the
Father	are	one”)	and	John	14:9	(“He	who	has	seen	me	has	seen	the	Father”).
However,	the	last	passage	can	simply	mean	that	Jesus	fully	reveals	the
character	of	God	the	Father,	and	the	former	passage	(John	10:30),	in	a	context
in	which	Jesus	affirms	that	he	will	accomplish	all	that	the	Father	has	given
him	to	do	and	save	all	whom	the	Father	has	given	to	him,	seems	to	mean	that
Jesus	and	the	Father	are	one	in	purpose.
The	fatal	shortcoming	of	modalism	is	the	fact	that	it	must	deny	the	personal
relationships	within	the	Trinity	that	appear	in	so	many	places	in	Scripture	(or
it	must	affirm	that	these	were	simply	an	illusion	and	not	real).	Thus,	it	must
deny	three	separate	persons	at	the	baptism	of	Jesus,	where	the	Father	speaks
from	heaven	and	the	Spirit	descends	on	Jesus	like	a	dove.	And	it	must	say	that
all	those	instances	where	Jesus	is	praying	to	the	Father	are	an	illusion	or	a
charade.	The	idea	of	the	Son	or	the	Holy	Spirit	interceding	for	us	before	God
the	Father	is	lost.	Finally,	modalism	ultimately	loses	the	heart	of	the	doctrine
of	the	atonement—that	is,	the	idea	that	God	sent	his	Son	as	a	substitutionary
sacrifice,	and	that	the	Son	bore	the	wrath	of	God	in	our	place,	and	that	the
Father,	representing	the	interests	of	the	Trinity,	saw	the	suffering	of	Christ	and
was	satisfied	(Isa.	53:11).
Moreover,	modalism	denies	the	independence	of	God,	for	if	God	is	only	one
person,	then	he	has	no	ability	to	love	and	to	communicate	without	other
persons	in	his	creation.	Therefore	it	was	necessary	for	God	to	create	the
world,	and	God	would	no	longer	be	independent	of	creation	(see	
chapter	12
,
above,	on	God’s	independence).
One	present	denomination	within	Protestantism	(broadly	defined),	the	United
Pentecostal	Church,	is	modalistic	in	its	doctrinal	position.
23
2.	Arianism	Denies	the	Full	Deity	of	the	Son	and	the	Holy	Spirit.
a.	The	Arian	Controversy:
	The	term	
Arianism	
is	derived	from	Arius,	a
Bishop	of	Alexandria	whose	views	were	condemned	at	the	Council	of	Nicea
in	A.D.	325,	and	who	died	in	A.D.	336.	Arius	taught	that	God	the	Son	was	at
one	point	created	by	God	the	Father,	and	that	before	that	time	the	Son	did	not
exist,	nor	did	the	Holy	Spirit,	but	the	Father	only.	Thus,	though	the	Son	is	a
heavenly	being	who	existed	before	the	rest	of	creation	and	who	is	far	greater
than	all	the	rest	of	creation,	he	is	still	not	equal	to	the	Father	in	all	his
attributes—he	may	even	be	said	to	be	“like	the	Father”	or	“similar	to	the
Father”	in	his	nature,	but	he	cannot	be	said	to	be	“of	the	same	nature”	as	the
Father.
The	Arians	depended	heavily	on	texts	that	called	Christ	God’s	
“only
begotten”	
Son	(John	1:14;	3:16,	18;	1	John	4:9).	If	Christ	were	“begotten”	by
God	the	Father,	they	reasoned,	it	must	mean	that	he	was	brought	into
existence	by	God	the	Father	(for	the	word	“beget”	in	human	experience	refers
to	the	father’s	role	in	conceiving	a	child).	Further	support	for	the	Arian	view
was	found	in	Colossians	1:15,	“He	is	the	image	of	the	invisible	God,	
the	first-
born	of	all	creation.”	
Does	not	“first-born”	here	imply	that	the	Son	was	at
some	point	brought	into	existence	by	the	Father?
24
	And	if	this	is	true	of	the
Son,	it	must	necessarily	be	true	of	the	Holy	Spirit	as	well.
But	these	texts	do	not	require	us	to	believe	the	Arian	position.	Colossians
1:15,	which	calls	Christ	“the	first-born	of	all	creation,”	is	better	understood	to
mean	that	Christ	has	the	rights	or	privileges	of	the	“first-born”—that	is,
according	to	biblical	usage	and	custom,	the	right	of	leadership	or	authority	in
the	family	for	one’s	generation.	(Note	Heb.	12:16	where	Esau	is	said	to	have
sold	his	“first-born	status”	or	“birthright”—the	Greek	word	
prototokia	
is
cognate	to	the	term	
prototokos,	
“first-born”	in	Col.	1:15.)	So	Colossians	1:15
means	that	Christ	has	the	privileges	of	authority	and	rule,	the	privileges
belonging	to	the	“first-born,”	but	with	respect	to	the	whole	creation.	The	NIV
translates	it	helpfully,	“the	firstborn	
over	all	creation.”
As	for	the	texts	that	say	that	Christ	was	God’s	“only	begotten	Son,”	the	early
church	felt	so	strongly	the	force	of	many	other	texts	showing	that	Christ	was
fully	and	completely	God,	that	it	concluded	that,	whatever	“only	begotten”
meant,	it	did	not	mean	“created.”	Therefore	the	Nicene	Creed	in	325	affirmed
that	Christ	was	“begotten,	not	made”:
We	believe	in	one	God,	the	Father	Almighty,	Maker	of	all	things	visible
and	invisible.
And	in	one	Lord	Jesus	Christ,	the	Son	of	God,	begotten	of	the	Father,
the	only-begotten;	that	is,	of	the	essence	of	the	Father,	God	of	God,
Light	of	Light,	very	God	of	very	God,	begotten,	not	made,	being	of
one	substance	(
homoousion
)	with	the	Father.	.	.	.
25
This	same	phrase	was	reaffirmed	at	the	Council	of	Constantinople	in	381.	In
addition,	the	phrase	“before	all	ages”	was	added	after	“begotten	of	the
Father,”	to	show	that	this	“begetting”	was	eternal.	It	never	began	to	happen,
but	is	something	that	has	been	eternally	true	of	the	relationship	between	the
Father	and	the	Son.	However,	the	nature	of	that	“begetting”	has	never	been
defined	very	clearly,	other	than	to	say	that	it	has	to	do	with	the	relationship
between	the	Father	and	the	Son,	and	that	in	some	sense	the	Father	has
eternally	had	a	primacy	in	that	relationship.
In	further	repudiation	of	the	teaching	of	Arius,	the	Nicene	Creed	insisted	that
Christ	was	“of	the	same	substance	as	the	Father.”	The	dispute	with	Arius
concerned	two	words	that	have	become	famous	in	the	history	of	Christian
doctrine,	
homoousios	
(“of	the	same	nature”)	and	
homoiousios	
(“of	a	similar
nature”).
26
	The	difference	depends	on	the	different	meaning	of	two	Greek
prefixes,	
homo-,	
meaning	“same,”	and	
homoi-,	
meaning	“similar.”	Arius	was
happy	to	say	that	Christ	was	a	supernatural	heavenly	being	and	that	he	was
created	by	God	before	the	creation	of	the	rest	of	the	universe,	and	even	that	he
was	“similar”	to	God	in	his	nature.	Thus,	Arius	would	agree	to	the	word
homoiousios.	
But	the	Council	of	Nicea	in	325	and	the	Council	of
Constantinople	in	381	realized	that	this	did	not	go	far	enough,	for	if	Christ	is
not	of	exactly	the	same	nature	as	the	Father,	then	he	is	not	fully	God.	So	both
councils	insisted	that	orthodox	Christians	confess	Jesus	to	be	
homoousios,	
of
the	
same	
nature	as	God	the	Father.	The	difference	between	the	two	words	was
only	one	letter,	the	Greek	letter	iota,	and	some	have	criticized	the	church	for
allowing	a	doctrinal	dispute	over	a	single	letter	to	consume	so	much	attention
for	most	of	the	fourth	century	A.D.	Some	have	wondered,	“Could	anything	be
more	foolish	than	arguing	over	a	single	letter	in	a	word?”	But	the	difference
between	the	two	words	was	profound,	and	the	presence	or	absence	of	the	iota
really	did	mark	the	difference	between	biblical	Christianity,	with	a	true
doctrine	of	the	Trinity,	and	a	heresy	that	did	not	accept	the	full	deity	of	Christ
and	therefore	was	nontrinitarian	and	ultimately	destructive	to	the	whole
Christian	faith.
b.	Subordinationism:
	In	affirming	that	the	Son	was	of	the	same	nature	as	the
Father,	the	early	church	also	excluded	a	related	false	doctrine,
subordinationism.	While	Arianism	held	that	the	Son	was	created	and	was	not
divine,	subordinationism	held	that	the	Son	was	eternal	(not	created)	and
divine,	but	still	not	equal	to	the	Father	in	being	or	attributes—the	Son	was
inferior	or	“subordinate”	in	being	to	God	the	Father.
27
	The	early	church	father
Origen	(c.	185–c.	A.D.	254)	advocated	a	form	of	subordinationism	by	holding
that	the	Son	was	inferior	to	the	Father	in	being,	and	that	the	Son	eternally
derives	his	being	from	the	Father.	Origen	was	attempting	to	protect	the
distinction	of	persons	and	was	writing	before	the	doctrine	of	the	Trinity	was
clearly	formulated	in	the	church.	The	rest	of	the	church	did	not	follow	him	but
clearly	rejected	his	teaching	at	the	Council	of	Nicea.
Although	many	early	church	leaders	contributed	to	the	gradual	formulation	of
a	correct	doctrine	of	the	Trinity,	the	most	influential	by	far	was	Athanasius.
He	was	only	twenty-nine	years	old	when	he	came	to	the	Council	of	Nicea	in
A.D.	325,	not	as	an	official	member	but	as	secretary	to	Alexander,	the	Bishop
of	Alexandria.	Yet	his	keen	mind	and	writing	ability	allowed	him	to	have	an
important	influence	on	the	outcome	of	the	Council,	and	he	himself	became
Bishop	of	Alexandria	in	328.	Though	the	Arians	had	been	condemned	at
Nicea,	they	refused	to	stop	teaching	their	views	and	used	their	considerable
political	power	throughout	the	church	to	prolong	the	controversy	for	most	of
the	rest	of	the	fourth	century.	Athanasius	became	the	focal	point	of	Arian
attack,	and	he	devoted	his	entire	life	to	writing	and	teaching	against	the	Arian
heresy.	“He	was	hounded	through	five	exiles	embracing	seventeen	years	of
flight	and	hiding,”	but,	by	his	untiring	efforts,	“almost	single-handedly
Athanasius	saved	the	Church	from	pagan	intellectualism.”
28
	The	“Athanasian
Creed”	which	bears	his	name	is	not	today	thought	to	stem	from	Athanasius
himself,	but	it	is	a	very	clear	affirmation	of	trinitarian	doctrine	that	gained
increasing	use	in	the	church	from	about	A.D.	400	onward	and	is	still	used	in
Protestant	and	Catholic	churches	today.	(See	
appendix	1
.)
c.	Adoptionism:
	Before	we	leave	the	discussion	of	Arianism,	one	related
false	teaching	needs	to	be	mentioned.	“Adoptionism”	is	the	view	that	Jesus
lived	as	an	ordinary	man	until	his	baptism,	but	then	God	“adopted”	Jesus	as
his	“Son”	and	conferred	on	him	supernatural	powers.	Adoptionists	would	not
hold	that	Christ	existed	before	he	was	born	as	a	man;	therefore,	they	would
not	think	of	Christ	as	eternal,	nor	would	they	think	of	him	as	the	exalted,
supernatural	being	created	by	God	that	the	Arians	held	him	to	be.	Even	after
Jesus’	“adoption”	as	the	“Son”	of	God,	they	would	not	think	of	him	as	divine
in	nature,	but	only	as	an	exalted	man	whom	God	called	his	“Son”	in	a	unique
sense.
Adoptionism	never	gained	the	force	of	a	movement	in	the	way	Arianism	did,
but	there	were	people	who	held	adoptionist	views	from	time	to	time	in	the
early	church,	though	their	views	were	never	accepted	as	orthodox.	Many
modern	people	who	think	of	Jesus	as	a	great	man	and	someone	especially
empowered	by	God,	but	not	really	divine,	would	fall	into	the	adoptionist
category.	We	have	placed	it	here	in	relation	to	Arianism	because	it,	too,	denies
the	deity	of	the	Son	(and,	similarly,	the	deity	of	the	Holy	Spirit).
The	controversy	over	Arianism	was	drawn	to	a	close	by	the	Council	of
Constantinople	in	A.D.	381.	This	council	reaffirmed	the	Nicene	statements
and	added	a	statement	on	the	deity	of	the	Holy	Spirit,	which	had	come	under
attack	in	the	period	since	Nicea.	After	the	phrase,	“And	in	the	Holy	Spirit,”
Constantinople	added,	“the	Lord	and	Giver	of	Life;	who	proceeds	from	the
Father;	who	with	the	Father	and	the	Son	together	is	worshipped	and	glorified;
who	spake	by	the	Prophets.”	The	version	of	the	creed	that	includes	the
additions	at	Constantinople	is	what	is	commonly	known	as	the	Nicene	Creed
today	(See	p.	
1169	for	the	text	of	the	Nicene	Creed.)
d.	The	Filioque	Clause:
	In	connection	with	the	Nicene	Creed,	one
unfortunate	chapter	in	the	history	of	the	church	should	be	briefly	noted,
namely	the	controversy	over	the	insertion	of	the	filioque	clause	into	the
Nicene	Creed,	an	insertion	that	eventually	led	to	the	split	between	western
(Roman	Catholic)	Christianity	and	eastern	Christianity	(consisting	today	of
various	branches	of	eastern	orthodox	Christianity,	such	as	the	Greek	Orthodox
Church,	the	Russian	Orthodox	Church,	etc.)	in	A.D.	1054.
The	word	
filioque	
is	a	Latin	term	that	means	“and	from	the	Son.”	It	was	not
included	in	the	Nicene	Creed	in	either	the	first	version	of	A.D.	325	or	the
second	version	of	A.D.	381.	Those	versions	simply	said	that	the	Holy	Spirit
“proceeds	from	the	Father.”	But	in	A.D.	589,	at	a	regional	church	council	in
Toledo	(in	what	is	now	Spain),	the	phrase	“and	the	Son”	was	added,	so	that
the	creed	then	said	that	the	Holy	Spirit	“proceeds	from	the	Father	
and	the	Son
(filioque).”	
In	the	light	of	John	15:26	and	16:7,	where	Jesus	said	that	he
would	send	the	Holy	Spirit	into	the	world,	it	seems	there	could	be	no
objection	to	such	a	statement	if	it	referred	to	the	Holy	Spirit	proceeding	from
the	Father	and	the	Son	at	a	point	in	time	(particularly	at	Pentecost).	But	this
was	a	statement	about	the	nature	of	the	Trinity,	and	the	phrase	was	understood
to	speak	of	the	
eternal	
relationship	between	the	Holy	Spirit	and	the	Son,
something	Scripture	never	explicitly	discusses.
29
	The	form	of	the	Nicene
Creed	that	had	this	additional	phrase	gradually	gained	in	general	use	and
received	an	official	endorsement	in	A.D.	1017.	The	entire	controversy	was
complicated	by	ecclesiastical	politics	and	struggles	for	power,	and	this
apparently	very	insignificant	doctrinal	point	was	the	main	doctrinal	issue	in
the	split	between	eastern	and	western	Christianity	in	A.D.	1054.	(The
underlying	political	issue,	however,	was	the	relation	of	the	Eastern	church	to
the	authority	of	the	Pope.)	The	doctrinal	controversy	and	the	split	between	the
two	branches	of	Christianity	have	not	been	resolved	to	this	day.
Is	there	a	correct	position	on	this	question?	The	weight	of	evidence	(slim
though	it	is)	seems	clearly	to	favor	the	western	church.	In	spite	of	the	fact	that
John	15:26	says	that	the	Spirit	of	truth	“proceeds	from	the	Father,”	this	does
not	deny	that	he	proceeds	also	from	the	Son	(just	as	John	14:26	says	that	the
Father	will	send	the	Holy	Spirit,	but	John	16:7	says	that	the	Son	will	send	the
Holy	Spirit).	In	fact,	in	the	same	sentence	in	John	15:26	Jesus	speaks	of	the
Holy	Spirit	as	one	“whom	I	shall	send	to	you	from	the	Father.”	And	if	the	Son
together	with	the	Father	sends	the	Spirit	into	the	world,	by	analogy	it	would
seem	appropriate	to	say	that	this	reflects	eternal	ordering	of	their
relationships.	This	is	not	something	that	we	can	clearly	insist	on	based	on	any
specific	verse,	but	much	of	our	understanding	of	the	
eternal	
relationships
among	the	Father,	Son,	and	Holy	Spirit	comes	by	analogy	from	what
Scripture	tells	us	about	the	way	they	relate	to	the	creation	
in	time.	
Moreover,
the	eastern	formulation	runs	the	danger	of	suggesting	an	unnatural	distance
between	the	Son	and	the	Holy	Spirit,	leading	to	the	possibility	that	even	in
personal	worship	an	emphasis	on	more	mystical,	Spirit-inspired	experience
might	be	pursued	to	the	neglect	of	an	accompanying	rationally	understandable
adoration	of	Christ	as	Lord.	Nevertheless,	the	controversy	was	ultimately	over
such	an	obscure	point	of	doctrine	(essentially,	the	relationship	between	the
Son	and	Spirit	before	creation)	that	it	certainly	did	not	warrant	division	in	the
church.
e.	The	Importance	of	the	Doctrine	of	the	Trinity:
	Why	was	the	church	so
concerned	about	the	doctrine	of	the	Trinity?	Is	it	really	essential	to	hold	to	the
full	deity	of	the	Son	and	the	Holy	Spirit?	Yes	it	is,	for	this	teaching	has
implications	for	the	very	heart	of	the	Christian	faith.	First,	the	atonement	is	at
stake.	If	Jesus	is	merely	a	created	being,	and	not	fully	God,	then	it	is	hard	to
see	how	he,	a	creature,	could	bear	the	full	wrath	of	God	against	all	of	our	sins.
Could	any	creature,	no	matter	how	great,	really	save	us?	Second,	justification
by	faith	alone	is	threatened	if	we	deny	the	full	deity	of	the	Son.	(This	is	seen
today	in	the	teaching	of	the	Jehovah’s	Witnesses,	who	do	not	believe	in
justification	by	faith	alone.)	If	Jesus	is	not	fully	God,	we	would	rightly	doubt
whether	we	can	really	trust	him	to	save	us	completely.	Could	we	really
depend	on	any	creature	fully	for	our	salvation?	Third,	if	Jesus	is	not	infinite
God,	should	we	pray	to	him	or	worship	him?	Who	but	an	infinite,	omniscient
God	could	hear	and	respond	to	all	the	prayers	of	all	God’s	people?	And	who
but	God	himself	is	worthy	of	worship?	Indeed,	if	Jesus	is	merely	a	creature,
no	matter	how	great,	it	would	be	idolatry	to	worship	him—yet	the	New
Testament	commands	us	to	do	so	(Phil.	2:9–11;	Rev.	5:12–14).	Fourth,	if
someone	teaches	that	Christ	was	a	created	being	but	nonetheless	one	who
saved	us,	then	this	teaching	wrongly	begins	to	attribute	credit	for	salvation	to
a	creature	and	not	to	God	himself.	But	this	wrongfully	exalts	the	creature
rather	than	the	Creator,	something	Scripture	never	allows	us	to	do.	Fifth,	the
independence	and	personal	nature	of	God	are	at	stake:	If	there	is	no	Trinity,
then	there	were	no	interpersonal	relationships	within	the	being	of	God	before
creation,	and,	without	personal	relationships,	it	is	difficult	to	see	how	God
could	be	genuinely	personal	or	be	without	the	need	for	a	creation	to	relate	to.
Sixth,	the	unity	of	the	universe	is	at	stake:	If	there	is	not	perfect	plurality	and
perfect	unity	in	God	himself,	then	we	have	no	basis	for	thinking	there	can	be
any	ultimate	unity	among	the	diverse	elements	of	the	universe	either.	Clearly,
in	the	doctrine	of	the	Trinity,	the	heart	of	the	Christian	faith	is	at	stake.
Herman	Bavinck	says	that	“Athanasius	understood	better	than	any	of	his
contemporaries	that	Christianity	stands	or	falls	with	the	confession	of	the
deity	of	Christ	and	of	the	Trinity.”
30
	He	adds,	“In	the	confession	of	the	Trinity
throbs	the	heart	of	the	Christian	religion:	every	error	results	from,	or	upon
deeper	reflection	may	be	traced	to,	a	wrong	view	of	this	doctrine.”
31
3.	Tritheism	Denies	That	There	Is	Only	One	God.
	A	final	possible	way	to
attempt	an	easy	reconciliation	of	the	biblical	teaching	about	the	Trinity	would
be	to	deny	that	there	is	only	one	God.	The	result	is	to	say	that	God	is	three
persons	and	each	person	is	fully	God.	Therefore,	there	are	three	Gods.
Technically	this	view	would	be	called	“tritheism.”
Few	persons	have	held	this	view	in	the	history	of	the	church.	It	has
similarities	to	many	ancient	pagan	religions	that	held	to	a	multiplicity	of	gods.
This	view	would	result	in	confusion	in	the	minds	of	believers.	There	would	be
no	absolute	worship	or	loyalty	or	devotion	to	one	true	God.	We	would	wonder
to	which	God	we	should	give	our	ultimate	allegiance.	And,	at	a	deeper	level,
this	view	would	destroy	any	sense	of	ultimate	unity	in	the	universe:	even	in
the	very	being	of	God	there	would	be	plurality	but	no	unity.
Although	no	modern	groups	advocate	tritheism,	perhaps	many	evangelicals
today	unintentionally	tend	toward	tritheistic	views	of	the	Trinity,	recognizing
the	distinct	personhood	of	the	Father,	the	Son,	and	the	Holy	Spirit,	but	seldom
being	aware	of	the	unity	of	God	as	one	undivided	being.
D.	What	Are	the	Distinctions	Between	the	Father,	the	Son,	and	the	Holy	Spirit?
After	completing	this	survey	of	errors	concerning	the	Trinity,	we	may	now	go
on	to	ask	if	anything	more	can	be	said	about	the	distinctions	between	the
Father,	Son,	and	Holy	Spirit.	If	we	say	that	each	member	of	the	Trinity	is	fully
God,	and	that	each	person	fully	shares	in	all	the	attributes	of	God,	then	is
there	any	difference	at	all	among	the	persons?	We	cannot	say,	for	example,
that	the	Father	is	more	powerful	or	wiser	than	the	Son,	or	that	the	Father	and
Son	are	wiser	than	the	Holy	Spirit,	or	that	the	Father	existed	before	the	Son
and	Holy	Spirit	existed,	for	to	say	anything	like	that	would	be	to	deny	the	full
deity	of	all	three	members	of	the	Trinity.	But	what	then	are	the	distinctions
between	the	persons?
1.
	The	Persons	of	the	Trinity	Have	Different	Primary	Functions	in
Relating	to	the	World.
	When	Scripture	discusses	the	way	in	which	God
relates	to	the	world,	both	in	creation	and	in	redemption,	the	persons	of	the
Trinity	are	said	to	have	different	functions	or	primary	activities.	Sometimes
this	has	been	called	the	“economy	of	the	Trinity,”	using	
economy	
in	an	old
sense	meaning	“ordering	of	activities.”	(In	this	sense,	people	used	to	speak	of
the	“economy	of	a	household”	or	“home	economics,”	meaning	not	just	the
financial	affairs	of	a	household,	but	all	of	the	“ordering	of	activities”	within
the	household.)	The	“economy	of	the	Trinity”	means	the	different	ways	the
three	persons	act	as	they	relate	to	the	world	and	(as	we	shall	see	in	the	next
section)	to	each	other	for	all	eternity.
We	see	these	different	functions	in	the	work	of	creation.	God	the	Father	spoke
the	creative	words	to	bring	the	universe	into	being.	But	it	was	God	the	Son,
the	eternal	Word	of	God,	who	carried	out	these	creative	decrees.	“All	things
were	made	through	him,	and	without	him	was	not	anything	made	that	was
made”	(John	1:3).	Moreover,	“in	him	all	things	were	created,	in	heaven	and
on	earth,	visible	and	invisible,	whether	thrones	or	dominions	or	principalities
or	authorities—all	things	were	created	through	him	and	for	him”	(Col.	1:16;
see	also	Ps.	33:6,	9;	1	Cor.	8:6;	Heb.	1:2).	The	Holy	Spirit	was	active	as	well
in	a	different	way,	in	“moving”	or	“hovering”	over	the	face	of	the	waters
(Gen.	1:2),	apparently	sustaining	and	manifesting	God’s	immediate	presence
in	his	creation	(cf.	Ps.	33:6,	where	“breath”	should	perhaps	be	translated
“Spirit”;	see	also	Ps.	139:7).
In	the	work	of	redemption	there	are	also	distinct	functions.	God	the	Father
planned	redemption	and	sent	his	Son	into	the	world	(John	3:16;	Gal.	4:4;	Eph.
1:9–10).	The	Son	obeyed	the	Father	and	accomplished	redemption	for	us
(John	6:38;	Heb.	10:5–7;	et	al.).	God	the	Father	did	not	come	and	die	for	our
sins,	nor	did	God	the	Holy	Spirit.	That	was	the	particular	work	of	the	Son.
Then,	after	Jesus	ascended	back	into	heaven,	the	Holy	Spirit	was	sent	by	the
Father	and	the	Son	to	apply	redemption	to	us.	Jesus	speaks	of	“the	Holy
Spirit,	whom	the	Father	will	send	in	my	name”	(John	14:26),	but	also	says
that	he	himself	will	send	the	Holy	Spirit,	for	he	says,	“If	I	go,	I	will	send	him
to	you”	(John	16:7),	and	he	speaks	of	a	time	“when	the	Counselor	comes,
whom	I	shall	send	to	you	from	the	Father,	even	the	Spirit	of	truth”	(John
15:26).	It	is	especially	the	role	of	the	Holy	Spirit	to	give	us	regeneration	or
new	spiritual	life	(John	3:5–8),	to	sanctify	us	(Rom.	8:13;	15:16;	1	Peter	1:2),
and	to	empower	us	for	service	(Acts	1:8;	1	Cor.	12:7–11).	In	general,	the
work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	seems	to	be	to	bring	to	completion	the	work	that	has
been	planned	by	God	the	Father	and	begun	by	God	the	Son.	(See	chapter	30,
on	the	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit.)
So	we	may	say	that	the	role	of	the	Father	in	creation	and	redemption	has	been
to	plan	and	direct	and	send	the	Son	and	Holy	Spirit.	This	is	not	surprising,	for
it	shows	that	the	Father	and	the	Son	relate	to	one	another	as	a	father	and	son
relate	to	one	another	in	a	human	family:	the	father	directs	and	has	authority
over	the	son,	and	the	son	obeys	and	is	responsive	to	the	directions	of	the
father.	The	Holy	Spirit	is	obedient	to	the	directives	of	both	the	Father	and	the
Son.
Thus,	while	the	persons	of	the	Trinity	are	equal	in	all	their	attributes,	they
nonetheless	differ	in	their	relationships	to	the	creation.	The	Son	and	Holy
Spirit	are	equal	in	deity	to	God	the	Father,	but	they	are	subordinate	in	their
roles.
Moreover,	these	differences	in	role	are	not	temporary	but	will	last	forever:
Paul	tells	us	that	even	after	the	final	judgment,	when	the	“last	enemy,”	that	is,
death,	is	destroyed	and	when	all	things	are	put	under	Christ’s	feet,	“then	the
Son	himself	will	also	be	subjected	to	him	who	put	all	things	under	him,	that
God	may	be	everything	to	every	one”	(1	Cor.	15:28).
2.	The	Persons	of	the	Trinity	Eternally	Existed	as	Father,	Son,	and	Holy
Spirit.
	But	why	do	the	persons	of	the	Trinity	take	these	different	roles	in
relating	to	creation?	Was	it	accidental	or	arbitrary?	Could	God	the	Father	have
come	instead	of	God	the	Son	to	die	for	our	sins?	Could	the	Holy	Spirit	have
sent	God	the	Father	to	die	for	our	sins,	and	then	sent	God	the	Son	to	apply
redemption	to	us?
No,	it	does	not	seem	that	these	things	could	have	happened,	for	the	role	of
commanding,	directing,	and	sending	is	appropriate	to	the	position	of	the
Father,	after	whom	all	human	fatherhood	is	patterned	(Eph.	3:14–15).	And	the
role	of	obeying,	going	as	the	Father	sends,	and	revealing	God	to	us	is
appropriate	to	the	role	of	the	Son,	who	is	also	called	the	Word	of	God	(cf.
John	1:1–5,	14,	18;	17:4;	Phil.	2:5–11).	These	roles	could	not	have	been
reversed	or	the	Father	would	have	ceased	to	be	the	Father	and	the	Son	would
have	ceased	to	be	the	Son.	And	by	analogy	from	that	relationship,	we	may
conclude	that	the	role	of	the	Holy	Spirit	is	similarly	one	that	was	appropriate
to	the	relationship	he	had	with	the	Father	and	the	Son	before	the	world	was
created.
Second,	before	the	Son	came	to	earth,	and	even	before	the	world	was	created,
for	all	eternity	the	Father	has	been	the	Father,	the	Son	has	been	the	Son,	and
the	Holy	Spirit	has	been	the	Holy	Spirit.	These	relationships	are	eternal,	not
something	that	occurred	only	in	time.	We	may	conclude	this	first	from	the
unchangeableness	of	God	(see	
chapter	11
):	if	God	now	exists	as	Father,	Son,
and	Holy	Spirit,	then	he	has	always	existed	as	Father,	Son,	and	Holy	Spirit.
We	may	also	conclude	that	the	relationships	are	eternal	from	other	verses	in
Scripture	that	speak	of	the	relationships	the	members	of	the	Trinity	had	to	one
another	before	the	creation	of	the	world.	For	instance,	when	Scripture	speaks
of	God’s	work	of	election	(see	
chapter	32
)	before	the	creation	of	the	world,	it
speaks	of	the	Father	choosing	us	“in”	the	Son:	“Blessed	be	the	God	and
Father	of	our	Lord	Jesus	Christ	.	.	.	
he	chose	us	in	him	before	the	foundation
of	the	world,	
that	we	should	be	holy	and	blameless	before	him”	(Eph.	1:3–4).
The	initiatory	act	of	choosing	is	attributed	to	God	the	Father,	who	regards	us
as	united	to	Christ	or	“in	Christ”	before	we	ever	existed.	Similarly,	of	God	the
Father,	it	is	said	that	“those	whom	he	foreknew	he	also	predestined	to	be
conformed	to	the	image	of	his	Son”	(Rom.	8:29).	We	also	read	of	the
“foreknowledge	of	God	the	Father”	in	distinction	from	particular	functions	of
the	other	two	members	of	the	Trinity	(1	Peter	1:2	NASB;	cf.	1:20).
32
	Even	the
fact	that	the	Father	“gave	his	only	Son”	(John	3:16)	and	“sent	the	Son	into	the
world”	(John	3:17)	indicate	that	there	was	a	Father-Son	relationship	before
Christ	came	into	the	world.	The	Son	did	not	become	the	Son	when	the	Father
sent	him	into	the	world.	Rather,	the	great	love	of	God	is	shown	in	the	fact	that
the	one	who	was	
always	
Father	gave	the	one	who	was	
always	
his	only	Son:
“For	God	so	loved	the	world	that	he	gave	his	only	Son	.	.	.”	(John	3:16).	“But
when	the	time	had	fully	come,	God	sent	forth	his	Son”	(Gal.	4:4).
When	Scripture	speaks	of	creation,	once	again	it	speaks	of	the	Father	creating
through	
the	Son,	indicating	a	relationship	prior	to	when	creation	began	(see
John	1:3;	1	Cor.	8:6;	Heb.	1:2;	also	Prov.	8:22–31).	But	nowhere	does	it	say
that	the	Son	or	Holy	Spirit	created	through	the	Father.	These	passages	again
imply	that	there	was	a	relationship	of	Father	(as	originator)	and	Son	(as	active
agent)	before	creation,	and	that	this	relationship	made	it	appropriate	for	the
different	persons	of	the	Trinity	to	fulfill	the	roles	they	actually	did	fulfill.
Therefore,	the	different	functions	that	we	see	the	Father,	Son,	and	Holy	Spirit
performing	are	simply	outworkings	of	an	eternal	relationship	between	the
three	persons,	one	that	has	always	existed	and	will	exist	for	eternity.	God	has
always	existed	as	three	distinct	persons:	Father,	Son,	and	Holy	Spirit.	These
distinctions	are	essential	to	the	very	nature	of	God	himself,	and	they	could	not
be	otherwise.
Finally,	it	may	be	said	that	there	are	no	differences	in	deity,	attributes,	or
essential	nature	between	the	Father,	Son,	and	Holy	Spirit.	Each	person	is	fully
God	and	has	all	the	attributes	of	God.	
The	only	distinctions	between	the
members	of	the	Trinity	are	in	the	ways	they	relate	to	each	other	and	to	the	rest
of	creation.	
In	those	relationships	they	carry	out	roles	that	are	appropriate	to
each	person.
This	truth	about	the	Trinity	has	sometimes	been	summarized	in	the	phrase
“ontological	equality	but	economic	subordination,”	where	the	word
ontological	
means	“being.”
33
	Another	way	of	expressing	this	more	simply
would	be	to	say	“equal	in	being	but	subordinate	in	role.”	Both	parts	of	this
phrase	are	necessary	to	a	true	doctrine	of	the	Trinity:	If	we	do	not	have
ontological	equality,	not	all	the	persons	are	fully	God.	But	if	we	do	not	have
economic	subordination,
34
	then	there	is	no	inherent	difference	in	the	way	the
three	persons	relate	to	one	another,	and	consequently	we	do	not	have	the	three
distinct	persons	existing	as	Father,	Son,	and	Holy	Spirit	for	all	eternity.	For
example,	if	the	Son	is	not	eternally	subordinate	to	the	Father	in	role,	then	the
Father	is	not	eternally	“Father”	and	the	Son	is	not	eternally	“Son.”	This	would
mean	that	the	Trinity	has	not	eternally	existed.
This	is	why	the	idea	of	eternal	equality	in	being	but	subordination	in	role	has
been	essential	to	the	church’s	doctrine	of	the	Trinity	since	it	was	first	affirmed
in	the	Nicene	Creed,	which	said	that	the	Son	was	“begotten	of	the	Father
before	all	ages”	and	that	the	Holy	Spirit	“proceeds	from	the	Father	and	the
Son.”	Surprisingly,	some	recent	evangelical	writings	have	denied	an	eternal
subordination	in	role	among	the	members	of	the	Trinity,
35
	but	it	has	clearly
been	part	of	the	church’s	doctrine	of	the	Trinity	(in	Catholic,	Protestant,	and
Orthodox	expressions),	at	least	since	Nicea	(A.D.	325).	So	Charles	Hodge
says:
The	Nicene	doctrine	includes,	(1)	the	principle	of	the	subordination	of
the	Son	to	the	Father,	and	of	the	Spirit	to	the	Father	and	the	Son.	But
this	subordination	does	not	imply	inferiority.	.	.	.	The	subordination
intended	is	only	that	which	concerns	the	mode	of	subsistence	and
operation.	.	.	.
The	creeds	are	nothing	more	than	a	well-ordered	arrangement	of	the
facts	of	Scripture	which	concern	the	doctrine	of	the	Trinity.	They
assert	the	distinct	personality	of	the	Father,	Son,	and	Spirit	.	.	.	and
their	consequent	perfect	equality;	and	the	subordination	of	the	Son	to
the	Father,	and	of	the	Spirit	to	the	Father	and	the	Son,	as	to	the	mode
of	subsistence	and	operation.	These	are	scriptural	facts,	to	which	the
creeds	in	question	add	nothing;	
and	it	is	in	this	sense	they	have	been
accepted	by	the	Church	universal.
36
Similarly,	A.	H.	Strong	says:
Father,	Son,	and	Holy	Spirit,	while	equal	in	essence	and	dignity,	stand
to	each	other	in	an	order	of	personality,	office,	and	operation.	.	.	.
The	subordination	of	the	
person	
of	the	Son	to	the	
person	
of	the
Father,	or	in	other	words	an	order	of	personality,	office,	and	operation
which	permits	the	Father	to	be	officially	first,	the	Son	second,	and	the
Spirit	third,	is	perfectly	consistent	with	equality.	Priority	is	not
necessarily	superiority.	.	.	.	
We	frankly	recognize	an	eternal
subordination	of	Christ	to	the	Father,	
but	we	maintain	at	the	same
time	that	this	subordination	is	a	subordination	of	order,	office,	and
operation,	not	a	subordination	of	essence.
37
3.	What	Is	the	Relationship	Between	the	Three	Persons	and	the	Being	of
God?
	After	the	preceding	discussion,	the	question	that	remains	unresolved	is,
What	is	the	difference	between	“person”	and	“being”	in	this	discussion?	How
can	we	say	that	God	is	one	undivided	being,	yet	that	in	this	one	being	there
are	three	persons?
First,	it	is	important	to	affirm	that	each	person	is	completely	and	fully	God;
that	is,	that	each	person	has	the	whole	fullness	of	God’s	being	in	himself.	The
Son	is	not	partly	God	or	just	one-third	of	God,	but	the	Son	is	wholly	and	fully
God,	and	so	is	the	Father	and	the	Holy	Spirit.	Thus,	it	would	not	be	right	to
think	of	the	Trinity	according	to	figure	14.1,	with	each	person	representing
only	one-third	of	God’s	being.
Rather,	we	must	say	that	the	person	of	the	Father	possesses	the	
whole	being	
of
God	in	himself.	Similarly,	the	Son	possesses	the	
whole	being	
of	God	in
himself,	and	the	Holy	Spirit	possesses	the	
whole	being	
of	God	in	himself.
When	we	speak	of	the	Father,	Son,	and	Holy	Spirit	together	we	are	not
speaking	of	any	greater	being	than	when	we	speak	of	the	Father	alone,	or	the
Son	alone,	or	the	Holy	Spirit	alone.	The	Father	is	
all	
of	God’s	being.	The	Son
also	is	
all	
of	God’s	being.	And	the	Holy	Spirit	is	
all	
of	God’s	being.
GOD’S	BEING	IS	NOT	DIVIDED	INTO	THREE	EQUAL	PARTS	BELONGING	TO	THE	THREE
MEMBERS	OF	THE	TRINITY
Figure	14.1
This	is	what	the	Athanasian	Creed	affirmed	in	the	following	sentences:
And	the	Catholic	Faith	is	this:	That	we	worship	one	God	in	Trinity,
and	Trinity	in	Unity;	Neither	confounding	the	Persons:	nor	dividing
the	Substance	[Essence].	For	there	is	one	Person	of	the	Father:
another	of	the	Son:	and	another	of	the	Holy	Spirit.	But	the	Godhead	of
the	Father,	of	the	Son,	and	of	the	Holy	Spirit,	is	all	one:	the	Glory
equal,	the	Majesty	coeternal.	Such	as	the	Father	is:	such	is	the	Son:
and	such	is	the	Holy	Spirit.	.	.	.	For	like	as	we	are	compelled	by	the
Christian	verity:	to	acknowledge	every	Person	by	himself	to	be	God
and	Lord:	So	are	we	forbidden	by	the	Catholic	Religion:	to	say,	There
be	[are]	three	Gods,	or	three	Lords.
But	if	each	person	is	fully	God	and	has	all	of	God’s	being,	then	we	also
should	not	think	that	the	personal	distinctions	are	any	kind	of	additional
attributes	added	on	to	the	being	of	God,	something	after	the	pattern	of	figure
14.2.
THE	PERSONAL	DISTINCTIONS	IN	THE	TRINITY	ARE	NOT	SOMETHING	ADDED	ONTO
GOD’S	REAL	BEING
Figure	14.2
Rather,	each	person	of	the	Trinity	has	all	of	the	attributes	of	God,	and	no	one
person	has	any	attributes	that	are	not	possessed	by	the	others.
On	the	other	hand,	we	must	say	that	the	persons	are	real,	that	they	are	not	just
different	ways	of	looking	at	the	one	being	of	God.	(This	would	be	modalism
or	Sabellianism,	as	discussed	above.)	So	figure	14.3	would	not	be	appropriate.
Rather,	we	need	to	think	of	the	Trinity	in	such	a	way	that	the	reality	of	the
three	persons	is	maintained,	and	each	person	is	seen	as	relating	to	the	others
as	an	“I”	(a	first	person)	and	a	“you”	(a	second	person)	and	a	“he”	(a	third
person).
The	only	way	it	seems	possible	to	do	this	is	to	say	that	the	distinction	between
the	persons	is	not	a	difference	in	“being”	but	a	difference	in	“relationships.”
This	is	something	far	removed	from	our	human	experience,	where	every
different	human	“person”	is	a	different	being	as	well.	Somehow	God’s	being
is	so	much	greater	than	ours	that	within	his	one	undivided	being	there	can	be
an	unfolding	into	interpersonal	relationships,	so	that	there	can	be	three
distinct	persons.
THE	PERSONS	OF	THE	TRINITY	ARE	NOT	JUST	THREE	DIFFERENT	WAYS	OF	LOOKING	AT
THE	ONE	BEING	OF	GOD	
Figure	14.3
What	then	are	the	differences	between	Father,	Son,	and	Holy	Spirit?	There	is
no	difference	in	attributes	at	all.	The	only	difference	between	them	is	the	way
they	relate	to	each	other	and	to	the	creation.	The	unique	quality	of	the	Father
is	the	way	he	
relates	as	Father	
to	the	Son	and	Holy	Spirit.	The	unique	quality
of	the	Son	is	the	way	he	
relates	as	Son.	
And	the	unique	quality	of	the	Holy
Spirit	is	the	way	he	
relates	as	Spirit.
38
While	the	three	diagrams	given	above	represented	erroneous	ideas	to	be
avoided,	the	following	diagram	may	be	helpful	in	thinking	about	the	existence
of	three	persons	in	the	one	undivided	being	of	God.
In	this	diagram,	the	Father	is	represented	as	the	section	of	the	circle
designated	by	F,	and	also	the	rest	of	the	circle,	moving	around	clockwise	from
the	letter	F;	the	Son	is	represented	as	the	section	of	the	circle	designated	by	S,
and	also	the	rest	of	the	circle,	moving	around	clockwise	from	the	letter	S;	and
the	Holy	Spirit	is	represented	as	the	section	of	the	circle	marked	HS	and	also
the	rest	of	the	circle,	moving	around	clockwise	from	the	HS.	Thus,	there	are
three	distinct	persons,	but	each	person	is	fully	and	wholly	God.	Of	course	the
representation	is	imperfect,	for	it	cannot	represent	God’s	infinity,	or
personality,	or	indeed	any	of	his	attributes.	It	also	requires	looking	at	the
circle	in	more	than	one	way	in	order	to	understand	it:	the	dotted	lines	must	be
understood	to	indicate	personal	relationship,	not	any	division	in	the	one	being
of	God.	Thus,	the	circle	itself	represents	God’s	being	while	the	dotted	lines
represent	a	form	of	personal	existence	other	than	a	difference	in	being.	But
the	diagram	may	nonetheless	help	guard	against	some	misunderstanding.
THERE	ARE	THREE	DISTINCT	PERSONS,	AND	THE	BEING	OF	EACH	PERSON	IS	EQUAL	TO
THE	WHOLE	BEING	OF	GOD	
Figure	14.4
Our	own	human	personalities	provide	another	faint	analogy	that	can	provide
some	help	in	thinking	about	the	Trinity.	A	man	can	think	about	different
objects	outside	of	himself,	and	when	he	does	this	he	is	the	subject	who	does
the	thinking.	He	can	also	think	about	himself,	and	then	he	is	the	object	who	is
being	thought	about:	then	he	is	both	subject	and	object.	Moreover,	he	can
reflect	on	his	ideas	about	himself	as	a	third	thing,	neither	subject	nor	object,
but	
thoughts	
that	he	as	a	subject	has	about	himself	as	an	object.	When	this
happens,	the	subject,	object,	and	thoughts	are	three	distinct	things.	Yet	each
thing	in	a	way	includes	his	whole	being:	All	of	the	man	is	the	subject,	and	all
of	the	man	is	the	object,	and	the	thoughts	(though	in	a	lesser	sense)	are
thoughts	about	all	of	himself	as	a	person.
39
But	if	the	unfolding	of	human	personality	allows	this	kind	of	complexity,	then
the	unfolding	of	God’s	personality	must	allow	for	far	greater	complexity	than
this.	Within	the	one	being	of	God	the	“unfolding”	of	personality	must	allow
for	the	existence	of	three	distinct	persons,	while	each	person	still	has	the
whole	of	God’s	being	in	himself.	The	difference	in	persons	must	be	one	of
relationship,	not	one	of	being,	and	yet	each	person	must	really	exist.	This	tri-
personal	form	of	being	is	far	beyond	our	ability	to	comprehend.	
It	is	a	kind	of
existence	far	different	from	anything	we	have	experienced,	
and	far	different
from	anything	else	in	the	universe.
Because	the	existence	of	three	persons	in	one	God	is	something	beyond	our
understanding,	Christian	theology	has	come	to	use	the	word	
person	
to	speak
of	these	differences	in	relationship,	not	because	we	fully	understand	what	is
meant	by	the	word	
person	
when	referring	to	the	Trinity,	but	rather	so	that	we
might	say	something	instead	of	saying	nothing	at	all.
4.	Can	We	Understand	the	Doctrine	of	the	Trinity?
	We	should	be	warned
by	the	errors	that	have	been	made	in	the	past.	They	have	all	come	about
through	attempts	to	simplify	the	doctrine	of	the	Trinity	and	make	it
completely	understandable,	removing	all	mystery	from	it.	This	we	can	never
do.	However,	it	is	not	correct	to	say	that	we	cannot	understand	the	doctrine	of
the	Trinity	at	all.	Certainly	we	can	understand	and	know	that	God	is	three
persons,	and	that	each	person	is	fully	God,	and	that	there	is	one	God.	We	can
know	these	things	because	the	Bible	teaches	them.	Moreover,	we	can	know
some	things	about	the	way	in	which	the	persons	relate	to	each	other	(see	the
section	above).	But	what	we	cannot	understand	fully	is	how	to	fit	together
those	distinct	biblical	teachings.	We	wonder	how	there	can	be	three	distinct
persons,	and	each	person	have	the	whole	being	of	God	in	himself,	and	yet
God	is	only	one	undivided	being.	This	we	are	unable	to	understand.	In	fact,	it
is	spiritually	healthy	for	us	to	acknowledge	openly	that	God’s	very	being	is
far	greater	than	we	can	ever	comprehend.	This	humbles	us	before	God	and
draws	us	to	worship	him	without	reservation.
But	it	should	also	be	said	that	Scripture	does	not	ask	us	to	believe	in	a
contradiction.	A	contradiction	would	be	“There	is	one	God	and	there	is	not
one	God,”	or	“God	is	three	persons	and	God	is	not	three	persons,”	or	even
(which	is	similar	to	the	previous	statement)	“God	is	three	persons	and	God	is
one	person.”	But	to	say	that	“God	is	three	persons	and	there	is	one	God”	is
not	a	contradiction.	It	is	something	we	do	not	understand,	and	it	is	therefore	a
mystery	or	a	paradox,	but	that	should	not	trouble	us	as	long	as	the	different
aspects	of	the	mystery	are	clearly	taught	by	Scripture,	for	as	long	as	we	are
finite	creatures	and	not	omniscient	deity,	there	will	always	(for	all	eternity)	be
things	that	we	do	not	fully	understand.	Louis	Berkhof	wisely	says:
The	Trinity	is	a	mystery	.	.	.	man	cannot	comprehend	it	and	make	it
intelligible.	It	is	intelligible	in	some	of	its	relations	and	modes	of
manifestation,	but	unintelligible	in	its	essential	nature.	.	.	.	The	real
difficulty	lies	in	the	relation	in	which	the	persons	in	the	Godhead
stand	to	the	divine	essence	and	to	one	another;	and	this	is	a	difficulty
which	the	Church	cannot	remove,	but	only	try	to	reduce	to	its	proper
proportion	by	a	proper	definition	of	terms.	It	has	never	tried	to	explain
the	mystery	of	the	Trinity	but	only	sought	to	formulate	the	doctrine	of
the	Trinity	in	such	a	manner	that	the	errors	which	endangered	it	were
warded	off.
40
Berkhof	also	says,	“It	is	especially	when	we	reflect	on	the	relation	of	the	three
persons	to	the	divine	essence	that	all	analogies	fail	us	and	we	become	deeply
conscious	of	the	fact	that	the	Trinity	is	a	mystery	far	beyond	our
comprehension.	It	is	the	incomprehensible	glory	of	the	Godhead.”
41
E.	Application
Because	God	in	himself	has	both	unity	and	diversity,	it	is	not	surprising	that
unity	and	diversity	are	also	reflected	in	the	human	relationships	he	has
established.	We	see	this	first	in	marriage.	When	God	created	man	in	his	own
image,	he	did	not	create	merely	isolated	individuals,	but	Scripture	tells	us,
“male	and	female	he	created	them”	(Gen.	1:27).	And	in	the	unity	of	marriage
(see	Gen.	2:24)	we	see,	not	a	triunity	as	with	God,	but	at	least	a	remarkable
unity	of	two	persons,	persons	who	remain	distinct	individuals	yet	also	become
one	in	body,	mind,	and	spirit	(cf.	1	Cor.	6:16–20;	Eph.	5:31).	In	fact,	in	the
relationship	between	man	and	woman	in	marriage	we	see	also	a	picture	of	the
relationship	between	the	Father	and	Son	in	the	Trinity.	Paul	says,	“But	I	want
you	to	understand	that	the	head	of	every	man	is	Christ,	the	head	of	a	woman
is	her	husband,	and	the	head	of	Christ	is	God”	(1	Cor.	11:3).	Here,	just	as	the
Father	has	authority	over	the	Son	in	the	Trinity,	so	the	husband	has	authority
over	the	wife	in	marriage.	The	husband’s	role	is	parallel	to	that	of	God	the
Father	and	the	wife’s	role	is	parallel	to	that	of	God	the	Son.	Moreover,	just	as
Father	and	Son	are	equal	in	deity	and	importance	and	personhood,	so	the
husband	and	wife	are	equal	in	humanity	and	importance	and	personhood.
And,	although	it	is	not	explicitly	mentioned	in	Scripture,	the	gift	of	children
within	marriage,	coming	from	both	the	father	and	the	mother,	and	subject	to
the	authority	of	both	father	and	mother,	is	analogous	to	the	relationship	of	the
Holy	Spirit	to	the	Father	and	Son	in	the	Trinity.
But	the	human	family	is	not	the	only	way	in	which	God	has	ordained	that
there	would	be	both	diversity	and	unity	in	the	world	that	reflect	something	of
his	own	excellence.	In	the	church	we	have	“many	members”	yet	“one	body”
(1	Cor.	12:12).	Paul	reflects	on	the	great	diversity	among	members	of	the
human	body	(1	Cor.	12:14–26)	and	says	that	the	church	is	like	that:	We	have
many	different	members	in	our	churches	with	different	gifts	and	interests,	and
we	depend	on	and	help	each	other,	thereby	demonstrating	great	diversity	and
great	unity	at	the	same	time.	When	we	see	different	people	doing	many
different	things	in	the	life	of	a	church	we	ought	to	thank	God	that	this	allows
us	to	glorify	him	by	reflecting	something	of	the	unity	and	diversity	of	the
Trinity.
We	should	also	notice	that	God’s	purpose	in	the	history	of	the	universe	has
frequently	been	to	display	unity	in	diversity,	and	thus	to	display	his	glory.	We
see	this	not	only	in	the	diversity	of	gifts	in	the	church	(1	Cor.	12:12–26),	but
also	in	the	unity	of	Jews	and	Gentiles,	so	that	all	races,	diverse	as	they	are,	are
united	in	Christ	(Eph.	2:16;	3:8–10;	see	also	Rev.	7:9).	Paul	is	amazed	that
God’s	plans	for	the	history	of	redemption	have	been	like	a	great	symphony	so
that	his	wisdom	is	beyond	finding	out	(Rom.	11:33–36).	Even	in	the
mysterious	unity	between	Christ	and	the	church,	in	which	we	are	called	the
bride	of	Christ	(Eph.	5:31–32),	we	see	unity	beyond	what	we	ever	would	have
imagined,	unity	with	the	Son	of	God	himself.	Yet	in	all	this	we	never	lose	our
individual	identity	but	remain	distinct	persons	always	able	to	worship	and
serve	God	as	unique	individuals.
Eventually	the	entire	universe	will	partake	of	this	unity	of	purpose	with	every
diverse	part	contributing	to	the	worship	of	God	the	Father,	Son,	and	Holy
Spirit,	for	one	day,	at	the	name	of	Jesus	every	knee	will	bow	“in	heaven	and
on	earth	and	under	the	earth,	and	every	tongue	confess	that	Jesus	Christ	is
Lord,	to	the	glory	of	God	the	Father”	(Phil.	2:10–11).
On	a	more	everyday	level,	there	are	many	activities	that	we	carry	out	as
human	beings	(in	the	labor	force,	in	social	organizations,	in	musical
performances,	and	in	athletic	teams,	for	example)	in	which	many	distinct
individuals	contribute	to	a	unity	of	purpose	or	activity.	As	we	see	in	these
activities	a	reflection	of	the	wisdom	of	God	in	allowing	us	both	unity	and
diversity,	we	can	see	a	faint	reflection	of	the	glory	of	God	in	his	trinitarian
existence.	Though	we	will	never	fully	comprehend	the	mystery	of	the	Trinity,
we	can	worship	God	for	who	he	is	both	in	our	songs	of	praise,	and	in	our
words	and	actions	as	they	reflect	something	of	his	excellent	character.
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
Why	is	God	pleased	when	people	exhibit	faithfulness,	love,	and	harmony
within	a	family?	What	are	some	ways	in	which	members	of	your	family
reflect	the	diversity	found	in	the	members	of	the	Trinity?	How	does	your
family	reflect	the	unity	found	among	members	of	the	Trinity?	What	are
some	ways	in	which	your	family	relationships	could	reflect	the	unity	of
the	Trinity	more	fully?	How	might	the	diversity	of	persons	in	the	Trinity
encourage	parents	to	allow	their	children	to	develop	different	interests
from	each	other,	and	from	their	parents,	without	thinking	that	the	unity
of	the	family	will	be	damaged?
2
.	
Have	you	ever	thought	that	if	your	church	allows	new	or	different	kinds
of	ministries	to	develop,	that	it	might	hinder	the	unity	of	the	church?	Or
have	you	thought	that	encouraging	people	to	use	other	gifts	for	ministry
than	those	that	have	been	used	in	the	past	might	be	divisive	in	the
church?	How	might	the	fact	of	unity	and	diversity	in	the	Trinity	help	you
to	approach	those	questions?
3
.	
Do	you	think	that	the	trinitarian	nature	of	God	is	more	fully	reflected	in	a
church	in	which	all	the	members	have	the	same	racial	background,	or
one	in	which	the	members	come	from	many	different	races	(see	Eph.
3:1–10)?
4
.	
In	addition	to	our	relationships	within	our	families,	we	all	exist	in	other
relationships	to	human	authority	in	government,	in	employment,	in
voluntary	societies,	in	educational	institutions,	and	in	athletics,	for
example.	Sometimes	we	have	authority	over	others,	and	sometimes	we
are	subject	to	the	authority	of	others.	Whether	in	the	family	or	one	of
these	other	areas,	give	one	example	of	a	way	in	which	your	use	of
authority	or	your	response	to	authority	might	become	more	like	the
pattern	of	relationships	in	the	Trinity.
5
.	
If	we	see	the	trinitarian	existence	of	God	as	the	fundamental	basis	for	all
combinations	of	unity	and	diversity	in	the	universe,	then	what	are	some
other	parts	of	creation	that	show	both	unity	and	diversity	(for	example:
the	interdependency	of	environmental	systems	on	the	earth,	or	the
fascinating	activity	of	bees	in	a	hive,	or	the	harmonious	working	of	the
various	parts	of	the	human	body)?	Do	you	think	God	has	made	us	so	that
we	take	spontaneous	delight	in	demonstrations	of	unity	in	diversity,	such
as	a	musical	composition	that	manifests	great	unity	and	yet	great
diversity	of	various	parts	at	the	same	time,	or	in	the	skillful	execution	of
some	planned	strategy	by	members	of	an	athletic	team	working	together?
6
.	
In	the	being	of	God	we	have	infinite	unity	combined	with	the
preservation	of	distinct	personalities	belonging	to	the	members	of	the
Trinity.	How	can	this	fact	reassure	us	if	we	ever	begin	to	fear	that
becoming	more	united	to	Christ	as	we	grow	in	the	Christian	life	(or
becoming	more	united	to	one	another	in	the	church)	might	tend	to
obliterate	our	individual	personalities?	In	heaven,	do	you	think	you	will
be	exactly	like	everyone	else,	or	will	you	have	a	personality	that	is
distinctly	your	own?	How	do	eastern	religions	(such	as	Buddhism)	differ
from	Christianity	in	this	regard?
SPECIAL	TERMS
adoptionism
	
	
modalism
Arianism
	
	
modalistic	monarchianism
economic	subordination
	
	
only-begotten
eternal	begetting	of	the	Son
	
	
ontological	equality
eternal	generation	of	the	Son
	
	
Sabellianism
filioque
	
	
subordinationism
homoiousios
	
	
Trinity
homoousios
	
	
tritheism
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the	
bibliography	to
chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be	found	in	
Appendix	4
.)
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92			Litton,	91–108
1930			Thomas,	20–31,	90–99
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1875–76			Pope,	1:253–87;	2:101–5
1892–94			Miley,	1:223–75
1940			Wiley,	1:394–439
1960			Purkiser,	143–44,	199–203
1983			Carter,	1:127–29,	375–414
1983–			Cottrell,	3:117–74
1987–90			Oden,	1:181–224
3.			Baptist
1767			Gill,	1:187–245
1887			Boyce,	125–66
1907			Strong,	304–52
1917			Mullins,	203–13
1976–83			Henry,	5:165–213
1983–85			Erickson,	321–42
1987–94			Lewis/Demarest,	1:251–88
4.			Dispensational
1947			Chafer,	1:272–347;	5:7–38;	6:7–46
1949			Thiessen,	89–99
1986			Ryrie,	51–59
5.			Lutheran
1917–24			Pieper,	1:381–404
1934			Mueller,	147–60
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1559			Calvin,	1:120–59	(1.13)
1861			Heppe,	105–32
1871–73			Hodge,	1:442–534
1878			Dabney,	174–211
1887–1921			Warfield,	
BTS,	
22–156;	
SSW,	
1:88–92;	
BD,	
133–74
1889			Shedd,	1:249–332
1937–66			Murray,	
CW,	
4:58–81
1938			Berkhof,	82–99
1962			Buswell,	1:103–29
7.			Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988–92			Williams,	1:83–94
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955			Ott,	50–75
2.			Roman	Catholic:	Post-Vatican	II
1980			McBrien,	1:343–66
Other	Works
Augustine.	
On	the	Trinity.	
NPNF,	First	Series,	3:1–228.	(This	is
considered	the	most	thorough	development	of	the	orthodox	doctrine	of
the	Trinity	in	the	history	of	the	church.)
Bavinck,	Herman.	
The	Doctrine	of	God.	
Trans.	by	William	Hendriksen
(Edinburgh	and	Carlisle,	Pa.:	Banner	of	Truth,	1977	[reprint	of	1951
edition]),	pp.	255–334.	(This	is	one	of	the	most	thorough	modern
discussions	of	the	Trinity.)
Beisner,	Calvin.	
God	in	Three	Persons.	
Wheaton,	Ill.:	Tyndale	Press,
1984.
Bickersteth,	Edward	H.	
The	Trinity.	
Grand	Rapids:	Kregel,	1957	reprint.
Bloesch,	Donald	G.	
The	Battle	for	the	Trinity:	The	Debate	Over	Inclusive
God-Language.	
Ann	Arbor,	Mich.:	Servant,	1985.
Bowman,	Robert	M.,	Jr.	
Why	You	Should	Believe	in	the	Trinity:	An
Answer	to	Jehovah’s	Witnesses.	
Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1989.
Bray,	G.	L.	“Trinity.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	691–94.
_____.	“Tritheism.”	In	
NDT,	
p.	694.
Brown,	Harold	O.	J.	
Heresies:	The	Image	of	Christ	in	the	Mirror	of
Heresy	and	Orthodoxy	From	the	Apostles	to	the	Present.	
Garden	City,
N.Y.:	Doubleday,	1984,	pp.	95–157.
Davis,	Stephen	T.	
Logic	and	the	Nature	of	God.	
Grand	Rapids:
Eerdmans,	1983,	pp.	132–44.
Gruenler,	Royce	Gordon.	
The	Trinity	in	the	Gospel	of	John.	
Grand
Rapids:	Baker,	1986.
Harris,	Murray.	
Jesus	as	God.	
Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1992.
Kaiser,	Christopher	B.	
The	Doctrine	of	God:	An	Historical	Survey.
Westchester,	Ill.:	Crossway,	1982,	pp.	23–71.
McGrath,	Alister	E.	
Understanding	the	Trinity.	
Grand	Rapids:
Zondervan,	1988.
Mikolaski,	S.	J.	“The	Triune	God.”	In	
Fundamentals	of	the	Faith.	
Ed.	by
C.	F.	H.	Henry.	Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1969,	pp.	59–76.
Packer,	J.	I.	“God.”	
NDT,	
274–77.
_____.	
Knowing	God.	
Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,	1973,	pp.
57–63.
Wright,	D.	F.	“Augustine.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	58–61.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
Matthew	3:16–17:	
And	when	Jesus	was	baptized,	he	went	up	immediately
from	the	water,	and	behold,	the	heavens	were	opened	and	he	saw	the	Spirit	of
God	descending	like	a	dove,	and	alighting	on	him;	and	lo,	a	voice	from
heaven,	saying,	“This	is	my	beloved	Son,	with	whom	I	am	well	pleased.”
HYMN
“Holy,	Holy,	Holy”
Holy,	holy,	holy,	Lord	God	Almighty!
Early	in	the	morning	our	song	shall	rise	to	thee;
Holy,	holy,	holy!	Merciful	and	mighty!
God	in	three	persons,	blessed	Trinity!
Holy,	holy,	holy!	All	the	saints	adore	thee,
Casting	down	their	golden	crowns	around	the	glassy	sea;
Cherubim	and	seraphim	falling	down	before	thee,
Who	wert,	and	art,	and	evermore	shalt	be.
Holy,	holy,	holy!	Though	the	darkness	hide	thee,
Though	the	eye	of	sinful	man	thy	glory	may	not	see,
Only	thou	art	holy;	there	is	none	beside	thee
Perfect	in	pow’r,	in	love,	and	purity.
Holy,	holy,	holy!	Lord	God	Almighty!
All	thy	works	shall	praise	thy	name,	in	earth	and	sky	and	sea;
Holy,	holy,	holy!	Merciful	and	mighty!
God	in	three	persons,	blessed	Trinity!
AUTHOR:	REGINALD	HEBER,	1826
NOTES
1
Both	Alexander	the	Great	(in	152	B.C.)	and	King	Demetrius	(about	145	B.C.)	refer	to	themselves	in	this	way,	for	example,	in	the
Septuagint	text	of	1	Macc.	10:19	and	11:31,	but	this	is	in	Greek,	not	Hebrew,	and	it	is	written	long	after	Genesis	1.
2
See	E.	Kautzsch,	ed.,	
Gesenius’	Hebrew	Grammar,	
2d	ed.	(Oxford:	Clarendon	Press,	1910),	Section	124g,	n.	2,	with	reference	to
the	suggestion	of	a	plural	of	majesty:	“The	plural	used	by	God	in	Genesis	1:26,	11:7,	Isaiah	6:8	has	been	incorrectly	explained	in
this	way.”	They	understand	Gen.	1:26	as	“a	plural	of	self-deliberation.”	My	own	extensive	search	of	subsequent	Jewish
interpretation	in	the	Babylonian	Talmud,	the	targumim	and	the	midrashim	showed	only	that	later	Rabbinic	interpreters	were
unable	to	reach	agreement	on	any	satisfactory	interpretation	of	this	passage,	although	the	“plural	of	majesty”	and	“God	speaking
to	angels”	interpretations	were	commonly	suggested.
3
“The	plural	‘We’	was	regarded	by	the	fathers	and	earlier	theologians	almost	unanimously	as	indicative	of	the	Trinity”	[Keil	and
Delitzsch,	
Old	Testament	Commentaries	
(Grand	Rapids:	Associated	Publishers	and	Authors,	n.d.],	1:48,	with	objections	to	other
positions	and	an	affirmation	that	Gen.	1:26	contains	“the	truth	that	lies	at	the	foundation	of	the	Trinitarian	view”).
4
The	RSV	translates	Ps.	45:6,	“Your	divine	throne	endures	forever	and	ever,”	but	this	is	a	highly	unlikely	translation	because	it
requires	understanding	the	Hebrew	noun	for	“throne”	in	construct	state,	something	extremely	unusual	when	a	noun	has	a
pronominal	suffix,	as	this	one	does.	The	RSV	translation	would	only	be	adopted	because	of	a	theological	assumption	(that	an	Old
Testament	psalmist	could	not	predict	a	fully	divine	messianic	king),	but	not	on	the	grounds	of	language	or	grammar.	The	KJV,
NIV,	and	NASB	all	take	the	verse	in	its	plain,	straightforward	sense,	as	do	the	ancient	translations	and	Heb.	1:8.	Derek	Kidner,
Psalms	1-72,	
TOTC	(London:	Inter-Varsity	Press,	1973),	p.	
172,	says	this	verse	is	“an	example	of	Old	Testament	language
bursting	its	banks,	to	demand	a	more	than	human	fulfillment,”	and	“this	paradox	is	consistent	with	the	Incarnation,	but	mystifying
in	any	other	context.”
Though	some	ancient	kings,	such	as	the	Egyptian	pharaohs,	were	sometimes	addressed	as	“gods,”	this	was	part	of	the	falsehood
connected	with	pagan	idolatry,	and	it	should	not	be	confused	with	Ps.	45,	which	is	part	of	Scripture	and	therefore	true.
The	suggested	translation	of	Heb.	1:8	in	the	RSV	margin,	“God	is	your	throne	forever	and	ever,”	while	possible	grammatically,	is
completely	inconsistent	with	the	thinking	of	both	Old	and	New	Testaments:	the	mighty	God	who	created	everything	and	rules
supreme	over	the	universe	would	never	be	merely	a	“throne”	for	someone	else.	The	thought	itself	is	dishonoring	to	God,	and	it
should	certainly	not	be	considered	as	a	possibly	appropriate	translation.
5
This	RSV	translation	of	Isa.	48:16	accurately	reproduces	both	the	literal	sense	of	the	Hebrew	words	and	the	word	order	in	the
Hebrew	text.
6
The	NIV	translation,	“with	his	Spirit,”	is	not	required	by	the	Hebrew	text	and	tends	to	obscure	the	parallel	thoughts	of	the	Lord
sending	“me”	and	“his	Spirit.”	The	word	
with	
in	the	NIV	is	the	translators’	interpretation	of	the	Hebrew	conjunction	
w
e	
which
most	commonly	means	simply	“and.”	The	common	Hebrew	word	for	“with”	(
’îm
)	is	not	in	the	text.
7
In	response	to	these	arguments,	one	could	argue	that	there	are	similarly	detailed	personifications	of	wisdom	in	Prov.	8:1–12	and
9:1–6,	and	of	foolishness	in	Prov.	9:13–18,	and	no	interpreter	understands	these	to	be	actual	persons.	Therefore,	Prov.	8:22–31
does	not	represent	an	actual	person	either.	This	argument	seems	convincing	to	me,	but	I	have	included	the	following	paragraph
because	Prov.	8:22–31	has	a	long	history	of	interpreters	who	think	it	refers	to	God	the	Son.
8
The	confusion	surrounding	the	translation	of	the	verse	seems	to	have	been	caused	by	the	unusual	translation	of	the	Septuagint,
which	used	
ktizō	
(“create”)	rather	than	the	usual	translation	
ktaomai	
(“acquire,	take	possession	of”)	to	translate	the	Hebrew	term	at
this	verse.	
Qānāh	
occurs	eighty-four	times	in	the	Hebrew	Old	Testament	and	is	translated	more	than	seventy	times	by	
ktaomai,	
but
only	three	times	by	
ktizō	
(Gen.	14:19;	Prov.	8:22;	Jer.	39(32):15),	all	of	which	are	questionable	translations.	The	other	Greek
translations	of	the	Old	Testament	by	Aquila,	Symmachus,	and	Theodotian	all	have	
ktaomai	
at	Prov.	8:22.
9
The	following	section	on	the	distinct	personality	of	the	Holy	Spirit	follows	quite	closely	the	excellent	material	in	Louis	Berkhof,
Systematic	Theology,	
p.	96.
10
Grammatically	both	“the	Spirit”	(
to	pneuma
)	and	“the	Lord”	(
ho	kyrios
)	are	in	the	nominative	case,	which	is	the	case	taken	both
by	the	subject	and	by	the	predicate	noun	in	a	sentence	with	the	verb	“to	be.”	And	word	order	does	not	indicate	the	subject	in
Greek	as	it	does	in	English.	The	definite	article	(
ho,	
“the”)	before	“Lord”	here	is	probably	anaphoric	(that	is,	it	refers	back	to	the
previous	mention	of	“Lord”	in	v.	
16	and	says	that	the	Spirit	is	“the	Lord”	who	was	just	mentioned	in	the	previous	sentence).	(See
Murray	Harris,	“2	Corinthians,”	in	
EBC	
10:338–39.)
11
Another	possible	interpretation	is	to	say	that	this	is	speaking	of	the	function	of	Christ	and	the	function	of	the	Holy	Spirit	as	so
closely	related	in	the	New	Testament	age	that	they	can	be	spoken	of	as	one	in	purpose.	The	verse	would	then	mean	something	like
“The	Lord	Jesus	is	in	this	age	seen	and	known	through	the	activity	of	the	Holy	Spirit,	for	the	Holy	Spirit’s	function	is	to	glorify
Christ.”	But	this	is	a	less	persuasive	interpretation,	since	it	seems	unlikely	that	Paul	would	speak	of	an	identity	of	function	in	such
an	obscure	way,	or	even	that	Paul	would	want	to	say	that	the	work	of	Christ	and	the	work	of	the	Spirit	are	identical.
12
This	rule	(called	“Colwell’s	rule”)	is	covered	as	early	as	chapter	6	of	a	standard	introductory	Greek	grammar:	See	John
Wenham,	
The	Elements	of	New	Testament	Greek	
(Cambridge:	Cambridge	University	Press,	1965),	p.	
35;	also,	
BDF,	
273.	The	rule
is	simply	that	in	sentences	with	the	linking	verb	“to	be”	(such	as	Gk.	
eimi
),	a	definite	predicate	noun	will	usually	drop	the	definite
article	when	it	precedes	the	verb,	but	the	subject	of	the	sentence,	if	definite,	will	retain	the	definite	article.	So	if	John	had	wanted
to	say,	“The	Word	was	God,”	John	1:1	is	exactly	the	way	he	would	have	said	it.	(Recent	grammatical	study	has	confirmed	and
even	strengthened	Colwell’s	original	rule:	see	Lane	C.	McGaughy,	
Toward	a	Descriptive	Analysis	of	EINAI	as	a	Linking	Verb	in
the	New	Testament	
[SBLDS	6;	Missoula,	Mont.:	SBL,	1972],	esp.	pp.	49–53,	73–77;	and	the	important	review	of	this	book	by	E.
V.	N.	Goetchius	in	
JBL	
95	[1976]:	147–49.)
Of	course,	if	John	had	wanted	to	say,	“The	Word	was	a	god”	(with	an	indefinite	predicate,	“a	god”),	it	would	also	have	been
written	this	way,	since	there	would	have	been	no	definite	article	to	drop	in	the	first	place.	But	if	that	were	the	case,	there	would
have	to	be	some	clues	in	the	context	that	John	was	using	the	word	
theos	
to	speak	of	a	heavenly	being	that	was	not	fully	divine.	So
the	question	becomes,	what	kind	of	God	(or	“god”)	is	John	talking	about	in	this	context?	Is	he	speaking	of	the	one	true	God	who
created	the	heavens	and	the	earth?	In	that	case,	
theos	
was	definite	and	dropped	the	definite	article	to	show	that	it	was	the
predicate.	Or	is	he	speaking	about	some	other	kind	of	heavenly	being	(“a	god”)	who	is	not	the	one	true	God?	In	that	case,	
theos
was	indefinite	and	never	had	a	definite	article	in	the	first	place.
The	context	decides	this	question	clearly.	From	the	other	uses	of	the	word	
theos	
to	mean	“God”	in	vv.	1,	2,	6,	12,	13,	et	al.,	and
from	the	opening	words	that	recall	Gen.	1:1	(“In	the	beginning”),	it	is	clear	that	John	is	speaking	of	the	one	true	God	who	created
the	heavens	and	the	earth.	That	means	that	
theos	
in	v.	
2	must	be	understood	to	refer	to	that	same	God	as	well.
13
The	argument	is	found	in	a	detailed,	rather	extensive	attack	on	the	doctrine	of	the	Trinity:	
Should	You	Believe	in	the	Trinity?	
(no
author	named;	Brooklyn,	N.Y.:	Watchtower	Bible	and	Tract	Society,	1989).	This	group	apparently	deems	this	booklet	a	significant
statement	of	their	position,	for	page	2	states,	“First	printing	in	English:	5,000,000	copies.”	The	booklet	first	advances	the
traditional	argument	that	John	1:1	should	be	translated	“a	god”	because	of	the	absence	on	the	definite	article	(p.	
27).	But	then	it
later	acknowledges	that	Colwell’s	rule	is	relevant	for	John	1:1	(p.	
28)	and	there	admits	that	the	context,	not	the	absence	of	the
definite	article,	determines	whether	we	should	translate	“the	Word	was	God”	(definite)	or	“the	Word	was	a	god”	(indefinite).	Then
it	argues	as	follows:	“.	.	.	when	the	context	requires	it,	translators	may	insert	an	indefinite	article	in	front	of	the	noun	in	this	type	of
sentence	structure.	Does	the	context	require	an	indefinite	article	at	John	1:1?	Yes,	for	the	testimony	of	the	entire	Bible	is	that	Jesus
is	not	Almighty	God”	(p.	
28).
We	should	note	carefully	the	weakness	of	this	argument:	They	admit	that	context	is	decisive,	but	then	they	quote	not	one	shred	of
evidence	from	the	context	of	John	1:1.	Rather,	they	simply	assert	again	their	conclusion	about	“the	entire	Bible.”	If	they	agree	that
this	context	is	decisive,	but	they	can	find	nothing	in	this	context	that	supports	their	view,	they	have	simply	lost	the	argument.
Therefore,	having	acknowledged	Colwell’s	rule,	they	still	hold	their	view	on	John	1:1,	but	with	no	supporting	evidence.	To	hold	a
view	with	no	evidence	to	support	it	is	simply	irrationality.
The	booklet	as	a	whole	will	give	an	appearance	of	scholarly	work	to	laypersons,	since	it	quotes	dozens	of	theologians	and
academic	reference	works	(always	without	adequate	documentation).	However,	many	quotations	are	taken	out	of	context	and
made	to	say	something	the	authors	never	intended,	and	others	are	from	liberal	Catholic	or	Protestant	scholars	who	themselves	are
questioning	both	the	doctrine	of	the	Trinity	and	the	truthfulness	of	the	Bible.
14
The	Jehovah’s	Witnesses’	booklet	
Should	You	Believe	in	the	Trinity?	
offers	two	explanations	for	John	20:28:	(1)	“To	Thomas,
Jesus	was	like	‘a	god,’	especially	in	the	miraculous	circumstances	that	prompted	his	exclamation”	(p.	29).	But	this	explanation	is
unconvincing,	because	Thomas	did	not	say,	“You	are	like	a	god,”	but	rather	called	Jesus	“my	God.”	The	Greek	text	has	the
definite	article	(it	cannot	be	translated	“a	god”)	and	is	explicit:	
ho	theos	mou	
is	not	“a	god	of	mine”	but	“my	God.”
(2)	The	second	explanation	offered	is	that	“Thomas	may	simply	have	made	an	emotional	exclamation	of	astonishment,	spoken	to
Jesus	but	directed	to	God”	(ibid.).	The	second	part	of	this	sentence,	“spoken	to	Jesus	but	directed	to	God,”	is	simply	incoherent:	it
seems	to	mean,	“spoken	to	Jesus	but	not	spoken	to	Jesus,”	which	is	not	only	self-contradictory,	but	also	impossible:	if	Thomas	is
speaking	to	Jesus	he	is	also	directing	his	words	to	Jesus.	The	first	part	of	this	sentence,	the	claim	that	Thomas	is	really	not	calling
Jesus	“God,”	but	is	merely	swearing	or	uttering	some	involuntary	words	of	exclamation,	is	without	merit,	for	the	verse	makes	it
clear	that	Thomas	was	not	speaking	into	the	blue	but	was	speaking	directly	to	Jesus:	“Thomas	answered	and	said	
to	Him,	
‘My
Lord	and	my	God!’	”	(John	20:28,	NASB).	And	immediately	both	Jesus	and	John	in	his	writing	commend	Thomas,	certainly	not
for	swearing	but	for	believing	in	Jesus	as	his	Lord	and	his	God.
15
Both	Titus	2:13	and	2	Peter	1:1	have	marginal	readings	in	the	RSV	whereby	Jesus	is	referred	to	as	a	different	person	than
“God”	and	therefore	is	not	called	God:	“the	great	God	and	our	Savior	Jesus	Christ”	(Titus	2:13	mg.)	and	“our	God	and	the	Savior
Jesus	Christ”	(2	Peter	1:1	mg.).	These	alternative	translations	are	possible	grammatically	but	are	unlikely.	Both	verses	have	the
same	Greek	construction,	in	which	one	definite	article	governs	two	nouns	joined	by	the	Greek	word	for	
and	
(
kai
).	In	all	cases
where	this	construction	is	found	the	two	nouns	are	viewed	as	unified	in	some	way,	and	often	they	are	two	separate	names	for	the
same	person	or	thing.	Especially	significant	is	2	Peter	1:1,	for	exactly	the	same	construction	is	used	by	Peter	three	other	times	in
this	book	to	speak	of	“Our	Lord	and	Savior	Jesus	Christ”	(1	Peter	1:11;	2:20;	3:18).	In	these	three	other	verses,	the	Greek	wording
is	exactly	the	same	in	every	detail	except	that	the	word	
Lord	
(
kyrios
)	is	used	instead	of	the	word	
God	
(
theos
).	If	these	other	three
instances	are	all	translated	“Our	
Lord	
and	Savior	Jesus	Christ,”	as	they	are	in	all	major	translations,	then	consistency	in	translation
would	seem	to	require	the	translation	of	2	Peter	1:1	as	“Our	
God	
and	Savior	Jesus	Christ,”	again	referring	to	Christ	as	God.	In
Titus	2:13	Paul	is	writing	about	the	hope	of	Christ’s	second	coming,	which	the	New	Testament	writers	consistently	speak	of	in
terms	that	emphasize	the	manifestation	of	Jesus	Christ	in	his	glory,	not	in	terms	that	emphasize	the	glory	of	the	Father.
16
The	marginal	reading	in	the	NIV	is	similar	to	the	reading	in	the	main	text	of	the	RSV,	which	is,	“and	of	their	race,	according	to
the	flesh,	is	the	Christ.	God	who	is	over	all	be	blessed	for	ever.	Amen”	(Rom.	9:5	RSV).	But	this	translation	is	far	less	likely	on
grammatical	and	contextual	grounds	and	is	justified	primarily	by	arguing	that	Paul	would	not	have	referred	to	Christ	as	“God.”
The	NIV	translation,	which	refers	to	Christ	as	“God	over	all,”	is	preferable	because	(1)	Paul’s	normal	pattern	is	to	declare	a	word
of	blessing	concerning	the	person	about	whom	he	has	just	been	speaking,	who	in	this	case	is	Christ;	(2)	the	Greek	participle	
ōn,
“being,”	which	makes	the	phrase	say	literally,	“who,	being	God	over	all	is	blessed	forever,”	would	be	redundant	if	Paul	were
starting	a	new	sentence	as	the	RSV	has	it;	(3)	when	Paul	elsewhere	begins	a	new	sentence	with	a	word	of	blessing	to	God,	the
word	“blessed”	comes	first	in	the	Greek	sentence	(see	2	Cor.	1:3;	Eph.	1:3;	cf.	Peter’s	pattern	in	1	Peter	1:3),	but	here	the
expression	does	not	follow	that	pattern,	making	the	RSV	translation	unlikely.	See	Donald	Guthrie,	
New	Testament	Theology
(Leicester:	Inter-Varsity	Press,	1981),	pp.	339–40.	For	a	definitive	treatment	of	all	the	New	Testament	texts	that	refer	to	Jesus	as
“God,”	see	Murray	Harris,	
Jesus	as	God	
(Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1992).
17
1	Tim.	5:21	should	not	be	seen	as	a	counter	example	to	this	claim,	for	there	Paul	is	simply	warning	Timothy	in	the	presence	of	a
host	of	heavenly	witnesses,	both	divine	and	angelic,	who	he	knows	are	watching	Timothy’s	conduct.	This	is	similar	to	the	mention
of	God	and	Christ	and	the	angels	of	heaven	and	the	“spirits	of	just	men	made	perfect”	in	Heb.	12:22–24,	where	a	great	heavenly
assembly	is	mentioned.	1	Tim.	5:21	should	therefore	be	seen	as	significantly	different	from	the	trinitarian	passages	mentioned
above,	since	those	passages	speak	of	uniquely	divine	activities,	such	as	distributing	gifts	to	every	Christian	(1	Cor.	12:4–6)	or
having	the	name	into	which	all	believers	are	baptized	(Matt.	28:19).
18
1	Cor.	8:6	does	not	deny	that	God	the	Son	and	God	the	Holy	Spirit	are	also	“God,”	but	here	Paul	says	that	God	the	Father	is
identified	as	this	“one	God.”	Elsewhere,	as	we	have	seen,	he	can	speak	of	God	the	Son	and	God	the	Holy	Spirit	as	also	“God.”
Moreover,	in	this	same	verse,	he	goes	on	to	speak	of	“one	Lord,	Jesus	Christ,	through	whom	are	all	things	and	through	whom	we
exist.”	He	is	here	using	the	word	
Lord	
in	its	full	Old	Testament	sense	of	“Yahweh”	as	a	name	for	God,	and	saying	that	this	is	the
person	through	whom	all	things	were	created,	thus	affirming	the	full	deity	of	Christ	as	well,	but	with	a	different	name.	Thus	this
verse	affirms	both	the	unity	of	God	and	the	diversity	of	persons	in	God.
19
The	technical	name	for	this	view	is	modalism,	a	heresy	condemned	in	the	ancient	church:	see	discussion	below.
20
The	technical	name	for	this	view	is	Arianism,	another	heresy	condemned	in	the	ancient	church:	see	discussion	below.
21
There	is	a	certain	atmospheric	condition	(called	the	“triple	point”	by	chemists)	at	which	steam,	liquid	water,	and	ice	can	all	exist
simultaneously,	but	even	then	the	quantity	of	water	that	is	steam	is	not	ice	or	liquid,	the	quantity	that	is	liquid	is	not	steam	or	ice,
etc.
22
An	excellent	discussion	of	the	history	and	theological	implications	of	the	trinitarian	heresies	discussed	in	this	section	is	found	in
Harold	O.	J.	Brown,	
Heresies:	The	Image	of	Christ	in	the	Mirror	of	Heresy	and	Orthodoxy	from	the	Apostles	to	the	Present
(Garden	City,	N.Y.:	Doubleday,	1984),	pp.	95–157.
23
Some	of	the	leaders	who	formed	this	group	had	earlier	been	forced	out	of	the	Assemblies	of	God	when	the	Assemblies	decided
to	insist	on	a	trinitarian	statement	of	faith	for	its	ministers	in	1916.	The	United	Pentecostal	Church	is	sometimes	identified	with
the	slogan	“Jesus	only,”	and	it	insists	that	people	should	be	baptized	in	the	name	of	Jesus,	not	in	the	name	of	the	Father,	Son,	and
Holy	Spirit.	Because	of	its	denial	of	the	three	distinct	persons	in	God,	the	denomination	should	not	be	considered	to	be
evangelical,	and	it	is	doubtful	whether	it	should	be	considered	genuinely	Christian	at	all.
24
Prov.	8:22	was	also	used	by	the	Arians,	who	gained	support	from	the	fact	that	the	Septuagint	misleadingly	translated	it,	“The
Lord	created	me”	(Gk.	
ktizō
)	rather	than	“The	Lord	acquired	me	or	possessed	me”	(Gk.	
ktaomai
).	See	discussion	on	this	verse	at
the	beginning	of	
chapter	14
.
The	Jehovah’s	Witnesses,	who	are	modern-day	Arians,	also	point	to	Rev.	3:14,	where	Jesus	calls	himself	“the	beginning	of	God’s
creation,”	and	take	it	to	mean	that	“Jesus	was	created	by	God	as	the	beginning	of	God’s	invisible	creations”	(no	author	named,
Should	You	Believe	in	the	Trinity?	
[Brooklyn,	N.Y.:	Watch	Tower	Bible	and	Tract	Society,	1989],	p.	
14).	But	this	verse	does	not
mean	that	Jesus	was	the	first	being	created,	for	the	same	word	for	“beginning”	(Gk.	
archē
)	is	used	by	Jesus	when	he	says	that	he	is
“the	Alpha	and	the	Omega,	the	first	and	the	last,	the	
beginning	
and	the	end”	(Rev.	22:13),	and	“beginning”	here	is	a	synonym	for
“Alpha”	and	“first.”	God	the	Father	similarly	says	of	himself,	“I	am	the	Alpha	and	the	Omega”	(Rev.	1:8).	In	both	cases,	to	be
“the	Alpha”	or	“the	beginning”	means	to	be	the	one	who	was	there	before	anything	else	existed.	The	word	does	not	imply	that	the
Son	was	created	or	that	there	was	a	time	when	he	began	to	be,	for	both	the	Father	and	the	Son	have	always	been	“the	Alpha	and
the	Omega”	and	“the	beginning	and	the	end,”	since	they	have	existed	eternally.	(The	Jewish	historian	Josephus	uses	this	same
word	to	call	God	the	“beginning	(
archē
)”	of	“all	things,”	but	certainly	he	does	not	think	that	God	himself	was	created:	see	
Against
Apion	
2.190.)
The	NIV	translates	this	verse	differently:	“the	ruler	of	God’s	creation.”	This	is	an	acceptable	alternative	sense	for	
archē:	
see	the
same	meaning	in	Luke	12:11;	Titus	3:1.
25
This	is	the	original	form	of	the	Nicene	Creed,	but	it	was	later	modified	at	the	Council	of	Constantinople	in	381	and	there	took
the	form	that	is	commonly	called	the	“Nicene	Creed”	by	churches	today.	This	text	is	taken	from	Philip	Schaff,	
Creeds	of
Christendom,	
3	vols.	(Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1983	reprint	of	1931	edition),	1:28–29.
26
Older	translations	of	
homoousios	
sometimes	use	the	term	“consubstantial,”	an	uncommon	English	word	simply	meaning	“of	the
same	substance	or	nature.”
27
The	heresy	of	subordinationism,	which	holds	that	the	Son	is	inferior	in	being	to	the	Father,	should	be	clearly	distinguished	from
the	orthodox	doctrine	that	the	Son	is	eternally	subordinate	to	the	Father	in	role	or	function:	without	this	truth,	we	would	lose	the
doctrine	of	the	Trinity,	for	we	would	not	have	any	eternal	personal	distinctions	between	the	Father	and	the	Son,	and	they	would
not	eternally	be	Father	and	Son.	(See	
section	D
	on	the	differences	between	the	Father,	Son,	and	Holy	Spirit.)
28
S.	J.	Mikolaski,	“Athanasius,”	
NIDCC,	
81.
29
The	word	
proceeds	
was	not	understood	to	refer	to	a	creating	of	the	Holy	Spirit,	or	any	deriving	of	his	being	from	the	Father	and
Son,	but	to	indicate	the	way	the	Holy	Spirit	eternally	relates	to	the	Father	and	Son.
30
Bavinck,	
The	Doctrine	of	God,	
p.	281.
31
Ibid.,	p.	
285.
32
Another	passage	that	may	suggest	such	a	distinction	in	function	is	John	17:5:	When	Jesus	asks	the	Father,	“glorify	me	in	your
own	presence	with	the	glory	which	I	had	with	you	before	the	world	was	made”	(John	17:5),	he	suggests	that	it	is	the	Father’s	right
to	give	glory	to	whom	he	will	and	that	this	glory	had	been	given	to	the	Son	by	the	Father	because	the	Father	loved	the	Son	before
the	foundation	of	the	world.
33
See	
section	D.1
,	above,	where	
economy	
was	explained	to	refer	to	different	activities	or	roles.
34
Economic	subordination	should	be	carefully	distinguished	from	the	error	of	“subordinationism,”	which	holds	that	the	Son	or
Holy	Spirit	are	inferior	in	being	to	the	Father	(see	
section	C.2
.)
35
See,	for	example,	Richard	and	Catherine	Kroeger,	in	the	article	“Subordinationism”	in	
EDT:	
They	define	subordinationism	as
“a	doctrine	which	assigns	an	inferiority	of	being,	status,	
or	role	
to	the	Son	or	the	Holy	Spirit	within	the	Trinity.	Condemned	by
numerous	church	councils,	this	doctrine	has	continued	in	one	form	or	another	throughout	the	history	of	the	church”	(p.	
1058,
emphasis	mine).	When	the	Kroegers	speak	of	“inferiority	of	.	.	.	role”	they	apparently	mean	to	say	that	any	affirmation	of	eternal
subordination	in	role	belongs	to	the	heresy	of	subordinationism.	But	if	this	is	what	they	are	saying,	then	they	are	condemning	all
orthodox	Christology	from	the	Nicene	Creed	onward	and	thereby	condemning	a	teaching	that	Charles	Hodge	says	has	been	a
teaching	of	“the	Church	universal.”
Similarly,	Millard	Erickson,	in	his	
Christian	Theology	
(Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1983–85),	pp.	338	and	698,	is	willing	only	to	affirm
that	Christ	had	a	temporary	subordination	in	function	for	the	period	of	ministry	on	earth,	but	nowhere	affirms	an	eternal
subordination	in	role	of	the	Son	to	the	Father	or	the	Holy	Spirit	to	the	Father	and	the	Son.	(Similarly,	his	
Concise	Dictionary	of
Christian	Theology,	
p.	161.)
Robert	Letham,	in	“The	Man-Woman	Debate:	Theological	Comment,”	
WTJ	
52:1	(Spring	1990),	pp.	65–78,	sees	this	tendency	in
recent	evangelical	writings	as	the	outworking	of	an	evangelical	feminist	claim	that	a	subordinate	role	necessarily	implies	lesser
importance	or	lesser	personhood.	Of	course,	if	this	is	not	true	among	members	of	the	Trinity,	then	it	is	not	necessarily	true
between	husband	and	wife	either.
36
Systematic	Theology	
(3	vols.;	Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1970	[reprint;	first	published	1871–73]),	1:460–62	(italics	mine).
37
Systematic	Theology	
(Valley	Forge,	Pa.:	Judson,	1907),	p.	
342	(third	italics	mine).
38
Some	systematic	theologies	give	names	to	these	different	relationships:	“paternity”	(or	“generation”)	for	the	Father,
“begottenness”	(or	“filiation”)	for	the	Son,	and	“procession”	(or	“spiration”)	for	the	Holy	Spirit,	but	the	names	do	not	mean
anything	more	than	“relating	as	a	Father,”	and	“relating	as	a	Son,”	and	“relating	as	Spirit.”	In	an	attempt	to	avoid	the	proliferation
of	technical	terms	that	do	not	exist	in	contemporary	English,	or	whose	meaning	differs	from	their	ordinary	English	sense,	I	have
not	used	these	terms	in	this	chapter.
39
We	said	above	that	no	analogy	teaches	the	Trinity	perfectly,	and	this	one	has	several	shortcomings	as	well:	this	man	remains	as
one	person;	he	is	not	three	persons.	And	his	“thoughts”	do	not	equal	all	of	him	as	a	person.	But	the	analogy	is	helpful	in	hinting	at
something	of	the	complexity	even	of	human	personality	and	suggesting	that	the	complexity	of	divine	personality	is	something	far
greater	than	this.
40
Berkhof,	
Systematic	Theology,	
p.	89.
41
Ibid.,	p.	
88.
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	15
Creation
Why,	how,	and	when	did	God	create	the	universe?
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
1
How	did	God	create	the	world?	Did	he	create	every	different	kind	of	plant	and
animal	directly,	or	did	he	use	some	kind	of	evolutionary	process,	guiding	the
development	of	living	things	from	the	simplest	to	the	most	complex?	And
how	quickly	did	God	bring	about	creation?	Was	it	all	completed	within	six
twenty-four-hour	days,	or	did	he	use	thousands	or	perhaps	millions	of	years?
How	old	is	the	earth,	and	how	old	is	the	human	race?
These	questions	face	us	when	we	deal	with	the	doctrine	of	creation.	Unlike
most	of	the	earlier	material	in	this	book,	this	chapter	treats	several	questions
on	which	evangelical	Christians	have	differing	viewpoints,	sometimes	very
strongly	held	ones.
This	chapter	is	organized	to	move	from	those	aspects	of	creation	that	are	most
clearly	taught	in	Scripture,	and	on	which	almost	all	evangelicals	would	agree
(creation	out	of	nothing,	special	creation	of	Adam	and	Eve,	and	the	goodness
of	the	universe),	to	other	aspects	of	creation	about	which	evangelicals	have
had	disagreements	(whether	God	used	a	process	of	evolution	to	bring	about
much	of	creation,	and	how	old	the	earth	and	the	human	race	are).
We	may	define	the	doctrine	of	creation	as	follows:	
God	created	the	entire
universe	out	of	nothing;	it	was	originally	very	good;	and	he	created	it	to
glorify	himself.
A.	God	Created	the	Universe	Out	of	Nothing
1.
	Biblical	Evidence	for	Creation	Out	of	Nothing.
	The	Bible	clearly
requires	us	to	believe	that	God	created	the	universe	out	of	nothing.
(Sometimes	the	Latin	phrase	
ex	nihilo,	
“out	of	nothing”	is	used;	it	is	then	said
that	the	Bible	teaches	creation	
ex	nihilo.
)	This	means	that	before	God	began
to	create	the	universe,	nothing	else	existed	except	God	himself.
2
This	is	the	implication	of	Genesis	1:1,	which	says,	“In	the	beginning	God
created	the	heavens	and	the	earth.”	The	phrase	“the	heavens	and	the	earth”
includes	the	entire	universe.	Psalm	33	also	tells	us,	“By	the	word	of	the	L
ORD
the	heavens	were	made,	and	all	their	host	by	the	breath	of	his	mouth.	.	.	.	For
he	spoke,	and	it	came	to	be;	he	commanded,	and	it	stood	forth”	(Ps.	33:6,	9).
In	the	New	Testament,	we	find	a	universal	statement	at	the	beginning	of
John’s	gospel:	“
All	things	
were	made	through	him,	and	without	him	was	not
anything	made	that	was	made”	(John	1:3).	The	phrase	“all	things”	is	best
taken	to	refer	to	the	entire	universe	(cf.	Acts	17:24;	Heb.	11:3).	Paul	is	quite
explicit	in	Colossians	1	when	he	specifies	all	the	parts	of	the	universe,	both
visible	and	invisible	things:	“For	in	him	
all	things	
were	created,	in	heaven	and
on	earth,	
visible	and	invisible,	
whether	thrones	or	dominions	or	principalities
or	authorities—all	things	were	created	through	him	and	for	him”	(Col.	1:16).
The	song	of	the	twenty-four	elders	in	heaven	likewise	affirms	this	truth:
“You	are	worthy,	our	Lord	and	God,
to	receive	glory	and	honor	and	power,
for	you	created	
all	things,
and	by	your	will	they	existed	and	were	created.”	(Rev.	4:11)
In	the	last	phrase	God’s	will	is	said	to	be	the	reason	why	things	even	“existed”
at	all	and	why	they	“were	created.”
That	God	created	both	the	heavens	and	the	earth	and	everything	in	them	is
affirmed	several	other	times	in	the	New	Testament.	For	instance,	Acts	4:24
speaks	of	God	as	the	“Sovereign	Lord,	who	made	
the	heaven	and	the	earth
and	the	sea	and	everything	in	them.”	
One	of	the	first	ways	of	identifying	God
is	to	say	that	he	is	the	one	who	created	all	things.	Barnabas	and	Paul	explain
to	the	pagan	audience	at	Lystra	that	they	are	messengers	of	“a	living	God	who
made	the	heaven	and	the	earth	and	the	sea	and	all	that	is	in	them”	(Acts
14:15).	Similarly,	when	Paul	is	speaking	to	pagan	Greek	philosophers	in
Athens,	he	identifies	the	true	God	as	“The	God	who	made	the	world	and
everything	in	it”	and	says	that	this	God	“gives	to	all	men	life	and	breath	and
everything”	(Acts	17:24–25;	cf.	Isa.	45:18;	Rev.	10:6).
Hebrews	11:3	says,	“By	faith	we	understand	that	the	worlds	were	prepared	by
the	word	of	God,	so	that	what	is	seen	was	not	made	out	of	things	which	are
visible”	(NASB).	This	translation	(as	well	as	the	NIV)	most	accurately
reflects	the	Greek	text.
3
	Though	the	text	does	not	quite	teach	the	doctrine	of
creation	out	of	nothing,	it	comes	close	to	doing	so,	since	it	says	that	God	did
not	create	the	universe	out	of	anything	that	is	visible.	The	somewhat	strange
idea	that	the	universe	might	have	been	created	out	of	something	that	was
invisible	is	probably	not	in	the	author’s	mind.	He	is	contradicting	the	idea	of
creation	out	of	previously	existing	matter,	and	for	that	purpose	the	verse	is
quite	clear.
Romans	4:17	also	implies	that	God	created	out	of	nothing,	even	if	it	does	not
exactly	state	it.	The	Greek	text	literally	speaks	of	God	as	one	who	“calls
things	not	existing	as	existing.”	The	RSV	translation,	“calls	into	existence	the
things	that	do	not	exist”	(similarly	NASB)	is	unusual	but	possible
grammatically,
4
	and	it	makes	an	explicit	affirmation	of	creation	out	of
nothing.	Yet	even	if	we	translate	it	so	that	the	Greek	word	
hos	
takes	its
common	sense	“as,”	the	verse	says	that	God	“calls	the	things	which	do	not
exist	as	existing”	(NASB	mg.).	But	if	God	speaks	to	or	calls	something	that
does	not	exist,	as	if	in	fact	it	did	exist,	then	what	is	implied?	If	he	calls	things
that	do	not	exist	as	though	they	existed,	it	must	mean	that	they	will	soon	exist,
irresistibly	called	into	existence.
Because	God	created	the	entire	universe	out	of	nothing	there	is	no	matter	in
the	universe	that	is	eternal.	All	that	we	see—the	mountains,	the	oceans,	the
stars,	the	earth	itself—all	came	into	existence	when	God	created	them.	There
was	a	time	when	they	did	not	exist:
“Before	the	mountains	were	brought	forth,
or	ever	you	had	formed	the	earth	and	the	world,
from	everlasting	to	everlasting	you	are	God.”	(Ps.	90:2)
This	reminds	us	that	God	rules	over	all	the	universe	and	that	nothing	in
creation	is	to	be	worshiped	instead	of	God	or	in	addition	to	him.	However,
were	we	to	deny	creation	out	of	nothing,	we	would	have	to	say	that	some
matter	has	always	existed	and	that	it	is	eternal	like	God.	This	idea	would
challenge	God’s	independence,	his	sovereignty,	and	the	fact	that	worship	is
due	to	him	alone:	if	matter	existed	apart	from	God,	then	what	inherent	right
would	God	have	to	rule	over	it	and	use	it	for	his	glory?	And	what	confidence
could	we	have	that	every	aspect	of	the	universe	will	ultimately	fulfill	God’s
purposes,	if	some	parts	of	it	were	not	created	by	him?
The	positive	side	of	the	fact	that	God	created	the	universe	out	of	nothing	is
that	it	has	meaning	and	a	purpose.	God,	in	his	wisdom,	created	it	for
something.	We	should	try	to	understand	that	purpose	and	use	creation	in	ways
that	fit	that	purpose,	namely,	to	bring	glory	to	God	himself.
5
	Moreover,
whenever	the	creation	brings	us	joy	(cf.	1	Tim.	6:17),	we	should	give	thanks
to	the	God	who	made	it	all.
2.	The	Creation	of	the	Spiritual	Universe.
	This	creation	of	the	entire
universe	includes	the	creation	of	an	unseen,	spiritual	realm	of	existence:	God
created	the	angels	and	other	kinds	of	heavenly	beings	as	well	as	animals	and
man.	He	also	created	heaven	as	a	place	where	his	presence	is	especially
evident.	The	creation	of	the	spiritual	realm	is	certainly	implied	in	all	the
verses	above	that	speak	of	God	creating	not	only	the	earth	but	also	“heaven
and	what	is	in	it”	(Rev.	10:6;	cf.	Acts	4:24),	but	it	is	also	explicitly	affirmed	in
a	number	of	other	verses.	The	prayer	of	Ezra	says	very	clearly:	“You	are	the
L
ORD
,	you	alone;	you	have	made	heaven,	the	heaven	of	heavens,	with	all	their
host,	the	earth	and	all	that	is	on	it,	the	seas	and	all	that	is	in	them;	and	you
preserve	all	of	them;	and	the	host	of	heaven	worships	you”	(Neh.	9:6).	The
“host	of	heaven”	in	this	verse	seems	to	refer	to	the	angels	and	other	heavenly
creatures,	since	Ezra	says	that	they	engage	in	the	activity	of	worshiping	God
(the	same	term	
host	
is	used	to	speak	of	angels	who	worship	God	in	Ps.	103:21
and	148:2).
6
In	the	New	Testament,	Paul	specifies	that	in	Christ	“all	things	were	created,	in
heaven	and	on	earth,	visible	
and	invisible,	
whether	thrones	or	dominions	or
principalities	or	authorities—all	things	were	created	through	him	and	for	him”
(Col.	1:16;	cf.	Ps.	148:2–5).	Here	the	creation	of	invisible	heavenly	beings	is
also	explicitly	affirmed.
3.	The	Direct	Creation	of	Adam	and	Eve.
	The	Bible	also	teaches	that	God
created	Adam	and	Eve	in	a	special,	personal	way.	“The	L
ORD
	God	formed
man	of	dust	from	the	ground,	and	breathed	into	his	nostrils	the	breath	of	life;
and	man	became	a	living	being”	(Gen.	2:7).	After	that,	God	created	Eve	from
Adam’s	body:	“So	the	L
ORD
	God	caused	a	deep	sleep	to	fall	upon	the	man,
and	while	he	slept	took	one	of	his	ribs	and	closed	up	its	place	with	flesh;	and
the	rib	which	the	L
ORD
	God	had	taken	from	the	man	he	made	into	a	woman
and	brought	her	to	the	man”	(Gen.	2:21–22).	God	apparently	let	Adam	know
something	of	what	had	happened,	for	Adam	said,
“This	at	last	is	bone	of	my	bones
and	flesh	of	my	flesh;
she	shall	be	called	Woman,
because	she	was	taken	out	of	Man.”	(Gen.	2:23)
As	we	shall	see	below,	Christians	differ	on	the	extent	to	which	evolutionary
developments	may	have	occurred	after	creation,	perhaps	(according	to	some)
leading	to	the	development	of	more	and	more	complex	organisms.	While
there	are	sincerely	held	differences	on	that	question	among	some	Christians
with	respect	to	the	plant	and	animal	kingdoms,	these	texts	are	so	explicit	that
it	would	be	very	difficult	for	someone	to	hold	to	the	complete	truthfulness	of
Scripture	and	still	hold	that	human	beings	are	the	result	of	a	long	evolutionary
process.	This	is	because	when	Scripture	says	that	the	Lord	“formed	man	of
dust	from	the	ground”	(Gen.	2:7),	it	does	not	seem	possible	to	understand	that
to	mean	that	he	did	it	over	a	process	that	took	millions	of	years	and	employed
the	random	development	of	thousands	of	increasingly	complex	organisms.
7
Even	more	impossible	to	reconcile	with	an	evolutionary	view	is	the	fact	that
this	narrative	clearly	portrays	Eve	as	having	no	female	parent:	she	was
created	directly	from	Adam’s	rib	while	Adam	slept	(Gen.	2:21).	But	on	a
purely	evolutionary	view,	this	would	not	be	possible,	for	even	the	very	first
female	“human	being”	would	have	been	descended	from	some	merely	human
creature	that	was	still	an	animal.	The	New	Testament	reaffirms	the	historicity
of	this	special	creation	of	Eve	from	Adam	when	Paul	says,	“For	man	was	not
made	from	woman,	but	
woman	from	man.	
Neither	was	man	created	for
woman,	but	woman	for	man”	(1	Cor.	11:8–9).
The	special	creation	of	Adam	and	Eve	shows	that,	though	we	may	be	like
animals	in	many	respects	in	our	physical	bodies,	nonetheless	we	are	very
different	from	animals.	We	are	created	“in	God’s	image,”	the	pinnacle	of
God’s	creation,	more	like	God	than	any	other	creature,	appointed	to	rule	over
the	rest	of	creation.	Even	the	brevity	of	the	Genesis	account	of	creation	places
a	wonderful	emphasis	on	the	importance	of	man	in	distinction	from	the	rest	of
the	universe.	It	thus	resists	modern	tendencies	to	see	man	as	meaningless
against	the	immensity	of	the	universe.	Derek	Kidner	notes	that	Scripture
stands
against	every	tendency	to	empty	human	history	of	meaning.	.	.	.	in
presenting	the	tremendous	acts	of	creation	as	a	mere	curtain-raiser	to
the	drama	that	slowly	unfolds	throughout	the	length	of	the	Bible.	The
prologue	is	over	in	a	page;	there	are	a	thousand	to	follow.
By	contrast,	Kidner	notes	that	the	modern	scientific	account	of	the	universe,
true	though	it	may	be,
overwhelms	us	with	statistics	that	reduce	our	apparent	significance	to
a	vanishing-point.	Not	the	prologue,	but	the	human	story	itself,	is	now
the	single	page	in	a	thousand,	and	the	whole	terrestrial	volume	is	lost
among	uncataloged	millions.
8
Scripture	gives	us	the	perspective	on	human	significance	that	God	intends	us
to	have.	(This	fact	will	be	discussed	in	more	detail	in	chapter	21,	below.)
4.	The	Creation	of	Time.
	One	other	aspect	of	God’s	creation	is	the	creation
of	time	(the	succession	of	moments	one	after	another).	This	idea	was
discussed	with	respect	to	God’s	attribute	of	eternity	in	chapter	11,
9
	and	we
need	only	summarize	it	here.	When	we	speak	of	God’s	existence	“before”	the
creation	of	the	world,	we	should	not	think	of	God	as	existing	in	an	unending
extension	of	time.	Rather,	God’s	eternity	means	that	he	has	a	different	kind	of
existence,	an	existence	without	the	passage	of	time,	a	kind	of	existence	that	is
difficult	for	us	even	to	imagine.	(See	Job	36:26;	Ps.	90:2,	4;	John	8:58;	2
Peter	3:8;	Rev.	1:8).	The	fact	that	God	created	time	reminds	us	of	his	lordship
over	it	and	our	obligation	to	use	it	for	his	glory.
5.	The	Work	of	the	Son	and	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in	Creation.
	God	the	Father
was	the	primary	agent	in	initiating	the	act	of	creation.	But	the	Son	and	the
Holy	Spirit	were	also	active.	The	Son	is	often	described	as	the	one	“through”
whom	creation	came	about.	“All	things	were	made	
through	
him,	and	without
him	was	not	anything	made	that	was	made”	(John	1:3).	Paul	says	there	is	“one
Lord,	Jesus	Christ,	
through	
whom	are	all	things	and	
through	
whom	we	exist”
(1	Cor.	8:6),	and,	“all	things	were	created	
through	
him	and	for	him”	(Col.
1:16).	We	read	also	that	the	Son	is	the	one	“through	whom”	God	“created	the
world”	(Heb.	1:2).	These	passages	give	a	consistent	picture	of	the	Son	as	the
active	agent	carrying	out	the	plans	and	directions	of	the	Father.
The	Holy	Spirit	was	also	at	work	in	creation.	He	is	generally	pictured	as
completing,	filling,	and	giving	life	to	God’s	creation.	In	Genesis	1:2,	“the
Spirit	of	God	was	moving	over	the	face	of	the	waters,”	indicating	a
preserving,	sustaining,	governing	function.	Job	says,	“The	spirit	of	God	has
made	me,	and	the	breath	of	the	Almighty	gives	me	life”	(Job	33:4).	In	a
number	of	Old	Testament	passages,	it	is	important	to	realize	that	the	same
Hebrew	word	(
rûach
)	can	mean,	in	different	contexts,	“spirit,”	or	“breath,”	or
“wind.”	But	in	many	cases	there	is	not	much	difference	in	meaning,	for	even
if	one	decided	to	translate	some	phrases	as	the	“breath	of	God”	or	even	the
“wind	of	God,”	it	would	still	seem	to	be	a	figurative	way	of	referring	to	the
activity	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in	creation.	So	the	psalmist,	in	speaking	of	the	great
variety	of	creatures	on	the	earth	and	in	the	sea,	says,	“When	you	send	forth
your	Spirit,	they	are	created”	(Ps.	104:30;	note	also,	on	the	Holy	Spirit’s
work,	Job	26:13;	Isa.	40:13;	1	Cor.	2:10).	However,	the	testimony	of	Scripture
to	the	specific	activity	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in	creation	is	scarce.	The	work	of	the
Holy	Spirit	is	brought	into	much	greater	prominence	in	connection	with	the
inspiring	of	the	authors	of	Scripture	and	the	applying	of	Christ’s	redemptive
work	to	the	people	of	God.
10
B.	Creation	Is	Distinct	From	God	Yet	Always	Dependent	on	God
The	teaching	of	Scripture	about	the	relationship	between	God	and	creation	is
unique	among	the	religions	of	the	world.	The	Bible	teaches	that	God	is
distinct	from	his	creation.	He	is	not	part	of	it,	for	he	has	made	it	and	rules
over	it.	The	term	often	used	to	say	that	God	is	much	greater	than	creation	is
the	word	
transcendent.	
Very	simply,	this	means	that	God	is	far	“above”	the
creation	in	the	sense	that	he	is	greater	than	the	creation	and	he	is	independent
of	it.
God	is	also	very	much	involved	in	creation,	for	it	is	continually	dependent	on
him	for	its	existence	and	its	functioning.	The	technical	term	used	to	speak	of
God’s	involvement	in	creation	is	the	word	
immanent,	
meaning	“remaining	in”
creation.	The	God	of	the	Bible	is	no	abstract	deity	removed	from,	and
uninterested	in	his	creation.	The	Bible	is	the	story	of	God’s	involvement	with
his	creation,	and	particularly	the	people	in	it.	Job	affirms	that	even	the
animals	and	plants	depend	on	God:	“In	his	hand	is	the	life	of	every	living
thing	and	the	breath	of	all	mankind”	(Job	12:10).	In	the	New	Testament,	Paul
affirms	that	God	“gives	to	all	men	life	and	breath	and	everything”	and	that	“in
him	we	live	and	move	and	have	our	being”	(Acts	17:25,	28).	Indeed,	in	Christ
“all	things	hold	together”	(Col.	1:17),	and	he	is	continually	“upholding	the
universe	by	his	word	of	power”	(Heb.	1:3).	God’s	transcendence	and
immanence	are	both	affirmed	in	a	single	verse	when	Paul	speaks	of	“one	God
and	Father	of	us	all,	who	is	above	all	and	through	all	and	in	all”	(Eph.	4:6).
The	fact	that	creation	is	distinct	from	God	yet	always	dependent	on	God,	that
God	is	far	above	creation	yet	always	involved	in	it	(in	brief,	that	God	is	both
transcendent	and	immanent),	may	be	represented	as	in	figure	15.1.
CREATION	IS	DISTINCT	FROM	GOD	YET	ALWAYS	DEPENDENT	ON	GOD	(GOD	IS	BOTH
TRANSCENDENT	AND	IMMANENT)
Figure	15.1
This	is	clearly	distinct	from	
materialism,	
which	is	the	most	common
philosophy	of	unbelievers	today,	and	which	denies	the	existence	of	God
altogether.	Materialism	would	say	that	the	material	universe	is	all	there	is.	It
may	be	represented	as	in	figure	15.2.
MATERIALISM
Figure	15.2
Christians	today	who	focus	almost	the	entire	effort	of	their	lives	on	earning
more	money	and	acquiring	more	possessions	become	“practical”	materialists
in	their	activity,	since	their	lives	would	be	not	much	different	if	they	did	not
believe	in	God	at	all.
The	scriptural	account	of	God’s	relation	to	his	creation	is	also	distinct	from
pantheism.	The	Greek	word	
pan	
means	“all”	or	“every,”	and	
pantheism	
is	the
idea	that	everything,	the	whole	universe,	is	God,	or	is	part	of	God.	This	can	be
pictured	as	in	figure	15.3.
PANTHEISM
Figure	15.3
Pantheism	denies	several	essential	aspects	of	God’s	character.	If	the	whole
universe	is	God,	then	God	has	no	distinct	personality.	God	is	no	longer
unchanging,	because	as	the	universe	changes,	God	also	changes.	Moreover,
God	is	no	longer	holy,	because	the	evil	in	the	universe	is	also	part	of	God.
Another	difficulty	is	that	ultimately	most	pantheistic	systems	(such	as
Buddhism	and	many	other	eastern	religions)	end	up	denying	the	importance
of	individual	human	personalities:	since	everything	is	God,	the	goal	of	an
individual	should	be	to	blend	in	with	the	universe	and	become	more	and	more
united	with	it,	thus	losing	his	or	her	individual	distinctiveness.	If	God	himself
(or	itself)	has	no	distinct	personal	identity	separate	from	the	universe,	then	we
should	certainly	not	strive	to	have	one	either.	Thus,	pantheism	destroys	not
only	the	personal	identity	of	God,	but	also,	ultimately,	of	human	beings	as
well.
Any	philosophy	that	sees	creation	as	an	“emanation”	out	of	God	(that	is,
something	that	comes	out	of	God	but	is	still	part	of	God	and	not	distinct	from
him)	would	be	similar	to	pantheism	in	most	or	all	of	the	ways	in	which
aspects	of	God’s	character	are	denied.
The	biblical	account	also	rules	out	
dualism.	
This	is	the	idea	that	both	God	and
the	material	universe	have	eternally	existed	side	by	side.	Thus,	there	are	two
ultimate	forces	in	the	universe,	God	and	matter.	This	may	be	represented	as	in
figure	15.4.
DUALISM
Figure	15.4
The	problem	with	dualism	is	that	it	indicates	an	eternal	conflict	between	God
and	the	evil	aspects	of	the	material	universe.	Will	God	ultimately	triumph
over	evil	in	the	universe?	We	cannot	be	sure,	because	both	God	and	evil	have
apparently	always	existed	side	by	side.	This	philosophy	would	deny	both
God’s	ultimate	lordship	over	creation	and	also	that	creation	came	about
because	of	God’s	will,	that	it	is	to	be	used	solely	for	his	purposes,	and	that	it
is	to	glorify	him.	This	viewpoint	would	also	deny	that	all	of	the	universe	was
created	inherently	good	(Gen.	1:31)	and	would	encourage	people	to	view
material	reality	as	somewhat	evil	in	itself,	in	contrast	with	a	genuine	biblical
account	of	a	creation	that	God	made	to	be	good	and	that	he	rules	over	for	his
purposes.
One	recent	example	of	dualism	in	modern	culture	is	the	series	of	
Star	Wars
movies,	which	postulate	the	existence	of	a	universal	“Force”	that	has	both	a
good	and	an	evil	side.	There	is	no	concept	of	one	holy	and	transcendent	God
who	rules	over	all	and	will	certainly	triumph	over	all.	When	non-Christians
today	begin	to	be	aware	of	a	spiritual	aspect	to	the	universe,	they	often
become	dualists,	merely	acknowledging	that	there	are	good	and	evil	aspects
to	the	supernatural	or	spiritual	world.	Most	“New	Age”	religion	is	dualistic.
Of	course,	Satan	is	delighted	to	have	people	think	that	there	is	an	evil	force	in
the	universe	that	is	perhaps	equal	to	God	himself.
The	Christian	view	of	creation	is	also	distinct	from	the	viewpoint	of	
deism.
Deism	is	the	view	that	God	is	not	now	directly	involved	in	the	creation.	It
may	be	represented	as	in	figure	15.5.
DEISM
Figure	15.5
Deism	generally	holds	that	God	created	the	universe	and	is	far	greater	than
the	universe	(God	is	“transcendent”).	Some	deists	also	agree	that	God	has
moral	standards	and	will	ultimately	hold	people	accountable	on	a	day	of
judgment.	But	they	deny	God’s	present	involvement	in	the	world,	thus	leaving
no	place	for	his	immanence	in	the	created	order.	Rather,	God	is	viewed	as	a
divine	clock	maker	who	wound	up	the	“clock”	of	creation	at	the	beginning
but	then	left	it	to	run	on	its	own.
While	deism	does	affirm	God’s	transcendence	in	some	ways,	it	denies	almost
the	entire	history	of	the	Bible,	which	is	the	history	of	God’s	active
involvement	in	the	world.	Many	“lukewarm”	or	nominal	Christians	today	are,
in	effect,	practical	deists,	since	they	live	lives	almost	totally	devoid	of	genuine
prayer,	worship,	fear	of	God,	or	moment-by-moment	trust	in	God	to	care	for
needs	that	arise.
C.	God	Created	the	Universe	to	Show	His	Glory
It	is	clear	that	God	created	his	people	for	his	own	glory,	for	he	speaks	of	his
sons	and	daughters	as	those	“whom	I	created	
for	my	glory,	
whom	I	formed
and	made”	(Isa.	43:7).	But	it	is	not	only	human	beings	that	God	created	for
this	purpose.	The	entire	creation	is	intended	to	show	God’s	glory.	Even	the
inanimate	creation,	the	stars	and	sun	and	moon	and	sky,	testify	to	God’s
greatness,	“The	heavens	are	telling	the	glory	of	God;	and	the	firmament
proclaims	his	handiwork.	Day	to	day	pours	forth	speech,	and	night	to	night
declares	knowledge”	(Ps.	19:1–2).	The	song	of	heavenly	worship	in
Revelation	4	connects	God’s	creation	of	all	things	with	the	fact	that	he	is
worthy	to	receive	glory	from	them:
“You	are	worthy,	our	Lord	and	God,
to	receive	glory	and	honor	and	power,
for	you	have	created	all	things,
and	by	your	will	they	existed	and	were	created.”	(Rev.	4:11)
What	does	creation	show	about	God?	Primarily	it	shows	his	great	power	and
wisdom,	far	above	anything	that	could	be	imagined	by	any	creature.
11
	“It	is	he
who	made	the	earth	by	his	power,	who	established	the	world	by	his	wisdom,
and	by	his	understanding	stretched	out	the	heavens”	(Jer.	10:12).	In	contrast
to	ignorant	men	and	the	“worthless”	idols	they	make,	Jeremiah	says,	“Not	like
these	is	he	who	is	the	portion	of	Jacob,	for	he	is	the	one	who	formed	all	things
.	.	.	the	L
ORD
	of	hosts	is	his	name”	(Jer.	10:16).	One	glance	at	the	sun	or	the
stars	convinces	us	of	God’s	infinite	power.	And	even	a	brief	inspection	of	any
leaf	on	a	tree,	or	of	the	wonder	of	the	human	hand,	or	of	any	one	living	cell,
convinces	us	of	God’s	great	wisdom.	Who	could	make	all	of	this?	Who	could
make	it	out	of	nothing?	Who	could	sustain	it	day	after	day	for	endless	years?
Such	infinite	power,	such	intricate	skill,	is	completely	beyond	our
comprehension.	When	we	meditate	on	it,	we	give	glory	to	God.
When	we	affirm	that	God	created	the	universe	to	show	his	glory,	it	is
important	that	we	realize	that	he	did	not	need	to	create	it.	We	should	not	think
that	God	needed	more	glory	than	he	had	within	the	Trinity	for	all	eternity,	or
that	he	was	somehow	incomplete	without	the	glory	that	he	would	receive
from	the	created	universe.	This	would	be	to	deny	God’s	independence	and
imply	that	God	needed	the	universe	in	order	to	be	fully	God.
12
	Rather,	we
must	affirm	that	the	creation	of	the	universe	was	a	
totally	free	act	of	God.	
It
was	not	a	necessary	act	but	something	that	God	chose	to	do.	“You	created	all
things,	and	
by	your	will	
they	existed	and	were	created”	(Rev.	4:11).	God
desired	to	create	the	universe	to	demonstrate	his	excellence.	The	creation
shows	his	great	wisdom	and	power,	and	ultimately	it	shows	all	of	his	other
attributes	as	well.
13
	It	seems	that	God	created	the	universe,	then,	to	take
delight	in	his	creation,	for	as	creation	shows	forth	various	aspects	of	God’s
character,	to	that	extent	he	takes	delight	in	it.
This	explains	why	we	take	spontaneous	delight	in	all	sorts	of	creative
activities	ourselves.	People	with	artistic	or	musical	or	literary	skills	enjoy
creating	things	and	seeing,	hearing,	or	pondering	their	creative	work.	God	has
so	made	us	to	enjoy	imitating,	in	a	creaturely	way,	his	creative	activity.	And
one	of	the	amazing	aspects	of	humanity—in	distinction	from	the	rest	of
creation—is	our	ability	to	create	new	things.	This	also	explains	why	we	take
delight	in	other	kinds	of	“creative”	activity:	many	people	enjoy	cooking,	or
decorating	their	home,	or	working	with	wood	or	other	materials,	or	producing
scientific	inventions,	or	devising	new	solutions	to	problems	in	industrial
production.	Even	children	enjoy	coloring	pictures	or	building	houses	out	of
blocks.	In	all	of	these	activities	we	reflect	in	small	measure	the	creative
activity	of	God,	and	we	should	delight	in	it	and	thank	him	for	it.
D.	The	Universe	God	Created	Was	“Very	Good”
This	point	follows	from	the	previous	point.	If	God	created	the	universe	to
show	his	glory,	then	we	would	expect	that	the	universe	would	fulfill	the
purpose	for	which	he	created	it.	In	fact,	when	God	finished	his	work	of
creation,	he	did	take	delight	in	it.	At	the	end	of	each	stage	of	creation	God
saw	that	what	he	had	done	was	“good”	(Gen.	1:4,	10,	12,	18,	21,	25).	Then	at
the	end	of	the	six	days	of	creation,	“God	saw	everything	that	he	had	made,
and	behold,	it	was	very	good”	(Gen.	1:31).	God	delighted	in	the	creation	that
he	had	made,	just	as	he	had	purposed	to	do.
Even	though	there	is	now	sin	in	the	world,	the	material	creation	is	still	good
in	God’s	sight	and	should	be	seen	as	“good”	by	us	as	well.	This	knowledge
will	free	of	us	from	a	false	asceticism	that	sees	the	use	and	enjoyment	of	the
material	creation	as	wrong.	Paul	says	that	those	who	“forbid	marriage,”	and
“enjoin	abstinence	from	foods	which	God	created	to	be	received	with
thanksgiving	by	those	who	believe	and	know	the	truth”	(1	Tim.	4:1–3)	are
giving	heed	to	“doctrines	of	demons.”	The	apostle	takes	such	a	firm	line
because	he	understands	that	“everything	created	by	God	is	good,	and	nothing
is	to	be	rejected	if	it	is	received	with	thanksgiving;	for	then	it	is	consecrated
by	the	word	of	God	and	prayer”	(1	Tim.	4:4–5).	Paul’s	mention	of	“the	word
of	God”	that	consecrates	or	“sanctifies”	the	foods	and	other	things	we	enjoy
in	the	material	creation	is	probably	a	reference	to	the	blessing	of	God	spoken
in	Genesis	1:31,	“It	was	very	good.”
Though	the	created	order	can	be	used	in	sinful	or	selfish	ways	and	can	turn
our	affections	away	from	God,	nonetheless	we	must	not	let	the	danger	of	the
abuse	of	God’s	creation	keep	us	from	a	positive,	thankful,	joyful	use	of	it	for
our	own	enjoyment	and	for	the	good	of	his	kingdom.	Shortly	after	Paul	has
warned	against	the	desire	to	be	rich	and	the	“love	of	money”	(1	Tim.	6:9–10),
he	affirms	that	it	is	God	himself	“who	richly	furnishes	us	with	everything	to
enjoy”	(1	Tim.	6:17).	This	fact	gives	warrant	for	Christians	to	encourage
proper	industrial	and	technological	development	(together	with	care	for	the
environment),	and	joyful	and	thankful	use	of	all	the	products	of	the	abundant
earth	that	God	has	created—both	by	ourselves	and	by	those	with	whom	we
are	to	share	generously	of	our	possessions	(note	1	Tim.	6:18).	Yet	in	all	of	this
we	are	to	remember	that	material	possessions	are	only	temporary,	not	eternal.
We	are	to	set	our	hopes	on	God	(see	Ps.	62:10;	1	Tim.	6:17)	and	on	receiving
a	kingdom	that	cannot	be	shaken	(Col.	3:1–4;	Heb.	12:28;	1	Peter	1:4).
E.	The	Relationship	Between	Scripture	and	the	Findings	
of	Modern	Science
At	various	times	in	history,	Christians	have	found	themselves	dissenting	from
the	accepted	findings	of	contemporary	science.	In	the	vast	majority	of	cases,
sincere	Christian	faith	and	strong	trust	in	the	Bible	have	led	scientists	to	the
discovery	of	new	facts	about	God’s	universe,	and	these	discoveries	have
changed	scientific	opinion	for	all	of	subsequent	history.	The	lives	of	Isaac
Newton,	Galileo	Galilei,	Johannes	Kepler,	Blaise	Pascal,	Robert	Boyle,
Michael	Faraday,	James	Clerk	Maxwell,	and	many	others	are	examples	of
this.
14
On	the	other	hand,	there	have	been	times	when	accepted	scientific	opinion	has
been	in	conflict	with	people’s	understanding	of	what	the	Bible	said.	For
example,	when	the	Italian	astronomer	Galileo	(1564–1642)	began	to	teach
that	the	earth	was	not	the	center	of	the	universe	but	that	the	earth	and	other
planets	revolved	around	the	sun	(thus	following	the	theories	of	the	Polish
astronomer	Copernicus	[1472–1543]),	he	was	criticized,	and	eventually	his
writings	were	condemned	by	the	Roman	Catholic	Church.	This	was	because
many	people	thought	that	the	Bible	taught	that	the	sun	revolved	about	the
earth.	In	fact,	the	Bible	does	not	teach	that	at	all,	but	it	was	Copernican
astronomy	that	made	people	look	again	at	Scripture	to	see	if	it	really	taught
what	they	thought	it	taught.	In	fact,	descriptions	of	the	sun	rising	and	setting
(Eccl.	1:5;	et	al.)	merely	portray	events	as	they	appear	from	the	perspective	of
the	human	observer,	and,	from	that	perspective,	they	give	an	accurate
description.	But	they	imply	nothing	about	the	relative	motion	of	the	earth	and
the	sun,	and	nowhere	does	the	Bible	explain	what	makes	the	sun	go	“down”
in	the	viewpoint	of	a	human	observer.	Scripture	says	nothing	at	all	about
whether	the	earth	or	the	sun	or	some	other	body	is	the	“center”	of	the	universe
or	the	solar	system—that	is	not	a	question	Scripture	addresses.	Yet	the	lesson
of	Galileo,	who	was	forced	to	recant	his	teachings	and	who	had	to	live	under
house	arrest	for	the	last	few	years	of	his	life,	should	remind	us	that	careful
observation	of	the	natural	world	can	cause	us	to	go	back	to	Scripture	and
reexamine	whether	Scripture	actually	teaches	what	we	think	it	teaches.
Sometimes,	on	closer	examination	of	the	text,	we	may	find	that	our	previous
interpretations	were	incorrect.
Scientific	investigation	has	helped	Christians	reevaluate	what	earlier
generations	thought	about	the	age	of	the	earth,	for	example,	so	that	no
evangelical	scholar	today	would	hold	that	the	world	was	created	in	4004	B.C.
Yet	that	date	was	once	widely	believed	to	be	the	date	of	the	creation	because
of	the	writings	of	Irish	Archbishop	James	Ussher	(1581–1656),	one	of	the
great	scholars	of	his	day,	who	carefully	added	together	the	dates	in	the
genealogies	of	the	Bible	to	find	when	Adam	was	created.	Today	it	is	widely
acknowledged	that	the	Bible	does	not	tell	us	the	precise	date	of	the	creation	of
the	earth	or	of	the	human	race	(see	below).
On	the	other	hand,	many	people	in	the	Christian	community	have	steadfastly
refused	to	agree	with	the	dominant	opinion	of	scientists	today	regarding
evolution.	On	this	matter,	thousands	of	Christians	have	examined	Scripture
again	and	again	in	great	detail,	and	many	have	concluded	that	Scripture	is	not
silent	on	the	process	by	which	living	organisms	came	into	being.	Moreover,
careful	observation	of	the	facts	of	the	created	universe	has	produced
widespread	disagreement	regarding	theories	of	evolution	(both	from	scientists
who	are	Christians	and	from	a	number	of	non-Christian	scientists	as	well).
15
So	on	both	biblical	and	scientific	grounds,	theories	of	evolution	have	been
challenged	by	Christians.
We	should	also	remember	that	the	question	of	the	creation	of	the	universe	is
unlike	many	other	scientific	questions	because	creation	is	not	something	that
can	be	repeated	in	a	laboratory	experiment,	nor	were	there	any	human
observers	of	it.	Therefore	pronouncements	by	scientists	about	creation	and	the
early	history	of	the	earth	are	at	best	educated	speculation.	If	we	are
convinced,	however,	that	the	only	observer	of	these	events	(God	himself)	has
told	us	about	them	in	the	reliable	words	of	the	Bible,	then	we	should	pay
careful	attention	to	the	biblical	account.
In	the	following	section,	we	have	listed	some	principles	by	which	the
relationship	between	creation	and	the	findings	of	modern	science	can	be
approached.
1.
	When	All	the	Facts	Are	Rightly	Understood,	There	Will	Be	“No	Final
Conflict”	Between	Scripture	and	Natural	Science.
	The	phrase	“no	final
conflict”	is	taken	from	a	very	helpful	book	by	Francis	Schaeffer,	
No	Final
Conflict.
16
	Regarding	questions	about	the	creation	of	the	universe,	Schaeffer
lists	several	areas	where,	in	his	judgment,	there	is	room	for	disagreement
among	Christians	who	believe	in	the	total	truthfulness	of	Scripture:
1
.	
There	is	a	possibility	that	God	created	a	“grown-up”	universe.
2
.	
There	is	a	possibility	of	a	break	between	Genesis	1:1	and	1:2	or	between
1:2	and	1:3.
3
.	
There	is	a	possibility	of	a	long	day	in	Genesis	1.
4
.	
There	is	a	possibility	that	the	flood	affected	the	geological	data.
5
.	
The	use	of	the	word	“kinds”	in	Genesis	1	may	be	quite	broad.
6
.	
There	is	a	possibility	of	the	death	of	animals	before	the	fall.
7
.	
Where	the	Hebrew	word	
bārā’	
is	not	used	there	is	the	possibility	of
sequence	from	previously	existing	things.
17
Schaeffer	makes	clear	that	he	is	not	saying	that	any	of	those	positions	is	his
own;	only	that	they	are	theoretically	possible.	Schaeffer’s	major	point	is	that
in	both	our	understanding	of	the	natural	world	and	our	understanding	of
Scripture,	our	knowledge	is	not	perfect.	But	we	can	approach	both	scientific
and	biblical	study	with	the	confidence	that	when	all	the	facts	are	correctly
understood,	and	when	we	have	understood	Scripture	rightly,	our	findings	will
never	be	in	conflict	with	each	other:	there	will	be	“no	final	conflict.”	This	is
because	God,	who	speaks	in	Scripture,	knows	all	facts,	and	he	has	not	spoken
in	a	way	that	would	contradict	any	true	fact	in	the	universe.
This	is	a	very	helpful	perspective	with	which	the	Christian	should	begin	any
study	of	creation	and	modern	science.	We	should	not	fear	to	investigate
scientifically	the	facts	of	the	created	world	but	should	do	so	eagerly	and	with
complete	honesty,	confident	that	when	facts	are	rightly	understood,	they	will
always	turn	out	to	be	consistent	with	God’s	inerrant	words	in	Scripture.
Similarly,	we	should	approach	the	study	of	Scripture	eagerly	and	with
confidence	that,	when	rightly	understood,	Scripture	will	never	contradict	facts
in	the	natural	world.
18
Someone	may	object	that	this	whole	discussion	is	inappropriate,	for	the	Bible
is	given	to	us	to	teach	religious	and	ethical	matters;	it	is	not	intended	to	teach
“science.”	However,	as	we	noted	in	chapter	5	above,	Scripture	itself	places	no
such	restriction	on	the	subjects	to	which	it	can	speak.	Although	the	Bible	is	of
course	not	a	“textbook”	of	science	in	a	formal	sense,	it	does	nonetheless
contain	many	affirmations	about	the	natural	world—its	origin,	its	purposes,
its	ultimate	destiny—and	many	statements	about	how	it	functions	from	day	to
day.	If	we	take	seriously	the	idea	that	it	is	God	himself	(as	well	as	the	human
authors)	who	speaks	all	the	words	of	Scripture,	then	we	must	take	these
statements	seriously	and	believe	them	as	well.	Indeed,	Scripture	says	that	our
understanding	of	some	“scientific”	facts	is	a	matter	of	our	faith!	Hebrews	11:3
tells	us,	“
By	faith	
we	understand	that	the	worlds	were	prepared	by	the	word	of
God,	so	that	what	is	seen	was	not	made	out	of	things	which	are	visible”
(NASB).
2.	Some	Theories	About	Creation	Seem	Clearly	Inconsistent	With	the
Teachings	of	Scripture.
	In	this	section	we	will	examine	three	types	of
explanation	of	the	origin	of	the	universe	that	seem	clearly	inconsistent	with
Scripture.
a.	Secular	Theories:
	For	the	sake	of	completeness	we	mention	here	only
briefly	that	any	purely	secular	theories	of	the	origin	of	the	universe	would	be
unacceptable	for	those	who	believe	in	Scripture.	A	“secular”	theory	is	any
theory	of	the	origin	of	the	universe	that	does	not	see	an	infinite-personal	God
as	responsible	for	creating	the	universe	by	intelligent	design.	Thus,	the	“big
bang”	theory	(in	a	secular	form	in	which	God	is	excluded),	or	any	theories
that	hold	that	matter	has	always	existed,	would	be	inconsistent	with	the
teaching	of	Scripture	that	God	created	the	universe	out	of	nothing,	and	that	he
did	so	for	his	own	glory.	(When	Darwinian	evolution	is	thought	of	in	a	totally
materialistic	sense,	as	it	most	often	is,	it	would	belong	in	this	category	also.)
19
b.	Theistic	Evolution:
	Ever	since	the	publication	of	Charles	Darwin’s	book
Origin	of	Species	by	Means	of	Natural	Selection	
(1859),	some	Christians	have
proposed	that	living	organisms	came	about	by	the	process	of	evolution	that
Darwin	proposed,	but	that	God	guided	that	process	so	that	the	result	was	just
what	he	wanted	it	to	be.	This	view	is	called	
theistic	evolution	
because	it
advocates	belief	in	God	(it	is	“theistic”)	and	in	evolution	too.	Many	who	hold
to	theistic	evolution	would	propose	that	God	intervened	in	the	process	at
some	crucial	points,	usually	(1)	the	creation	of	matter	at	the	beginning,	(2)	the
creation	of	the	simplest	life	form,	and	(3)	the	creation	of	man.	But,	with	the
possible	exception	of	those	points	of	intervention,	theistic	evolutionists	hold
that	evolution	proceeded	in	the	ways	now	discovered	by	natural	scientists,
and	that	it	was	the	process	that	God	decided	to	use	in	allowing	all	of	the	other
forms	of	life	on	earth	to	develop.	They	believe	that	the	random	mutation	of
living	things	led	to	the	evolution	of	higher	life	forms	through	the	fact	that
those	that	had	an	“adaptive	advantage”	(a	mutation	that	allowed	them	to	be
better	fitted	to	survive	in	their	environment)	lived	when	others	did	not.
Theistic	evolutionists	are	quite	prepared	to	change	their	views	of	the	way
evolution	came	about,	because,	according	to	their	standpoint,	the	Bible	does
not	specify	how	it	happened.	It	is	therefore	up	to	us	to	discover	this	through
ordinary	scientific	investigation.	They	would	argue	that	as	we	learn	more	and
more	about	the	way	in	which	evolution	came	about,	we	are	simply	learning
more	and	more	about	the	process	that	God	used	to	bring	about	the
development	of	life	forms.
The	objections	to	theistic	evolution	are	as	follows:
1.	The	clear	teaching	of	Scripture	that	there	is	purposefulness	in	God’s	work
of	creation	seems	incompatible	with	the	randomness	demanded	by
evolutionary	theory.	When	Scripture	reports	that	God	said,	“Let	the	earth
bring	forth	living	creatures	according	to	their	kinds:	cattle	and	creeping	things
and	beasts	of	the	earth	according	to	their	kinds”	(Gen.	1:24),	it	pictures	God
as	doing	things	intentionally	and	with	a	purpose	for	each	thing	he	does.	But
this	is	the	opposite	of	allowing	mutations	to	proceed	entirely	
randomly,	
with
no	purpose	for	the	millions	of	mutations	that	would	have	to	come	about,
under	evolutionary	theory,	before	a	new	species	could	emerge.
The	fundamental	difference	between	a	biblical	view	of	creation	and	theistic
evolution	lies	here:	the	driving	force	that	brings	about	change	and	the
development	of	new	species	in	all	evolutionary	schemes	is	
randomness.
Without	the	random	mutation	of	organisms	you	do	not	have	evolution	in	the
modern	scientific	sense	at	all.	Random	mutation	is	the	underlying	force	that
brings	about	eventual	development	from	the	simplest	to	the	most	complex	life
forms.	But	the	driving	force	in	the	development	of	new	organisms	according
to	Scripture	is	God’s	
intelligent	design.	
God	created	“the	great	creatures	of	the
sea	and	every	living	and	moving	thing	with	which	the	water	teems,	according
to	their	kinds,	and	every	winged	bird	according	to	its	kind”	(Gen.	1:21	NIV).
“God	made	the	wild	animals	according	to	their	kinds,	the	livestock	according
to	their	kinds,	and	all	the	creatures	that	move	along	the	ground	according	to
their	kinds.	And	God	saw	that	it	was	good”	(Gen.	1:25	NIV).	These
statements	seem	inconsistent	with	the	idea	of	God	creating	or	directing	or
observing	millions	of	random	mutations,	none	of	which	were	“very	good”	in
the	way	he	intended,	none	of	which	really	were	the	kinds	of	plants	or	animals
he	wanted	to	have	on	the	earth.	Instead	of	the	straightforward	biblical	account
of	God’s	creation,	the	theistic	evolution	view	has	to	understand	events	to	have
occurred	something	like	this:
And	God	said,	“Let	the	earth	bring	forth	living	creatures	according	to
their	kinds.”	And	after	three	hundred	eighty-seven	million	four
hundred	ninety-two	thousand	eight	hundred	seventy-one	attempts,
God	finally	made	a	mouse	that	worked.
That	may	seem	a	strange	explanation,	but	it	is	precisely	what	the	theistic
evolutionist	must	postulate	for	each	of	the	hundreds	of	thousands	of	different
kinds	of	plants	and	animals	on	the	earth:	they	all	developed	through	a	process
of	random	mutation	over	millions	of	years,	gradually	increasing	in	complexity
as	occasional	mutations	turned	out	to	be	advantageous	to	the	creature.
A	theistic	evolutionist	may	object	that	God	intervened	in	the	process	and
guided	it	at	many	points	in	the	direction	he	wanted	it	to	go.	But	once	this	is
allowed	then	there	is	purpose	and	intelligent	design	in	the	process—we	no
longer	have	evolution	at	all,	because	there	is	no	longer	random	mutation	(at
the	points	of	divine	interaction).	No	secular	evolutionist	would	accept	such
intervention	by	an	intelligent,	purposeful	Creator.	But	once	a	Christian	agrees
to	some	active,	purposeful	design	by	God,	then	there	is	no	longer	any	need	for
randomness	or	any	development	emerging	from	random	mutation.	Thus	we
may	as	well	have	God	immediately	creating	each	distinct	creature	without
thousands	of	attempts	that	fail.
2.	Scripture	pictures	God’s	creative	word	as	bringing	immediate	response.
When	the	Bible	talks	about	God’s	creative	word	it	emphasizes	the	power	of
his	word	and	its	ability	to	accomplish	his	purpose.
By	the	word	of	the	L
ORD
	the	heavens	were	made,
and	all	their	host	by	the	breath	of	his	mouth.
.	.	.	For	he	spoke,	and	it	came	to	be;
he	commanded,	and	it	stood	forth.	(Ps.	33:6,	9)
This	kind	of	statement	seems	incompatible	with	the	idea	that	God	spoke	and
after	millions	of	years	and	millions	of	random	mutations	in	living	things	his
power	brought	about	the	result	that	he	had	called	for.	Rather,	as	soon	as	God
says,	“Let	the	earth	put	forth	vegetation,”	the	very	next	sentence	tells	us,
“And	it	was	so”	(Gen.	1:11).
3.	When	Scripture	tells	us	that	God	made	plants	and	animals	to	reproduce
“according	to	their	kinds”	
(Gen.	1:11,	24),	it	suggests	that	God	created	many
different	types	of	plants	and	animals	and	that,	though	there	would	be	some
differentiation	among	them	(note	many	different	sizes,	races,	and	personal
characteristics	among	human	beings!),	nonetheless	there	would	be	some
narrow	limits	to	the	kind	of	change	that	could	come	about	through	genetic
mutations.
20
4.	God’s	present	active	role	in	creating	or	forming	every	living	thing	that	now
comes	into	being	is	hard	to	reconcile	with	the	distant	“hands	off	”	kind	of
oversight	of	evolution	that	is	proposed	by	theistic	evolution.	David	is	able	to
confess,	“You	formed	my	inward	parts,	you	knit	me	together	in	my	mother’s
womb”	(Ps.	139:13).	And	God	said	to	Moses,	“Who	has	made	man’s	mouth?
Who	makes	him	dumb,	or	deaf,	or	seeing,	or	blind?	Is	it	not	I,	the	L
ORD
?”
(Ex.	4:11).	God	makes	the	grass	grow	(Ps.	104:14;	Matt.	6:30)	and	feeds	the
birds	(Matt.	6:26)	and	the	other	creatures	of	the	forest	(Ps.	104:21,	27–30).	If
God	is	so	involved	in	causing	the	growth	and	development	of	every	step	of
every	living	thing	even	now,	does	it	seem	consistent	with	Scripture	to	say	that
these	life	forms	were	originally	brought	about	by	an	evolutionary	process
directed	by	random	mutation	rather	than	by	God’s	direct,	purposeful	creation,
and	that	only	after	they	had	been	created	did	he	begin	his	active	involvement
in	directing	them	each	moment?
5.	The	special	creation	of	Adam,	and	Eve	from	him,	is	a	strong	reason	to
break	with	theistic	evolution.	Those	theistic	evolutionists	who	argue	for	a
special	creation	of	Adam	and	Eve	because	of	the	statements	in	Genesis	1–2
have	really	broken	with	evolutionary	theory	at	the	point	that	is	of	most
concern	to	human	beings	anyway.	But	if,	on	the	basis	of	Scripture,	we	insist
upon	God’s	special	intervention	at	the	point	of	the	creation	of	Adam	and	Eve,
then	what	is	to	prevent	our	allowing	that	God	intervened,	in	a	similar	way,	in
the	creation	of	living	organisms?
We	must	realize	that	the	special	creation	of	Adam	and	Eve	as	recorded	in
Scripture	shows	them	to	be	far	different	from	the	nearly	animal,	just	barely
human	creatures	that	evolutionists	would	say	were	the	first	humans,	creatures
who	descended	from	ancestors	that	were	highly	developed	nonhuman	apelike
creatures.	Scripture	pictures	the	first	man	and	woman,	Adam	and	Eve,	as
possessing	highly	developed	linguistic,	moral,	and	spiritual	abilities	from	the
moment	they	were	created.	They	can	talk	with	each	other.	They	can	even	talk
with	God.	They	are	very	different	from	the	nearly	animal	first	humans,
descended	from	nonhuman	apelike	creatures,	of	evolutionary	theory.
Some	may	object	that	Genesis	1–2	does	not	intend	to	portray	Adam	and	Eve
as	literal	individuals,	but	(a)	the	historical	narrative	in	Genesis	continues
without	a	break	into	the	obviously	historical	material	about	Abraham	(Gen.
12),	showing	that	the	author	intended	the	entire	section	to	be	historical,
21
	and
(b)	in	Romans	5:12–21	and	1	Corinthians	15:21–22,	45–49,	Paul	affirms	the
existence	of	the	“one	man”	Adam	through	whom	sin	came	into	the	world,	and
bases	his	discussion	of	Christ’s	representative	work	of	earning	salvation	on
the	previous	historical	pattern	of	Adam	being	a	representative	for	mankind	as
well.	Moreover,	the	New	Testament	elsewhere	clearly	understands	Adam	and
Eve	to	be	historical	figures	(cf.	Luke	3:38;	Acts	17:26;	1	Cor.	11:8–9;	2	Cor.
11:3;	1	Tim.	2:13–14).	The	New	Testament	also	assumes	the	historicity	of	the
sons	of	Adam	and	Eve,	Cain	(Heb.	11:4;	1	John	3:12;	Jude	11)	and	Abel
(Matt.	23:35;	Luke	11:51;	Heb.	11:4;	12:24).
6.	There	are	many	scientific	problems	with	evolutionary	theory	(see	the
following	section).	The	increasing	number	of	questions	about	the	validity	of
the	theory	of	evolution	being	raised	even	by	non-Christians	in	various
scientific	disciplines	indicates	that	anyone	who	claims	to	be	forced	to	believe
in	evolution	because	the	“scientific	facts”	leave	no	other	option	has	simply
not	considered	all	the	evidence	on	the	other	side.	The	scientific	data	do	not
force	one	to	accept	evolution,	and	if	the	scriptural	record	argues	convincingly
against	it	as	well,	it	does	not	seem	to	be	a	valid	theory	for	a	Christian	to
adopt.
It	seems	most	appropriate	to	conclude	in	the	words	of	geologist	Davis	A.
Young,	“The	position	of	theistic	evolutionism	as	expressed	by	some	of	its
proponents	is	not	a	consistently	Christian	position.	It	is	not	a	truly	biblical
position,	for	it	is	based	in	part	on	principles	that	are	imported	into
Christianity.”
22
	According	to	Louis	Berkhof	“theistic	evolution	is	really	a
child	of	embarrassment,	which	calls	God	in	at	periodic	intervals	to	help	nature
over	the	chasms	that	yawn	at	her	feet.	It	is	neither	the	biblical	doctrine	of
creation,	nor	a	consistent	theory	of	evolution.”
23
c.	Notes	on	the	Darwinian	Theory	of	Evolution:
	The	word	
evolution	
can	be
used	in	different	ways.	Sometimes	it	is	used	to	refer	to	“micro-evolution”—
small	developments	within	one	species,	so	that	we	see	flies	or	mosquitoes
becoming	immune	to	insecticides,	or	human	beings	growing	taller,	or
different	colors	and	varieties	of	roses	being	developed.	Innumerable	examples
of	such	“micro-evolution”	are	evident	today,	and	no	one	denies	that	they
exist.
24
	But	that	is	not	the	sense	in	which	the	word	
evolution	
is	usually	used
when	discussing	theories	of	creation	and	evolution.
The	term	
evolution	
is	more	commonly	used	to	refer	to	“macro-evolution”—
that	is,	the	“general	theory	of	evolution”	or	the	view	that	“nonliving	substance
gave	rise	to	the	first	living	material,	which	subsequently	reproduced	and
diversified	to	produce	all	extinct	and	extant	organisms.”
25
	In	this	chapter,
when	we	use	the	word	
evolution	
it	is	used	to	refer	to	macro-evolution	or	the
general	theory	of	evolution.
(1)	Current	Challenges	to	Evolution:
	Since	Charles	Darwin	first	published
his	
Origin	of	Species	by	Means	of	Natural	Selection	
in	1859,	there	have	been
challenges	to	his	theory	by	Christians	and	non-Christians	alike.	Current	neo-
Darwinian	theory	is	still	foundationally	similar	to	Darwin’s	original	position,
but	with	refinements	and	modifications	due	to	over	a	hundred	years	of
research.	In	modern	Darwinian	evolutionary	theory,	the	history	of	the
development	of	life	began	when	a	mix	of	chemicals	present	on	the	earth
spontaneously	produced	a	very	simple,	probably	one-celled	life	form.	This
living	cell	reproduced	itself,	and	eventually	there	were	some	mutations	or
differences	in	the	new	cells	produced.	These	mutations	led	to	the	development
of	more	complex	life	forms.	A	hostile	environment	meant	that	many	of	them
would	perish,	but	those	that	were	better	suited	to	their	environment	would
survive	and	multiply.	Thus,	nature	exercised	a	process	of	“natural	selection”
in	which	the	differing	organisms	most	fitted	to	the	environment	survived.
More	and	more	mutations	eventually	developed	into	more	and	more	varieties
of	living	things,	so	that	from	the	very	simplest	organism	all	the	complex	life
forms	on	earth	eventually	developed	through	this	process	of	mutation	and
natural	selection.
The	most	recent,	and	perhaps	most	devastating,	critique	of	current	Darwinian
theory	comes	from	Philip	E.	Johnson,	a	law	professor	who	specializes	in
analyzing	the	logic	of	arguments.	In	his	book	
Darwin	on	Trial,
26
	he	quotes
extensively	from	current	evolutionary	theorists	to	demonstrate	that:
1.	After	more	than	one	hundred	years	of	experimental	breeding	of	various
kinds	of	animals	and	plants,	the	amount	of	variation	that	can	be	produced
(even	with	intentional,	not	random,	breeding)	is	extremely	limited,	due	to	the
limited	range	of	genetic	variation	in	each	type	of	living	thing:	dogs	who	are
selectively	bred	for	generations	are	still	dogs,	fruit	flies	are	still	fruit	flies,	etc.
And	when	allowed	to	return	to	the	wild	state,	“the	most	highly	specialized
breeds	quickly	perish	and	the	survivors	revert	to	the	original	wild	type.”	He
concludes	that	“natural	selection,”	claimed	by	Darwinists	to	account	for	the
survival	of	new	organisms,	is	really	a	conservative	force	that	works	to
preserve	the	genetic	fitness	of	a	population,	not	to	change	its	characteristics.
27
2.	In	current	evolutionary	arguments,	the	idea	of	“survival	of	the	fittest”	(or
“natural	selection”)	is	popularly	thought	to	mean	that	those	animals	whose
different	characteristics	give	them	a	comparative	advantage	will	survive,	and
others	will	die	out.	But	in	actual	practice	almost	any	characteristic	can	be
argued	to	be	either	an	advantage	or	a	disadvantage.
28
	So	how	do	Darwinists
know	which	characteristics	have	given	an	advantage	in	survival	to	certain
animals?	By	observing	which	kinds	survive.	But	this	means	that	natural
selection	is	often	at	bottom	not	a	powerful	new	insight	into	what	happens	in
nature	but	simply	a	tautology	(a	meaningless	repetition	of	the	same	idea),
since	it	boils	down	to	saying	that	the	“fittest”	animals	are	those	who	have	the
most	offspring.	In	this	sense,	natural	selection	means:	animals	who	have	the
most	offspring	have	the	most	offspring.
29
	But	this	proves	nothing	about	any
supposed	mutations	to	produce	different,	more	fit	offspring	over	the	course	of
many	generations.
3.	The	vast	and	complex	mutations	required	to	produce	complex	organs	such
as	an	eye	or	a	bird’s	wing	(or	hundreds	of	other	organs)	could	not	have
occurred	in	tiny	mutations	accumulating	over	thousands	of	generations,
because	the	individual	parts	of	the	organ	are	useless	(and	give	no
“advantage”)	unless	the	entire	organ	is	functioning.	But	the	mathematical
probability	of	such	random	mutations	happening	together	in	one	generation	is
effectively	zero.	Darwinists	are	left	saying	that	it	must	have	happened	because
it	happened.
30
An	amusing	example	of	the	need	for	all	the	parts	of	a	complex	organic	system
to	be	put	in	place	at	once	is	pointed	out	by	Robert	Kofahl	and	Kelly	Segraves
in	their	book,	
The	Creation	Explanation:	A	Scientific	Alternative	to
Evolution.
31
	They	describe	the	“Bombardier	beetle,”	which	repels	enemies	by
firing	a	hot	charge	of	chemicals	from	two	swivel	tubes	in	its	tail.	The
chemicals	fired	by	this	beetle	will	spontaneously	explode	when	mixed
together	in	a	laboratory,	but	apparently	the	beetle	has	an	inhibitor	substance
that	blocks	the	explosive	reaction	until	the	beetle	squirts	some	of	the	liquid
into	its	“combustion	chambers,”	where	an	enzyme	is	added	to	catalyze	the
reaction.	An	explosion	takes	place	and	the	chemical	repellent	is	fired	at	a
temperature	of	212°F	at	the	beetle’s	enemies.	Kofahl	and	Segraves	rightly	ask
whether	any	evolutionary	explanation	can	account	for	this	amazing
mechanism:
Note	that	a	rational	evolutionary	explanation	for	the	development	of
this	creature	must	assign	some	kind	of	adaptive	advantage	to	each	of
the	millions	of	hypothetical	intermediate	stages	in	the	construction
process.	But	would	the	stages	of	one-fourth,	one-half,	or	two-thirds
completion,	for	example,	have	conferred	any	advantage?	After	all,	a
rifle	is	useless	without	all	of	its	parts	functioning.	.	.	.	Before	this
defensive	mechanism	could	afford	any	protection	to	the	beetle,	all	of
its	parts,	together	with	the	proper	explosive	mixture	of	chemicals,	plus
the	instinctive	behavior	required	for	its	use,	would	have	to	be
assembled	in	the	insect.	The	partially	developed	set	of	organs	would
be	useless.	Therefore,	according	to	the	principles	of	evolutionary
theory,	there	would	be	no	selective	pressure	to	cause	the	system	to
evolve	from	a	partially	completed	stage	toward	the	final	completed
system.	.	.	.	If	a	theory	fails	to	explain	the	data	in	any	science,	that
theory	should	be	either	revised	or	replaced	with	a	theory	that	is	in
agreement	with	the	data.
32
In	this	case,	of	course,	the	amusing	question	is,	What	would	happen	if	the
explosive	chemical	mixture	developed	in	the	beetle	without	the	chemical
inhibitor?
4.	The	fossil	record	was	Darwin’s	greatest	problem	in	1859,	and	it	has	simply
become	a	greater	problem	since	then.	In	Darwin’s	time,	hundreds	of	fossils
were	available	showing	the	existence	of	many	distinct	kinds	of	animals	and
plants	in	the	distant	past.	But	Darwin	was	unable	to	find	any	fossils	from
“intermediate	types”	to	fill	in	the	gaps	between	distinct	kinds	of	animals—
fossils	showing	some	characteristics	of	one	animal	and	a	few	characteristics
of	the	next	developmental	type,	for	example.	In	fact,	many	ancient	fossils
exactly	resembled	present-day	animals—showing	that	(according	to	the
chronological	assumptions	of	his	view)	numerous	animals	have	persisted	for
millions	of	years	essentially	unchanged.	Darwin	realized	that	the	absence	of
“transitional	types”	in	the	fossil	record	weakened	his	theory,	but	he	thought	it
was	due	to	the	fact	that	not	enough	fossils	had	been	discovered,	and	was
confident	that	further	discoveries	would	unearth	many	transitional	types	of
animals.	However,	the	subsequent	130	years	of	intensive	archaeological
activity	has	still	failed	to	produce	one	convincing	example	of	a	needed
transitional	type.
33
Johnson	quotes	noted	evolutionist	Stephen	Jay	Gould	of	Harvard	as	saying
that	there	are	two	characteristics	of	the	fossil	record	that	are	inconsistent	with
the	idea	of	gradual	change	through	generations:
1
.	
Stasis.	Most	species	exhibit	no	directional	change	during	their	tenure	on
earth.	They	appear	in	the	fossil	record	looking	pretty	much	the	same	as
when	they	disappear;	morphological	change	is	usually	limited	and
directionless.
2
.	
Sudden	appearance.	In	any	local	area,	a	species	does	not	arise	gradually
by	the	steady	transformation	of	its	ancestors;	it	appears	all	at	once	and
“fully	formed.”
34
So	difficult	is	this	problem	for	Darwinian	evolution	that	many	evolutionary
scientists	today	propose	that	evolution	came	about	in	sudden	jumps	to	new
life	forms—so	that	each	of	the	thirty-two	known	orders	of	mammals,	for
example,	appeared	quite	suddenly	in	the	history	of	Europe.
35
But	how	could	hundreds	or	thousands	of	genetic	changes	come	about	all	at
once?	No	explanation	has	been	given	other	than	to	say	that	it	must	have
happened,	because	it	happened.	(A	glance	at	the	dotted	lines	in	any	current
biology	textbook,	showing	the	supposed	transitions	from	one	kind	of	animal
to	another,	will	indicate	the	nature	of	the	gaps	still	unfilled	after	130	years	of
investigation.)	The	significance	of	this	problem	is	demonstrated	forcefully	in
a	recent	book	by	a	non-Christian	writer,	Michael	Denton,	
Evolution:	A	Theory
in	Crisis.
36
	Denton	himself	proposes	no	alternative	explanation	for	the
emergence	of	life	in	its	present	form	upon	the	earth,	but	he	notes	that	since
Darwin’s	time,
neither	of	the	two	fundamental	axioms	of	Darwin’s
macroevolutionary	theory—the	concept	of	the	continuity	of	nature,
that	is	the	idea	of	a	functional	continuum	of	all	life	forms	linking	all
species	together	and	ultimately	leading	back	to	a	primeval	cell,	and
the	belief	that	all	the	adaptive	design	of	life	has	resulted	from	a	blind
random	process—have	been	validated	by	one	single	empirical
discovery	or	scientific	advance	since	1859.
37
5.	The	molecular	structures	of	living	organisms	do	show	relationships,	but
Darwinists	simply	assume	that	relationships	imply	common	ancestry,	a	claim
that	certainly	has	not	been	proven.	Moreover,	there	are	amazing	molecular
differences	between	living	things,	and	no	satisfactory	explanation	for	the
origin	of	those	differences	has	been	given.
38
Of	course,	similarity	of	design	at	any	level	(including	levels	above	the
molecular	level)	has	often	been	used	as	a	argument	for	evolution.	The
assumption	of	evolutionists	is	that	similarity	of	design	between	two	species
implies	that	the	“lower”	species	evolved	into	the	“higher”	species,	but	the
proof	for	that	assumption	has	never	been	given.	Gleason	Archer	illustrates
this	well	by	supposing	that	one	visits	a	museum	of	science	and	industry	and
finds	a	display	of	how	human	beings	evolved	from	earlier	apelike	creatures
into	progressively	more	human-looking	beings	and	finally	into	modern	man.
But	he	rightly	notes	that
a	continuity	of	basic	design	furnishes	no	evidence	whatever	that	any
“lower”	species	phased	into	the	next	“higher”	species	by	any	sort	of
internal	dynamic,	as	evolution	demands.	For	if	the	museum	visitor
were	to	go	to	another	part	of	that	museum	of	science	and	industry,	he
would	find	a	completely	analogous	series	of	automobiles,
commencing	with	1900	and	extending	up	until	the	present	decade.
Stage	by	stage,	phase	by	phase,	he	could	trace	the	development	of	the
Ford	from	its	earliest	Model-T	prototype	to	the	large	and	luxurious
LTD	of	the	1970’s.
39
Of	course,	a	much	better	explanation	for	the	similarities	in	various	models	of
Ford	automobiles	is	the	fact	that	an	intelligent	designer	(or	group	of
designers)	used	similar	structures	in	successively	more	complex	automobiles
—if	a	steering	mechanism	works	well	in	one	model,	there	is	no	need	to	invent
a	different	kind	of	steering	mechanism	for	another	model.	In	the	same	way,
similarities	in	design	among	all	living	things	can	equally	well	be	taken	as
evidence	of	the	work	of	an	intelligent	master	craftsman,	the	Creator	himself.
6.	Probably	the	greatest	difficulty	of	all	for	evolutionary	theory	is	explaining
how	any	life	could	have	begun	in	the	first	place.	The	spontaneous	generation
of	even	the	simplest	living	organism	capable	of	independent	life	(the
prokaryote	bacterial	cell)	from	inorganic	materials	on	the	earth	could	not
happen	by	random	mixing	of	chemicals:	it	requires	intelligent	design	and
craftsmanship	so	complex	that	no	advanced	scientific	laboratory	in	the	world
has	been	able	to	do	it.	Johnson	quotes	a	now-famous	metaphor:	“That	a	living
organism	emerged	by	chance	from	a	pre-biotic	soup	is	about	as	likely	as	that
‘a	tornado	sweeping	through	a	junkyard	might	assemble	a	Boeing	747	from
the	materials	therein.’	Chance	assembly	is	just	a	naturalistic	way	of	saying
‘miracle.’	”
40
At	a	common-sense	level,	a	simple	illustration	will	show	this.	If	I	were	to	take
my	digital	watch,	hand	it	to	someone,	and	say	that	I	found	it	near	an	iron	mine
in	northern	Minnesota,	and	that	it	was	my	belief	that	the	watch	had	come
together	by	itself	simply	through	the	operation	of	random	movement	and
environmental	forces	(plus	some	energy	from	a	few	bolts	of	lightning,
perhaps),	I	would	quickly	be	written	off	as	mad.	Yet	any	one	living	cell	on	the
leaf	of	any	tree,	or	any	one	cell	in	the	human	body,	is	thousands	of	times	more
complex	than	my	digital	watch.	Even	given	4.5	billion	years	the	“chance”	of
even	one	living	cell	arising	spontaneously	is,	for	all	practical	purposes,	zero.
In	fact,	some	attempts	have	been	made	to	calculate	the	probability	of	life
arising	spontaneously	in	this	way.	Kofahl	and	Segraves	give	a	statistical
model	in	which	they	begin	with	a	very	generous	assumption:	that	every
square	foot	of	the	earth’s	surface	was	somehow	covered	with	95	pounds	of
protein	molecules	that	could	mix	freely,	and	that	are	all	replaced	with	fresh
protein	every	year	for	one	billion	years.	They	then	estimate	the	probability
that	even	one	enzyme	molecule	would	develop	in	each	one	billion	years	of	the
earth’s	history.	The	probability	is	1.2	times	10
11
	or	one	chance	in	80	billion.
They	note,	however,	that	even	with	the	generous	assumptions	and	starting
with	fresh	protein	every	year	for	a	billion	years,	finding	one	enzyme	molecule
—for	all	practical	purposes	an	impossible	task—would	not	solve	the	problem
at	all:
The	probability	of	finding	two	of	the	active	molecules	would	be	about
10
22
,	and	the	probability	that	they	would	be	identical	would	be	10
70
.
And	could	life	start	with	just	a	single	enzyme	molecule?	Furthermore,
what	is	the	possibility	that	an	active	enzyme	molecule,	once	formed,
could	find	its	way	through	thousands	of	miles	and	millions	of	years	to
that	randomly	formed	RNA	or	DNA	molecule	which	contains	the
code	for	that	particular	enzyme	molecule’s	amino	acid	sequence,	so
that	new	copies	of	itself	could	be	produced?	Zero	for	all	practical
purposes.
41
Kofahl	and	Segraves	report	a	study	by	an	evolutionary	scientist	who
formulates	a	model	to	calculate	the	probability	for	the	formation,	not	just	of
one	enzyme	molecule	but	the	smallest	likely	living	organism	by	random
processes.	He	comes	up	with	a	probability	of	one	chance	in	10
340,000,000	
—
that	is,	one	chance	in	10	with	340	million	zeros	after	it!	But	Kofahl	and
Segraves	note,	“Yet	Dr.	Morowitz	and	his	fellow	evolutionary	scientists	still
believe	that	it	happened!”
42
If	someone	were	to	ask	me	to	entrust	my	life	to	ride	on	an	airplane,	and	then
explained	that	the	airline	company	completed	its	flights	safely	once	in	every
10
340,000,000
	times—or	even	one	in	every	80	billion	flights—I	certainly	would
not	get	on	board,	nor	would	anyone	else	in	his	or	her	right	mind.	Yet	it	is
tragic	that	the	common	opinion,	perpetuated	in	many	science	textbooks	today,
that	evolution	is	an	established	“fact,”	has	continued	to	persuade	many	people
that	they	should	not	consider	the	total	truthfulness	of	the	Bible	to	be	an
intellectually	acceptable	viewpoint	for	responsible,	thinking	individuals	to
hold	today.	The	myth	that	“evolution	has	disproved	the	Bible”	persists	and
keeps	many	from	considering	Christianity	as	a	valid	option.
But	what	if	some	day	life	were	actually	“created”	in	the	laboratory	by
scientists?	Here	it	is	important	to	understand	what	is	meant.	First,	this	would
not	be	“creation”	in	the	pure	sense	of	the	word,	since	all	laboratory
experiments	begin	with	some	kinds	of	previously	existing	matter.	It	would	not
give	an	explanation	of	the	origin	of	matter	itself,	nor	would	it	be	the	kind	of
creating	that	the	Bible	says	God	did.	Second,	most	contemporary	attempts	to
“create	life”	are	really	just	very	small	steps	in	the	gigantic	process	of	moving
from	nonliving	materials	to	an	independently	living	organism,	even	one
consisting	of	only	one	cell.	The	construction	of	a	protein	molecule	or	an
amino	acid	nowhere	approaches	the	complexity	of	a	single	living	cell.	But
most	importantly,	what	would	it	demonstrate	if	the	collective	work	of
thousands	of	the	most	intelligent	scientists	in	the	world,	with	the	most
expensive	and	complex	laboratory	equipment	available,	working	over	the
course	of	several	decades,	actually	did	produce	a	living	organism?	Would	that
“prove”	that	God	did	not	create	life?	Quite	the	opposite:	it	would	demonstrate
that	life	simply	does	not	come	about	by	chance	but	must	be	intentionally
created	by	an	intelligent	designer.	In	theory	at	least,	it	is	not	impossible	that
human	beings,	created	in	the	image	of	God	and	using	their	God-given
intelligence	could	someday	create	a	living	organism	out	of	nonliving
substances	(though	the	complexity	of	the	task	far	surpasses	any	technology
that	exists	today).	But	that	would	only	show	that	God	made	us	to	be	“God-
like”—that	in	biological	research	as	in	many	other	areas	of	life	we	in	a	very
small	way	can	imitate	God’s	activity.	All	such	scientific	research	in	this
direction	really	ought	to	be	done	out	of	reverence	for	God	and	with	gratitude
for	the	scientific	capability	with	which	he	has	endowed	us.
Many	unbelieving	scientists	have	been	so	influenced	by	the	cumulative	force
of	the	objections	brought	against	evolution	that	they	have	openly	advocated
novel	positions	for	one	part	or	another	of	the	proposed	evolutionary
development	of	living	things.	Francis	Crick,	who	won	the	Nobel	Prize	for
helping	to	discover	the	structure	of	DNA	molecules,	proposed	in	1973	that
life	may	have	been	sent	here	by	a	spaceship	from	a	distant	planet,	a	theory
that	Crick	calls	“Directed	Panspermia.”
43
	To	the	present	author,	it	seems
ironic	that	brilliant	scientists	could	advocate	so	fantastic	a	theory	without	one
shred	of	evidence	in	its	favor,	all	the	while	rejecting	the	straightforward
explanation	given	by	the	one	book	in	the	history	of	the	world	that	has	never
been	proven	wrong,	that	has	changed	the	lives	of	millions	of	people,	that	has
been	believed	completely	by	many	of	the	most	intelligent	scholars	of	every
generation,	and	that	has	been	a	greater	force	for	good	than	any	other	book	in
the	history	of	the	world.	Why	will	otherwise	intelligent	people	commit
themselves	to	beliefs	that	seem	so	irrational?	It	seems	as	though	they	will
believe	in	anything,	so	long	as	it	is	not	belief	in	the	personal	God	of	Scripture,
who	calls	us	to	forsake	our	pride,	humble	ourselves	before	him,	ask	his
forgiveness	for	failure	to	obey	his	moral	standards,	and	submit	ourselves	to
his	moral	commands	for	the	rest	of	our	lives.	To	refuse	to	do	this	is	irrational,
but,	as	we	shall	see	in	the	chapter	on	sin,	all	sin	is	ultimately	irrational	at	its
root.
Other	challenges	to	the	theory	of	evolution	have	been	published	in	the	last
twenty	or	thirty	years,	and	no	doubt	many	more	will	be	forthcoming.	One
only	hopes	it	will	not	be	too	long	before	the	scientific	community	publicly
acknowledges	the	implausibility	of	evolutionary	theory,	and	textbooks	written
for	high	school	and	college	students	openly	acknowledge	that	evolution
simply	is	not	a	satisfactory	explanation	for	the	origin	of	life	on	the	earth.
(2)	The	Destructive	Influences	of	Evolutionary	Theory	in	Modern
Thought:
	It	is	important	to	understand	the	incredibly	destructive	influences
that	evolutionary	theory	has	had	on	modern	thinking.	If	in	fact	life	was	not
created	by	God,	and	if	human	beings	in	particular	are	not	created	by	God	or
responsible	to	him,	but	are	simply	the	result	of	random	occurrences	in	the
universe,	then	of	what	significance	is	human	life?	We	are	merely	the	product
of	matter	plus	time	plus	chance,	and	so	to	think	that	we	have	any	eternal
importance,	or	really	any	importance	at	all	in	the	face	of	an	immense
universe,	is	simply	to	delude	ourselves.	Honest	reflection	on	this	notion
should	lead	people	to	a	profound	sense	of	despair.
Moreover,	if	all	of	life	can	be	explained	by	evolutionary	theory	apart	from
God,	and	if	there	is	no	God	who	created	us	(or	at	least	if	we	cannot	know
anything	about	him	with	certainty),	then	there	is	no	supreme	Judge	to	hold	us
morally	accountable.	Therefore	there	are	no	moral	absolutes	in	human	life,
and	people’s	moral	ideas	are	only	subjective	preferences,	good	for	them
perhaps	but	not	to	be	imposed	on	others.	In	fact,	in	such	a	case	the	only	thing
forbidden	is	to	say	that	one	knows	that	certain	things	are	right	and	certain
things	are	wrong.
There	is	another	ominous	consequence	of	evolutionary	theory:	If	the
inevitable	processes	of	natural	selection	continue	to	bring	about	improvement
in	life	forms	on	earth	through	the	survival	of	the	fittest,	then	why	should	we
hinder	this	process	by	caring	for	those	who	are	weak	or	less	able	to	defend
themselves?	Should	we	not	rather	allow	them	to	die	without	reproducing	so
that	we	might	move	toward	a	new,	higher	form	of	humanity,	even	a	“master
race”?	In	fact,	Marx,	Nietzsche,	and	Hitler	all	justified	war	on	these
grounds.
44
Moreover,	if	human	beings	are	continually	evolving	for	the	better,	then	the
wisdom	of	earlier	generations	(and	particularly	of	earlier	religious	beliefs)	is
not	likely	to	be	as	valuable	as	modern	thought.	In	addition,	the	effect	of
Darwinian	evolution	on	the	people’s	opinions	of	the	trustworthiness	of
Scripture	has	been	a	very	negative	one.
Contemporary	sociological	and	psychological	theories	that	see	human	beings
as	simply	higher	forms	of	animals	are	another	outcome	of	evolutionary
thought.	And	the	extremes	of	the	modern	“animal	rights”	movement	that
oppose	all	killing	of	animals	(for	food,	or	for	leather	coats,	or	for	medical
research,	for	example)	also	flow	naturally	out	of	evolutionary	thought.
d.	The	Theory	of	a	“Gap”	Between	Genesis	1:1	and	1:2:
	Some
evangelicals	have	proposed	that	there	is	a	gap	of	millions	of	years	between
Genesis	1:1	(“In	the	beginning	God	created	the	heavens	and	the	earth”)	and
Genesis	1:2	(“The	earth	was	without	form	and	void,	and	darkness	was	upon
the	face	of	the	deep”).	According	to	this	theory,	God	made	an	earlier	creation,
but	there	was	eventually	a	rebellion	against	God	(probably	in	connection	with
Satan’s	own	rebellion),	and	God	judged	the	earth	so	that	“it	became	without
form	and	void”	(an	alternative,	but	doubtful,	translation	proposed	for	Gen.
1:2).
45
	What	we	read	of	in	Genesis	1:3–2:3	is	really	the	
second	
creation	of
God,	in	six	literal	twenty-four-hour	days,	which	occurred	only	recently
(perhaps	10,000	to	20,000	years	ago).	The	ancient	fossils	found	on	the	earth,
many	of	which	are	said	to	be	millions	of	years	old,	stem	from	the	
first
creation	(4,500,000,000	years	ago),	which	is	mentioned	only	in	Genesis	1:1.
The	primary	biblical	argument	for	this	theory	is	that	the	words	“without	form
and	void”	and	“darkness”	in	Genesis	1:2	picture	an	earth	that	has	suffered	the
effects	of	judgment	by	God:	darkness	elsewhere	in	the	Old	Testament	is
frequently	a	sign	of	God’s	judgment,	and	the	Hebrew	words	
tohû	
(“without
form”)	and	
bohû	
(“void,	empty”)	in	verses	such	as	Isaiah	34:11	and	Jeremiah
34:23	refer	to	places	such	as	deserts	that	have	suffered	the	desolating
consequences	of	God’s	judgment.
But	these	arguments	do	not	seem	strong	enough	to	persuade	us	that	Genesis
1:2	pictures	the	earth	as	desolate	after	God’s	judgment.	If	God	first	forms	the
earth	(v.	
1)	and	then	later	creates	light	(v.	
3),	there	would	have	to	be	darkness
over	the	earth	in	verse	2—this	indicates	that	creation	is	in	progress,	not	that
any	evil	is	present.	In	addition,	each	day	there	is	an	“evening,”	and	there	is
“darkness”	present	during	the	six	days	of	creation	(vv.	5,	8,	13,	18–19,	et	al.),
with	no	suggestion	of	evil	or	of	God’s	disapproval	(cf.	Ps.	104:20).	As	far	as
the	phrase	“without	form	and	void,”	the	sense	is	just	that	it	is	not	yet	fit	for
habitation:	God’s	preparatory	work	has	not	yet	been	done.	Of	course,	when
God	curses	a	desert,	it	does	become	unfit	for	habitation,	but	we	should	not
read	the	cause	of	that	unfitness	in	one	case	(God’s	curse	on	a	desert)	into
another	case,	the	creation,	where	the	cause	of	unfitness	for	habitation	is
simply	that	God’s	work	is	still	in	progress;	the	preparation	for	man	is	not	yet
complete.
46
	(It	is	not	proper	to	read	the	circumstances	that	surround	a	word	in
one	place	into	the	use	of	that	word	in	another	place	when	the	meaning	of	the
word	and	its	use	in	the	second	context	do	not	require	those	same
circumstances.)
In	addition	to	the	fact	that	Genesis	1:2	does	not	give	support	to	this	view,
there	are	some	other	arguments	that	weigh	strongly	against	the	gap	theory:
1.	There	is	no	verse	in	Scripture	that	explicitly	talks	about	an	earlier	creation.
So	this	theory	is	lacking	even	one	verse	of	Scripture	to	give	it	explicit
support.
2.	In	Genesis	1:31,	when	God	finished	his	work	of	creation,	we	read,	“And
God	saw	everything	that	he	had	made,	and	behold,	it	was	very	good.”	But
according	to	the	gap	theory,	God	would	be	looking	at	an	earth	full	of	the
results	of	rebellion,	conflict,	and	terrible	divine	judgment.	He	would	also	be
looking	at	all	the	demonic	beings,	the	hosts	of	Satan	who	had	rebelled	against
him,	and	yet	be	calling	everything	“very	good.”	It	is	difficult	to	believe	that
there	was	so	much	evil	and	so	many	evidences	of	rebellion	and	judgment	on
the	earth,	and	that	God	could	still	say	that	creation	was	very	good.
Moreover,	Genesis	2:1	says,	in	an	apparent	summary	of	all	that	has	happened
in	Genesis	1,	“Thus	the	heavens	and	the	earth	were	finished,	and	all	the	host
of	them.”	Here	it	is	not	just	God’s	work	on	the	earth,	but	all	that	he	made	in
the	heavens,	that	is	said	to	have	been	completed	in	the	narrative	in	Genesis	1.
This	would	not	allow	for	large	parts	of	heaven	and	earth	to	have	been	finished
long	before	the	six	creation	days.
3.	In	a	later	description	of	God’s	work	of	creation	found	in	the	Ten
Commandments,	we	read,	“for	
in	six	days	the	L
ORD
	made	heaven	and	earth,
the	sea,	
and	all	that	is	in	them,	
and	rested	the	seventh	day;	therefore	the	L
ORD
blessed	the	sabbath	day	and	hallowed	it”	(Ex.	20:11).	Here	the	creation	of
both	the	heaven	and	the	earth,	and	the	making	of	“all	that	is	in	them,”	is
attributed	to	God’s	work	in	the	six	days	of	creation.	Whether	we	take	these	to
be	twenty-four-hour	days	or	longer	periods	of	time,	on	either	view	the	making
of	the	entire	heavens	and	earth	and	
everything	in	them	
is	put	within	these	six
days.	But	the	proponents	of	the	gap	theory	would	have	to	say	that	there	are
many	things	in	the	earth	(such	as	fossil	remains	of	dead	animals,	and	the	earth
itself)	and	in	the	heavens	(such	as	the	stars)	that	God	did	not	make	in	the	six
days	specified	in	Exodus	20:11,	a	view	that	seems	exactly	contrary	to	what	is
affirmed	in	the	verse.
Moreover,	while	some	passages	of	Scripture	do	speak	of	God’s	judgment	on
rebellious	angels	or	his	judgment	on	the	earth	at	various	times	(see	Isa.	24:1;
Jer.	4:23–26;	2	Peter	2:4),	none	of	the	passages	places	this	judgment	at	a	time
before	the	creation	narrative	in	Genesis	1:2–31.
4.	This	theory	must	assume	that	all	of	the	fossils	of	animals	from	millions	of
years	ago	that	resemble	very	closely	animals	from	today	indicate	that	God’s
first	creation	of	the	animal	and	plant	kingdom	resulted	in	a	failure.	These
animals	and	plants	did	not	fulfill	God’s	original	purpose,	so	he	destroyed
them,	but	in	the	second	creation	he	made	others	that	were	exactly	like	them.
Moreover,	since	Adam	and	Eve	were	the	first	man	and	woman,	this	theory
must	assume	that	there	was	a	prior	creation	of	God	that	existed	for	millions	of
years	but	lacked	the	highest	aspect	of	God’s	creative	work,	namely,	man
himself.	But	both	the	failure	of	God	to	accomplish	his	purposes	with	the
original	plant	and	animal	kingdoms,	and	the	failure	of	God	to	crown	creation
with	his	highest	creature,	man,	seem	inconsistent	with	the	biblical	picture	of
God	as	one	who	always	accomplishes	his	purposes	in	whatever	he	does.	So
the	gap	theory	does	not	seem	an	acceptable	alternative	for	evangelical
Christians	today.
3.	The	Age	of	the	Earth:	Some	Preliminary	Considerations.
	Up	to	this
point,	the	discussions	in	this	chapter	have	advocated	conclusions	that	we	hope
will	find	broad	assent	among	evangelical	Christians.	But	now	at	last	we	come
to	a	perplexing	question	about	which	Bible-believing	Christians	have	differed
for	many	years,	sometimes	very	sharply.	The	question	is	simply	this:	How	old
is	the	earth?
It	is	appropriate	to	treat	this	question	after	all	the	earlier	matters,	because	it	is
really	much	less	important	than	the	doctrines	considered	above.	These	earlier
matters	may	be	summarized	as	follows:	(1)	God	created	the	universe	out	of
nothing;	(2)	creation	is	distinct	from	God,	yet	always	dependent	on	God;	(3)
God	created	the	universe	to	show	his	glory;	(4)	the	universe	God	created	was
very	good;	(5)	there	will	be	no	final	conflict	between	Scripture	and	science;
(6)	secular	theories	that	deny	God	as	Creator,	including	Darwinian	evolution,
are	clearly	incompatible	with	belief	in	the	Bible.
The	question	of	the	age	of	the	earth	is	also	less	important	than	matters	to	be
treated	in	subsequent	chapters,	that	is	(7)	the	creation	of	the	angelic	world	and
(8)	the	creation	of	man	in	the	image	of	God	(chapters	19,	21,	and	22).	It	is
important	to	keep	these	things	in	mind,	because	there	is	a	danger	that
Christians	will	spend	too	much	time	arguing	over	the	age	of	the	earth	and
neglect	to	focus	on	much	more	important	and	much	clearer	aspects	of	the
overall	teaching	of	the	Bible	on	creation.
The	two	options	to	choose	from	for	a	date	of	the	earth	are	the	“old	earth”
position,	which	agrees	with	the	consensus	of	modern	science	that	the	earth	is
4,500,000,000	years	old,	and	the	“young	earth”	position,	which	says	that	the
earth	is	10,000	to	20,000	years	old,	and	that	secular	scientific	dating	schemes
are	incorrect.	The	difference	between	these	two	views	is	enormous:
4,499,980,000	years!
Before	considering	the	specific	arguments	for	both	positions,	we	will	examine
some	preliminary	questions	about	the	genealogies	in	the	Bible,	current
estimates	for	the	age	of	the	human	race,	differing	views	on	the	date	of
dinosaurs,	and	the	length	of	the	six	creation	days	in	Genesis	1.
a.	There	Are	Gaps	in	the	Genealogies	of	the	Bible:
	When	one	reads	the	list
of	names	in	Scripture	together	with	their	ages,	it	might	seem	as	though	we
could	add	together	the	ages	of	all	the	people	in	the	history	of	redemption	from
Adam	to	Christ	and	come	up	with	an	approximate	date	for	the	creation	of	the
earth.	Certainly	this	would	give	a	very	recent	date	for	creation	(such	as
Archbishop	Ussher’s	date	of	4004	B.C.).	But	closer	inspection	of	the	parallel
lists	of	names	in	Scripture	will	show	that	Scripture	itself	indicates	the	fact	that
the	genealogies	list	only	those	names	the	biblical	writers	thought	it	important
to	record	for	their	purposes.	In	fact,	some	genealogies	include	names	that	are
left	out	by	other	genealogies	in	Scripture	itself.
For	instance,	Matthew	1:8–9	tells	us	that	Asa	was	“the	father	of	Jehoshaphat,
and	Jehoshaphat	the	father	of	Joram,	and	Joram	the	father	of	Uzziah,	and
Uzziah	the	father	of	Jotham,	and	Jotham	the	father	of	Ahaz.”	But	from	1
Chronicles	3:10–12	(which	uses	the	alternate	name	Ahaziah	for	Uzziah),	we
learn	that	three	generations	have	been	omitted	by	Matthew:	Joash,	Amaziah,
and	Azariah.	So	these	texts	can	be	compared	in	the	following	table:
Example	of	gaps	in	genealogies
1	Chronicles	3:10-12
	
	
Matthew	1:8-9
Asa
	
	
Asa
Jehoshaphat
	
	
Jehoshaphat
Joram
	
	
Joram
Ahaziah	(Uzziah)
	
	
Uzziah
Joash
	
	
	
Amaziah
	
	
	
Azariah
	
	
	
Jotham
	
	
Jotham
Ahaz
	
	
Ahaz
Hezekiah
	
	
Hezekiah
(etc.)
	
	
(etc.)
Therefore,	when	Matthew	says	that	Uzziah	was	“the	father	of	Jotham,”	it	can
mean	that	he	was	the	father	of	someone	who	led	to	Jotham.	Matthew	has
selected	those	names	that	he	wants	to	emphasize	for	his	own	purposes.
47
	A
similar	phenomenon	is	evident	in	Matthew	1:20	where	the	angel	of	the	Lord
speaks	to	Joseph	and	calls	him,	“Joseph,	son	of	David.”	Now	Joseph	is	not
directly	the	son	of	David	(for	David	lived	around	1000	B.C.),	but	Joseph	is
the	descendant	of	David	and	is	therefore	called	his	“son.”
Another	example	is	found	in	1	Chronicles	26:24	in	a	list	of	officers	appointed
by	King	David	near	the	end	of	his	life.	We	read	that	“Shebuel	the	son	of
Gershom,	son	of	Moses,	was	chief	officer	in	charge	of	the	treasuries”	(1
Chron.	26:24).	Now	we	know	from	Exodus	2:22	that	Gershom	was	the	son
born	to	Moses	before	the	Exodus,	sometime	around	1480	B.C.	(or,	on	a	late
date	for	the	exodus,	around	1330	B.C.).	But	these	officials	mentioned	in	1
Chronicles	26	were	appointed	at	the	time	that	David	made	Solomon	king	over
Israel,	around	970	B.C.	(see	1	Chron.	23:1).	That	means	that	in	1	Chronicles
26:24	Shebuel	is	said	to	be	“the	son	of	Gershom,”	who	was	born	510	(or	at
least	360)	years	earlier.	Ten	or	more	generations	have	been	omitted	in	this
designation	“son	of.”
48
It	seems	only	fair	to	conclude	that	the	genealogies	of	Scripture	have	some
gaps	in	them,	and	that	God	only	caused	to	be	recorded	those	names	that	were
important	for	his	purposes.	How	many	gaps	there	are	and	how	many
generations	are	missing	from	the	Genesis	narratives,	we	do	not	know.	The	life
of	Abraham	may	be	placed	at	approximately	2000	B.C.,	because	the	kings
and	places	listed	in	the	stories	of	Abraham’s	life	(Gen.	12ff.)	can	be	correlated
with	archaeological	data	that	can	be	dated	quite	reliably,
49
	but	prior	to
Abraham	the	setting	of	dates	is	very	uncertain.	In	view	of	the	exceptionally
long	life	spans	reported	for	people	prior	to	the	flood,	it	would	not	seem
unreasonable	to	think	that	a	few	thousand	years	have	been	passed	over	in	the
narrative.	This	gives	us	some	flexibility	in	our	thinking	about	the	date	that
man	first	appeared	on	the	earth.	(It	would	seem	to	be	quite	another	thing,
however,	and	quite	foreign	to	the	sense	of	continuity	in	the	narrative,	to	think
that	
millions	
of	years	have	been	omitted,	but	that	names	and	details	of	the
lives	of	key	persons	have	been	remembered	and	passed	down	over	such	a
long	period	of	time.)
b.	The	Age	of	the	Human	Race:
	While	current	scientific	estimates	say	that
man	first	appeared	on	the	earth	about	2.5	million	years	ago,	it	is	important	to
recognize	what	kind	of	“man”	this	is	claimed	to	be.	The	following	table	is	a
rough	guide	to	current	scientific	opinion:
50
homo	habilis	
(“skillful	man”)	stone	tools
	
	
	
2–3.5	million	years
B.C.
homo	erectus
	
	
	
1.5	million	years	B.C.
variety	of	stone	tools,	used	fire	by	500,000
B.C.,	hunted	large	animals
	
	
	
	
homo	sapiens	
(“wise	
man”	or	“thinking	man”)
buried	their	dead	(example:	Neanderthal	man)
	
	
	
40,000–150,000	B.C.
(or	perhaps	300,000
B.C.)
homo	sapiens	sapiens
	
	
	
90,000	B.C.
(“wise,	wise	man”)
	
	
	
	
(example:	Cro-Magnon	man)	cave	paintings
	
	
	
18,000–35,000	B.C.
(example:	Neolithic	man)	cattle	raising,
agriculture,	metalwork
	
	
	
19,000	B.C.
Whether	Christians	hold	to	a	young	earth	or	old	earth	view,	they	will	agree
that	man	is	certainly	on	the	earth	by	the	time	of	the	cave	paintings	by	Cro-
Magnon	man,	paintings	which	date	from	about	10,000	B.C.	There	is	some
variation	in	the	date	of	Cro-Magnon	man,	however,	since	the	dating	of	a	Cro-
Magnon	burial	site	in	Siberia	is	approximately	20,000	to	35,000	B.C.
according	to	the	geological	evidence	found	there,	but	the	Carbon-14	dating
method	gives	a	date	of	only	9,000	B.C.,	or	11,000	years	ago.
51
	Earlier	than
the	paintings	by	Cro-Magnon	man,	there	is	disagreement.	Was	Neanderthal
man	really	a	man,	or	just	a	human-like	creature?
52
	How	human	were	earlier
man-like	creatures?	(Higher	forms	of	animals,	such	as	chimpanzees,	can	use
tools,	and	burial	of	one’s	dead	is	not	necessarily	a	uniquely	human	trait.)
Moreover,	dating	methods	used	for	earlier	periods	are	very	approximate	with
results	that	often	conflict.
53
So	how	long	ago	did	man	first	appear	on	the	earth?	Certainly	by	10,000	B.C.,
if	the	Cro-Magnon	cave	paintings	have	been	dated	correctly.	But	before	that	it
is	difficult	to	say.
c.	Did	Animals	Die	Before	the	Fall?
	For	young	earth	advocates,	there	is	no
need	to	ask	whether	animals	died	before	the	fall,	because	animals	and	man
were	both	created	on	the	sixth	day,	and	there	may	have	been	only	a	short	time
before	Adam	and	Eve	sinned.	This	could	have	introduced	death	into	the
animal	kingdom	as	well,	as	part	of	the	curse	of	the	fall	(Gen.	3:17–19;	Rom.
8:20–23).
But	for	old	earth	advocates,	this	is	an	important	question.	There	are	millions
of	apparently	ancient	fossils	in	the	earth.	Might	they	have	come	from	animals
who	lived	and	died	for	long	ages	before	Adam	and	Eve	were	created?	Might
God	have	created	an	animal	kingdom	that	was	subject	to	death	from	the
moment	of	creation?	This	is	quite	possible.	There	was	no	doubt	death	in	the
plant	world,	if	Adam	and	Eve	were	to	eat	plants;	and	if	God	had	made	an
original	creation	in	which	animals	would	reproduce	and	also	live	forever,	the
earth	would	soon	be	overcrowded	with	no	hope	of	relief.	The	warning	to
Adam	in	Genesis	2:17	was	only	that	
he	
would	die	if	he	ate	of	the	forbidden
fruit,	not	that	animals	would	also	begin	to	die.	When	Paul	says,	“Sin	came
into	the	world	through	one	man	and	death	through	sin”	(Rom.	5:12a),	the
following	phrase	makes	clear	that	he	is	talking	about	death	for	human	beings,
not	for	plants	and	animals,	for	he	immediately	adds,	“and	so	death	spread	to
all	men	because	all	men	sinned”	(Rom.	5:12b).
From	the	information	we	have	in	Scripture,	we	cannot	now	know	whether
God	created	animals	subject	to	aging	and	death	from	the	beginning,	but	it
remains	a	real	possibility.
d.	What	About	Dinosaurs?:
	Current	scientific	opinion	holds	that	dinosaurs
became	extinct	about	65	million	years	ago,	millions	of	years	before	human
beings	appeared	on	the	earth.	But	those	who	hold	to	six	twenty-four-hour
days	of	creation	and	a	young	earth	would	say	that	dinosaurs	were	among	the
creatures	created	by	God	on	the	same	day	he	created	man	(the	sixth	day).
They	would	therefore	say	that	dinosaurs	and	human	beings	lived	on	the	earth
at	the	same	time	and	that	dinosaurs	subsequently	became	extinct	(perhaps	in
the	flood).	Young	earth	advocates	of	course	would	differ	with	the	methods
used	to	arrive	at	such	ancient	dates	for	dinosaurs.
Among	those	who	hold	to	an	old	earth	view,	some	would	want	to	say	that
dinosaurs	were	among	the	creatures	that	Adam	named	in	Genesis	2:19–20,
and	that	they	subsequently	perished	(perhaps	in	the	flood).	They	would	admit
that	dinosaurs	may	have	existed	earlier,	but	would	say	that	they	did	not
become	extinct	until	after	the	time	of	Adam	and	Eve.	Others	would	say	that
the	sixth	day	of	creation	was	millions	of	years	long,	and	that	dinosaurs	had
already	become	extinct	by	the	time	Adam	was	created	and	named	the	animals.
In	this	case,	Adam	did	not	name	dinosaurs	(the	Bible	does	not	say	that	he
did),	but	he	only	named	all	the	creatures	that	were	living	at	the	time	God
brought	him	all	the	animals	to	name	(Gen.	2:19–20;	see	NIV).	Of	course,	this
view	would	require	that	there	was	death	in	the	animal	world	before	there	was
sin	(see	previous	section).
e.	Are	the	Six	Days	of	Creation	Twenty-four-Hour	Days?:
	Much	of	the
dispute	between	“young	earth”	and	“old	earth”	advocates	hinges	on	the
interpretation	of	the	length	of	“days”	in	Genesis	1.	Old	earth	supporters
propose	that	the	six	“days”	of	Genesis	1	refer	not	to	periods	of	twenty-four
hours,	but	rather	to	long	periods	of	time,	millions	of	years,	during	which	God
carried	out	the	creative	activities	described	in	Genesis	1.	This	proposal	has	led
to	a	heated	debate	with	other	evangelicals,	which	is	far	from	being	settled
decisively	one	way	or	another.
In	favor	of	viewing	the	six	days	as	long	periods	of	time	is	the	fact	that	the
Hebrew	word	
yôm,	
“day,”	is	sometimes	used	to	refer	not	to	a	twenty-four-
hour	literal	day,	but	to	a	longer	period	of	time.	We	see	this	when	the	word	is
used	in	Genesis	2:4,	for	example:	“In	the	
day	
that	the	L
ORD
	God	made	the
earth	and	the	heavens,”	a	phrase	that	refers	to	the	entire	creative	work	of	the
six	days	of	creation.	Other	examples	of	the	word	
day	
to	mean	a	period	of	time
are	Job	20:28	(“the	
day	
of	God’s	wrath”);	Psalm	20:1	(“The	L
ORD
	answer	you
in	the	
day	
of	trouble!”);	Proverbs	11:4	(“Riches	do	not	profit	in	the	
day	
of
wrath”);	21:31	(“The	horse	is	made	ready	for	the	
day	
of	battle”);	24:10	(“If
you	faint	in	the	
day	
of	adversity,	your	strength	is	small”);	25:13	(“the	
time
[
yôm
]	of	harvest”);	Ecclesiastes	7:14	(“In	the	
day	
of	prosperity	be	joyful,	and
in	the	
day	
of	adversity	consider;	God	has	made	the	one	as	well	as	the	other”);
many	passages	referring	to	“the	
day	
of	the	L
ORD
”	(such	as	Isa.	2:12;	13:6,	9;
Joel	1:15;	2:1;	Zeph.	1:14);	and	many	other	Old	Testament	passages
predicting	times	of	judgment	or	blessing.	A	concordance	will	show	that	this	is
a	frequent	sense	for	the	word	
day	
in	the	Old	Testament.
An	additional	argument	for	a	long	period	of	time	in	these	“days”	is	the	fact
that	the	sixth	day	includes	so	many	events	that	it	must	have	been	longer	than
twenty-four	hours.	The	sixth	day	of	creation	(Gen.	1:24–31)	includes	the
creation	of	animals	and	the	creation	of	man	and	woman	both	(“male	and
female	he	created	them,”	Gen.	1:27).	It	was	also	on	the	sixth	day	that	God
blessed	Adam	and	Eve	and	said	to	them,	“Be	fruitful	and	multiply,	and	fill	the
earth	and	subdue	it;	and	have	dominion	over	the	fish	of	the	sea	and	over	the
birds	of	the	air	and	over	every	living	thing	that	moves	upon	the	earth”	(Gen.
1:28).	But	that	means	that	the	sixth	day	included	God’s	creation	of	Adam,
God’s	putting	Adam	in	the	Garden	of	Eden	to	till	it	and	keep	it,	and	giving
Adam	directions	regarding	the	tree	of	the	knowledge	of	good	and	evil	(Gen.
2:15–17),	his	bringing	all	the	animals	to	man	for	them	to	be	named	(Gen.
2:18–20),	finding	no	helper	fit	for	Adam	(Gen.	2:20),	and	then	causing	a	deep
sleep	to	fall	upon	Adam	and	creating	Eve	from	his	rib	(Gen.	2:21–25).	The
finite	nature	of	man	and	the	incredibly	large	number	of	animals	created	by
God	would	by	itself	seem	to	require	that	a	much	longer	period	of	time	than
part	of	one	day	would	be	needed	to	include	so	many	events—at	least	that
would	be	an	“ordinary”	understanding	of	the	passage	for	an	original	reader,	a
consideration	that	is	not	unimportant	in	a	debate	that	often	emphasizes	what
an	ordinary	reading	of	the	text	by	the	original	readers	would	lead	them	to
conclude.
54
	If	the	sixth	day	is	shown	by	contextual	considerations	to	be
considerably	longer	than	an	ordinary	twenty-four-hour	day,	then	does	not	the
context	itself	favor	the	sense	of	
day	
as	simply	a	“period	of	time”	of
unspecified	length?
Related	to	this	is	one	more	consideration.	The	seventh	day,	it	should	be	noted,
is	not	concluded	with	the	phrase	“and	there	was	evening	and	there	was
morning,	a	seventh	day.”	The	text	just	says	that	God	“rested	on	the	seventh
day	from	all	his	work	which	he	had	done”	and	that	“God	blessed	the	seventh
day	and	hallowed	it”	(Gen.	2:2–3).	The	possibility,	if	not	the	implication,
suggested	by	this	is	that	the	seventh	day	is	still	continuing.	It	never	ended	but
is	also	a	“day”	that	is	really	a	long	period	of	time	(cf.	John	5:17;	Heb.	4:4,	9–
10).
Some	have	objected	that	whenever	the	word	
day	
refers	to	a	period	of	time
other	than	a	twenty-four-hour	day	in	the	Old	Testament	the	context	makes	it
clear	that	this	is	the	case,	but	since	the	context	does	not	make	this	clear	in
Genesis	1	we	must	assume	that	normal	days	are	meant.	But	to	this	we	may
answer	that	whenever	the	word	
day	
means	a	twenty-four-hour	day,	the	context
makes	this	clear	as	well.	Otherwise,	we	could	not	know	that	a	twenty-four-
hour	day	is	meant	in	that	context.	So	this	is	not	a	persuasive	objection.	It
simply	affirms	what	everyone	agrees	to,	namely,	that	the	context	enables	us	to
determine	which	sense	a	word	will	take	when	it	has	various	possible
meanings.
Another	objection	is	that	the	Bible	could	have	used	other	words	if	a	period
longer	than	a	twenty-four-hour	day	was	intended.	However,	if	(as	is	clearly
the	case)	the	original	readers	knew	that	the	word	
day	
could	mean	a	long
period	of	time,	then	there	was	no	need	to	use	some	other	word,	for	the	word
yôm	
conveyed	the	intended	meaning	quite	well.	Furthermore,	it	was	a	very
appropriate	word	to	use	when	describing	six	successive	periods	of	work	plus
a	period	of	rest	that	would	set	the	pattern	for	the	seven	days	of	the	week	in
which	people	would	live.
That	brings	us	back	to	the	original	question,	namely,	what	does	the	word	
day
mean	in	the	context	of	Genesis	1?	The	fact	that	the	word	must	refer	to	a
longer	period	of	time	just	a	few	verses	later	in	the	same	narrative	(Gen.	2:4)
should	caution	us	against	making	dogmatic	statements	that	the	original
readers	would	have	certainly	known	that	the	author	was	talking	about	twenty-
four-hour	days.	In	fact,	both	senses	were	commonly	known	meanings	in	the
minds	of	the	original	readers	of	this	narrative.
55
It	is	important	to	realize	that	those	who	advocate	long	periods	of	time	for	the
six	“days”	of	creation	are	not	saying	that	the	context	
requires	
that	these	be
understood	as	periods	of	time.	They	are	simply	saying	that	the	context	does
not	clearly	specify	for	us	one	meaning	of	
day	
or	another,	and	if	convincing
scientific	data	about	the	age	of	the	earth,	drawn	from	many	different
disciplines	and	giving	similar	answers,	convinces	us	that	the	earth	is	billions
of	years	old,	then	this	possible	interpretation	of	
day	
as	a	long	period	of	time
may	be	the	best	interpretation	to	adopt.	In	this	way,	the	situation	is	something
like	that	faced	by	those	who	first	held	that	the	earth	rotates	on	its	axis	and
revolves	about	the	sun.	They	would	not	say	that	the	passages	about	the	sun
“rising”	or	“going	down”	
require	
us,	in	their	contexts,	to	believe	in	a
heliocentric	(sun-centered)	solar	system,	but	that	this	is	a	
possible
understanding	of	the	texts,	seeing	them	as	only	speaking	from	the	standpoint
of	the	observer.	Observational	evidence	taken	from	science	informs	us	that
this	is	in	fact	the	correct	way	to	interpret	those	texts.
On	the	other	side	of	this	question	are	the	arguments	in	favor	of	understanding
“day”	as	a	twenty-four-hour	day	in	Genesis	1:
1.	It	is	significant	that	each	of	the	days	of	Genesis	1	ends	with	an	expression
such	as,	“And	there	was	evening,	and	there	was	morning—the	first	day”
(Gen.	1:5	NIV).	The	phrase	“And	there	was	evening,	and	there	was	morning”
is	repeated	in	verses	8,	13,	19,	23,	and	31.	This	seems	to	imply	the	sequence
of	events	marking	a	literal	twenty-four-hour	day	and	suggests	that	the	readers
should	understand	it	in	that	way.
This	is	a	strong	argument	from	context,	and	many	have	found	it	persuasive.
Yet	those	who	hold	to	a	long	period	of	time	for	these	“days”	could	respond	(a)
that	even	evening	and	morning	do	not	constitute	an	entire	day,	but	only	the
end	of	one	day	and	the	beginning	of	another,	so	the	expression	itself	may	be
simply	part	of	the	author’s	way	of	telling	us	that	the	end	of	the	first	creative
day	(that	is,	long	period	of	time)	occurred,	and	the	beginning	of	the	next
creative	“day”	had	come;
56
	and	also	(b)	that	the	first	three	creative	“days”
could	not	have	been	marked	by	evening	and	morning	as	caused	by	the	sun
shining	on	the	earth,	for	the	sun	was	not	created	until	the	fourth	day	(Gen.
1:14–19);	thus,	the	very	context	shows	that	“evening	and	morning”	in	this
chapter	does	not	refer	to	the	ordinary	evening	and	morning	of	days	as	we
know	them	now.	So	the	argument	from	“evening	and	morning,”	though	it	may
give	some	weight	to	the	twenty-four-hour	view,	does	not	seem	to	tip	the
balance	decisively	in	its	favor.
2.	The	third	day	of	creation	cannot	be	very	long,	because	the	sun	does	not
come	into	being	until	the	fourth	day,	and	plants	cannot	live	long	without	light.
In	response	to	this,	it	might	be	said	that	the	light	that	God	created	on	the	first
day	energized	the	plants	for	millions	of	years.	But	that	would	suppose	God	to
have	created	a	light	that	is	almost	exactly	like	sunlight	in	brightness	and
power,	but	still	not	sunlight—an	unusual	suggestion.
3.	It	is	hard	to	avoid	the	conclusion	that	in	the	Ten	Commandments	the	word
day	
is	used	to	mean	a	twenty-four-hour	day:
Remember	the	sabbath	day,	to	keep	it	holy.	Six	
days	
you	shall	labor,
and	do	all	your	work;	but	the	seventh	
day	
is	a	sabbath	to	the	L
ORD
your	God;	.	.	.	for	in	six	
days	
the	L
ORD
	made	heaven	and	earth,	the
sea,	and	all	that	is	in	them,	and	rested	the	seventh	day;	therefore	the
L
ORD
	blessed	the	sabbath	day	and	hallowed	it.”	(Ex.	20:8–11)
Certainly	in	that	text	the	sabbath	“day”	is	a	twenty-four-hour	day.	And	must
we	not	say	that	verse	11,	which	in	the	same	sentence	says	that	the	Lord	made
heaven	and	earth	in	“six	days,”	uses	“day”	in	the	same	sense?	This	is	again	a
weighty	argument,	and	on	balance	it	gives	additional	persuasiveness	to	the
twenty-four-hour	day	position.	But	once	again	it	is	not	quite	conclusive	in
itself,	for	one	could	respond	that	the	readers	were	aware	(from	a	careful
reading	of	Gen.	1–2)	that	the	days	there	were	unspecified	periods	of	time,	and
that	the	sabbath	commandment	merely	told	God’s	people	that,	just	as	he
followed	a	six-plus-one	pattern	in	creation	(six	periods	of	work	followed	by	a
period	of	rest),	so	they	were	to	follow	a	six-plus-one	pattern	in	their	lives	(six
days	of	work	followed	by	a	day	of	rest;	also	six	years	of	work	followed	by	a
sabbath	year	of	rest,	as	in	Ex.	23:10–11).	In	fact,	in	the	very	next	sentence	of
the	Ten	Commandments,	“day”	means	“a	period	of	time”:	“Honor	your	father
and	your	mother,	that	your	
days	
may	be	long	in	the	land	which	the	L
ORD
	your
God	gives	you”	(Ex.	20:12).	Certainly	here	the	promise	is	not	for	“long”
literal	days	(such	as	twenty-five-	or	twenty-six-hour	days!),	but	rather	that	the
period	of	one’s	life	may	be	lengthened	upon	the	earth.
57
4.	Those	who	argue	for	“day”	as	a	twenty-four-hour	day	also	ask	whether
anywhere	else	in	the	Hebrew	Bible	the	word	“days”	in	the	plural,	especially
when	a	number	is	attached	(such	as	“six	days”),	ever	refers	to	anything	but
twenty-four-hour	days.	This	argument	is	not	compelling,	however,	because	(a)
a	plural	example	of	“days”	to	mean	periods	of	time	is	found	in	Exodus	20:12,
discussed	in	the	previous	paragraph	and	(b)	if	the	word	clearly	takes	the	sense
“period	of	time”	in	the	singular	(which	it	does,	as	all	admit),	then	to	speak	of
six	such	“periods”	of	time	would	certainly	be	understandable	to	the	readers,
even	if	the	Old	Testament	did	not	elsewhere	have	examples	of	such	a
meaning.	The	fact	that	such	an	expression	does	not	appear	elsewhere	may
mean	nothing	more	than	that	there	was	no	occasion	to	use	it	elsewhere.
5.	When	Jesus	says,	“But	from	the	beginning	of	creation,	‘God	made	them
male	and	female’	”	(Mark	10:6),	he	implies	that	Adam	and	Eve	were	not
created	billions	of	years	after	the	beginning	of	creation,	but	at	the	beginning
of	creation.	This	argument	also	has	some	force,	but	old	earth	advocates	may
respond	that	Jesus	is	just	referring	to	the	whole	of	Genesis	1–2	as	the
“beginning	of	creation,”	in	contrast	to	the	argument	from	the	laws	given	by
Moses	that	the	Pharisees	were	depending	on	(v.	
4).
I	have	given	an	answer	to	each	of	the	five	arguments	for	a	twenty-four-hour
day,	but	these	answers	may	not	persuade	its	advocates.	They	would	respond
to	the	“period	of	time”	position	as	follows:	(1)	Of	course,	it	is	true	that	
day
may	mean	“period	of	time”	in	many	places	in	the	Old	Testament,	but	that
does	not	demonstrate	that	
day	
must	have	that	meaning	in	Genesis	1.	(2)	The
sixth	day	of	creation	need	not	have	been	longer	than	twenty-four	hours,
especially	if	Adam	only	named	major	representative	kinds	of	birds	and	of
“every	beast	of	the	field”	(Gen.	2:20).	(3)	Though	there	was	no	sun	to	mark
the	first	three	days	of	creation,	nonetheless,	the	earth	was	still	rotating	on	its
axis	at	a	fixed	speed,	and	there	was	“light”	and	“darkness”	that	God	created
on	the	first	day	(Gen.	1:3–4),	and	he	called	the	light	“day”	and	the	darkness
“night”	(Gen.	3:5).	So	God	in	some	way	caused	an	alternation	between	day
and	night	from	the	very	first	day	of	creation,	according	to	Genesis	1:3–5.
What	shall	we	conclude	about	the	length	of	days	in	Genesis	1?	It	does	not
seem	at	all	easy	to	decide	with	the	information	we	now	have.	It	is	not	simply
a	question	of	“believing	the	Bible”	or	“not	believing	the	Bible,”	nor	is	it	a
question	of	“giving	in	to	modern	science”	or	“rejecting	the	clear	conclusions
of	modern	science.”	Even	for	those	who	believe	in	the	complete	truthfulness
of	Scripture	(such	as	the	present	author),	and	who	retain	some	doubt	about	the
exceptionally	long	periods	of	time	scientists	propose	for	the	age	of	the	earth
(such	as	the	present	author),	the	question	does	not	seem	to	be	easy	to	decide.
At	present,	considerations	of	the	power	of	God’s	creative	word	and	the
immediacy	with	which	it	seems	to	bring	response,	the	fact	that	“evening	and
morning”	and	the	numbering	of	days	still	suggest	twenty-four-hour	days,	and
the	fact	that	God	would	seem	to	have	no	purpose	for	delaying	the	creation	of
man	for	thousands	or	even	millions	of	years,	seem	to	me	to	be	strong
considerations	in	favor	of	the	twenty-four-hour	day	position.	But	even	here
there	are	good	arguments	on	the	other	side:	To	the	one	who	lives	forever,	for
whom	“one	day	is	as	a	thousand	years,	and	a	thousand	years	as	one	day”	(2
Peter	3:8),	who	delights	in	gradually	working	out	all	his	purposes	over	time,
perhaps	15	billion	years	is	just	the	right	amount	of	time	to	take	in	preparing
the	universe	for	man’s	arrival	and	4.5	billion	years	in	preparing	the	earth.	The
evidence	of	incredible	antiquity	in	the	universe	would	then	serve	as	a	vivid
reminder	of	the	even	more	amazing	nature	of	God’s	eternity,	just	as	the
incredible	size	of	the	universe	causes	us	to	wonder	at	God’s	even	greater
omnipresence	and	omnipotence.
Therefore,	with	respect	to	the	length	of	days	in	Genesis	1,	the	possibility	must
be	left	open	that	God	has	chosen	not	to	give	us	enough	information	to	come	to
a	clear	decision	on	this	question,	and	the	real	test	of	faithfulness	to	him	may
be	the	degree	to	which	we	can	act	charitably	toward	those	who	in	good
conscience	and	full	belief	in	God’s	Word	hold	to	a	different	position	on	this
matter.
4.	Both	“Old	Earth”	and	“Young	Earth”	Theories	Are	Valid	Options	for
Christians	Who	Believe	the	Bible	Today.
	After	discussing	several
preliminary	considerations	regarding	the	age	of	the	earth,	we	come	finally	to
the	specific	arguments	for	old	earth	and	young	earth	views.
a.	“Old	Earth”	Theories	of	Creation:
	In	this	first	category	we	list	two
viewpoints	held	by	those	who	believe	in	an	old	earth	with	an	age	of	about	4.5
billion	years	and	a	universe	about	15	billion	years	old.
(1)	Day-Age	View:
	Many	who	believe	that	the	earth	is	many	millions	of
years	old	maintain	that	the	days	of	Genesis	1	are	extremely	long	“ages”	of
time.
58
	The	arguments	given	above	for	long	days	in	Genesis	1	will	apply	here,
and,	as	we	argued	above,	the	words	of	the	Hebrew	text	do	allow	for	the	days
to	be	long	periods	of	time.	The	evident	advantage	of	this	view	is	that,	if	the
current	scientific	estimate	for	an	earth	4.5	billion	years	old	is	correct,	it
explains	how	the	Bible	is	consistent	with	this	fact.	Among	evangelicals	who
hold	to	an	old	earth	view,	this	is	a	common	position.	This	view	is	sometimes
called	a	“concordist”	view	because	it	seeks	agreement	or	“concord”	between
the	Bible	and	scientific	conclusions	about	dating.
Many	have	been	attracted	to	this	position	because	of	scientific	evidence
regarding	the	age	of	the	earth.	A	very	helpful	survey	of	the	views	of
theologians	and	scientists	regarding	the	age	of	the	earth,	from	ancient	Greece
to	the	twentieth	century,	is	found	in	a	book	by	a	professional	geologist	who	is
also	an	evangelical	Christian,	Davis	A.	Young,	
Christianity	and	the	Age	of	the
Earth.
59
	Young	demonstrates	that	in	the	nineteenth	and	twentieth	centuries,
many	Christian	geologists,	under	the	weight	of	apparently	overwhelming
evidence,	have	concluded	that	the	earth	is	about	4.5	billion	years	old.
Although	some	“young	earth”	proponents	(see	discussion	below)	have
claimed	that	radiometric	dating	techniques	are	inaccurate	because	of	changes
that	occurred	on	the	earth	at	the	time	of	the	flood,	Young	notes	that
radiometric	dating	of	rocks	from	the	moon	and	of	meteorites	recently	fallen	to
the	earth,	which	could	not	have	been	affected	by	Noah’s	flood,	coincide	with
many	other	radiometric	evidences	from	various	materials	on	the	earth,	and
that	the	results	of	these	tests	are	“remarkably	consistent	in	pointing	to	about
4.5–4.7	billion	years.”
60
Some	of	Young’s	most	forceful	arguments	for	an	old	earth,	in	addition	to
those	from	radiometric	dating,	include	the	time	required	for	liquid	magma	to
cool	(about	1	million	years	for	a	large	formation	in	southern	California),	the
time	and	pressure	required	for	the	formation	of	many	metamorphic	rocks	that
contain	small	fossils	(some	apparently	could	only	be	formed	by	the	pressure
of	being	buried	twelve	to	eighteen	miles	under	ground	and	later	brought	to	the
surface—but	when	could	this	have	happened	on	a	young	earth	view?),
continental	drift	(fossil-bearing	rock	fields	near	the	coasts	of	Africa	and	South
America	were	apparently	previously	joined	together,	then	separated	by
continental	drift,	something	that	could	not	have	happened	in	20,000	years	at
the	present	rate	of	two	centimeters	per	year),
61
	and	coral	reefs	(some	of	which
apparently	would	have	required	hundreds	of	thousands	of	years	of	gradual
deposits	to	attain	their	present	state).
62
	Several	other	arguments,	especially
from	astronomy,	have	been	summarized	by	Robert	C.	Newman	and	Herman	J.
Eckelmann,	Jr.,	in	
Genesis	One	and	the	Origin	of	the	Earth.
63
	These
arguments	favor	an	old	earth	view,	and	the	day-age	theory	is	an	attractive
position	for	old	earth	advocates.
The	day-age	view	is	certainly	possible,	but	it	has	several	difficulties:	(1)	The
sequence	of	events	in	Genesis	1	does	not	exactly	correspond	to	current
scientific	understanding	of	the	development	of	life,	which	puts	sea	creatures
(Day	5)	before	trees	(Day	3),	and	insects	and	other	land	animals	(Day	6),	as
well	as	fish	(Day	5),	before	birds	(Day	5).
64
	(2)	The	greatest	difficulty	for	this
view	is	that	it	puts	the	sun,	moon,	and	stars	(Day	4)	millions	of	years	
after	
the
creation	of	plants	and	trees	(Day	3).	That	makes	no	sense	at	all	according	to
current	scientific	opinion,	which	sees	the	stars	as	formed	long	before	the	earth
or	any	living	creatures	on	the	earth.	It	also	makes	no	sense	in	terms	of	the	way
the	earth	now	operates,	for	plants	do	not	grow	without	sunlight,	and	there	are
many	plants	(Day	3)	that	do	not	pollinate	without	birds	or	flying	insects	(Day
5),	and	there	are	many	birds	(Day	5)	that	live	off	creeping	insects	(Day	6).
Moreover,	how	would	the	waters	on	the	earth	keep	from	freezing	for	millions
of	years	without	the	sun?
In	response,	those	who	hold	the	concordist	view	say	that	the	sun,	moon,	and
stars	were	created	on	Day	1	(the	creation	of	light)	or	before	Day	1,	when	“in
the	beginning	God	created	the	heavens	and	the	earth”	(Gen.	1:1),	and	that	the
sun,	moon,	and	stars	were	only	
made	visible	
or	
revealed	
on	Day	4	(Gen.
1:14–19).	But	this	argument	is	not	very	convincing,	because	all	the	other	five
days	of	creation	involve	not	
revealing	
something	that	was	previously	created
but	actually	
creating	
things	for	the	first	time.	Moreover,	the	creative
statements	are	similar	to	those	of	other	days,	“And	God	said,	‘Let	there	be
lights	in	the	firmament	of	the	heavens	to	separate	the	day	from	the	night	.	.	.
to	give	light	upon	the	earth.’	And	it	was	so”	(Gen.	1:14–15).	This	is	the	form
of	language	used	in	verses	3,	6,	11,	20,	and	24	for	creating	things,	not
revealing	them.	Furthermore,	the	creation	(not	the	revealing)	of	the	sun,
moon,	and	stars	is	made	explicit	in	the	next	sentence:	“And	God	made	the	two
great	lights,	the	greater	light	to	rule	the	day,	and	the	lesser	light	to	rule	the
night;	he	made	the	stars	also”	(Gen.	1:16).	Here	the	word	“made”	(Heb.
‘āsāh
)	is	the	same	word	used	when	God	
made	
the	firmament,	the	beasts	of	the
earth,	and	man	(Gen.	1:7,	25,	26)—in	none	of	these	cases	is	it	used	to	speak
of	revealing	something	previously	made.	The	Hebrew	
‘āsāh	
is	also	the	word
used	in	the	summary	in	verse	31:	“And	God	saw	everything	that	he	had	made,
and	behold,	it	was	very	good.”	This	frequent	use	throughout	Genesis	1	makes
it	very	unlikely	that	Genesis	1:16	merely	refers	to	the	revealing	of	the	sun,
moon,	and	stars.
But	a	modification	of	the	day-age	view	in	response	to	these	objections	seems
possible.	The	verbs	in	Genesis	1:16	can	be	taken	as	perfects,	indicating
something	that	God	had	done	before:	“And	God	
had	made	
the	two	great
lights,	the	greater	light	to	rule	the	day,	and	the	lesser	light	to	rule	the	night;	he
had	made
65
	the	stars	also.”	Grammatically	this	is	possible	(this	is	how	the
NIV	translates	the	same	verb	form	in	2:8	and	2:19,	for	example).	This	view
would	imply	that	God	had	made	the	sun,	moon,	and	stars	earlier	(in	v.	
1,	the
creation	of	heavens	and	earth,	or	in	v.	
3,	the	creation	of	light)	but	only	placed
them	near	the	earth	on	Day	4,	or	allowed	them	to	be	seen	from	the	earth	on
Day	4	(vv.	14–15,	17–18).	This	allows	the	word	
made	
(
‘āsāh
)	to	mean
“created”	and	thus	avoids	the	difficulty	mentioned	above	with	the	view	that	it
means	“revealed”	in	verse	16.	This	option	remains	as	a	genuine	possibility	for
the	day-age	view,	and	in	fact	this	view	is	the	one	that	seems	most	persuasive
to	the	present	author,	if	an	old	earth	position	is	to	be	adopted.	With	regard	to
light	needed	for	the	plants	and	warmth	needed	for	the	waters,	there	was	light
available	from	Day	1—even	if	we	are	not	sure	whether	this	light	was	light
from	the	sun	and	stars	or	the	light	of	God’s	glory	(which	will	replace	the	sun
in	the	New	Jerusalem,	Rev.	21:23).
66
Another	answer	from	the	day-age	view	might	be	that	the	fourth	day	is	not
exactly	in	sequence,	though	an	overall	outline	of	progressive	work	of	God	is
given.	Yet	once	we	begin	changing	the	sequence	of	events	that	is	so
prominent	in	this	progression	of	six	creative	days,	it	is	doubtful	that	we	need
to	allow	the	text	to	tell	us	anything	other	than	the	bare	fact	that	God	created
things—but	in	that	case,	the	whole	inquiry	about	the	age	of	the	earth	is
unnecessary.	(Further	discussion	of	disruption	in	the	sequence	of	days	is
given	in	the	next	section.)
(2)	Literary	Framework	View:
	Another	way	of	interpreting	the	days	of
Genesis	1	has	gained	a	significant	following	among	evangelicals.	Since	it
argues	that	Genesis	1	gives	us	no	information	about	the	age	of	the	earth,	it
would	be	compatible	with	current	scientific	estimates	of	a	very	old	earth.	This
view	argues	that	the	six	days	of	Genesis	1	are	not	intended	to	indicate	a
chronological	sequence	of	events,	but	are	rather	a	literary	“framework,”
which	the	author	uses	to	teach	us	about	God’s	creative	activity.	The
framework	is	skillfully	constructed	so	that	the	first	three	days	and	the	second
three	days	correspond	to	each	other.
67
Days	of	forming
	
	
Days	of	filling
Day	1:	Light	and	darkness
Day	4:	Sun,	moon,	and
separated
	
	
stars	(lights	in	the	heaven)
Day	2:	Sky	and	waters
separated
	
	
Day	5:	Fish	and	birds
Day	3:	Dry	land	and	seas
separated,	plants	and	trees
	
	
Day	6:	Animals	and	man
In	this	way	a	parallel	construction	is	seen.	On	Day	1	God	separates	light	and
darkness,	while	on	Day	4	he	puts	the	sun,	moon,	and	stars	in	the	light	and	in
the	darkness.	On	Day	2	he	separates	the	waters	and	the	sky,	while	on	Day	5
he	puts	the	fish	in	the	waters	and	the	birds	in	the	sky.	On	Day	3	he	separates
the	dry	land	and	the	seas	and	makes	plants	to	grow,	while	on	Day	6	he	puts
the	animals	and	man	on	the	dry	land	and	gives	the	plants	to	them	for	food.
According	to	the	“framework”	view,	Genesis	1	should	not	be	read	as	though
the	author	wanted	to	inform	us	about	the	sequence	of	days	or	the	order	in
which	things	were	created,	nor	did	he	intend	to	tell	us	about	the	length	of	time
the	creation	took.	The	arrangement	of	six	“days”	is	a	literary	device	the
author	uses	to	teach	that	God	created	everything.	The	six	“days,”	which	are
neither	twenty-four-hour	days	nor	long	periods	of	time,	give	us	six	different
“pictures”	of	creation,	telling	us	that	God	made	all	aspects	of	the	creation,	that
the	pinnacle	of	his	creative	activity	was	man,	and	that	over	all	creation	is	God
himself,	who	rested	on	the	seventh	day	and	who	calls	man	therefore	to
worship	him	on	the	sabbath	day	as	well.
68
In	the	words	of	a	recent	advocate	of	this	position,	“Chronology	has	no	place
here.”
69
	The	attractions	in	favor	of	this	hypothesis	are	(1)	the	neat
correspondence	between	the	pairs	of	days	as	shown	in	the	table	above,	(2)	the
fact	that	it	avoids	any	conflict	with	modern	science	over	the	age	of	the	earth
and	the	age	of	living	creatures	(since	no	chronology	at	all	is	implied),	(3)	the
way	it	avoids	the	conflict	of	sequence	between	Genesis	1	and	2	in	which	man
(Gen.	2:7)	seems	to	be	formed	before	plants	(Gen.	2:8)	and	animals	(Gen.
2:19),	a	sequence	different	from	Genesis	1,	and	(4)	the	fact	that	Genesis	2:5
shows	that	the	“days”	of	creation	were	not	literal	twenty-four-hour	days,	for	it
says	that	there	were	no	plants	on	the	earth	because	it	had	not	yet	rained,
something	that	would	not	make	sense	in	a	six	day	creation,	since	plants	can
certainly	survive	three	or	four	days	without	rain.
Several	points	may	be	made	against	the	framework	theory.
1.	First,	the	proposed	correspondence	between	the	days	of	creation	is	not
nearly	as	exact	as	its	advocates	have	supposed.	The	sun,	moon,	and	stars
created	on	the	fourth	day	as	“lights	in	the	firmament	of	the	heavens”	(Gen.
1:14)	are	placed	not	in	any	space	created	on	Day	1	but	in	the	“firmament”
(Heb.	
raqia‘
)	that	was	created	on	the	second	day.	In	fact,	the	correspondence
in	language	is	quite	explicit:	this	“firmament”	is	not	mentioned	at	all	on	Day
1	but	five	times	on	Day	2	(Gen.	1:	6–8)	and	three	times	on	Day	4	(Gen.	1:14–
19).	Of	course	Day	4	also	has	correspondences	with	Day	1	(in	terms	of	day
and	night,	light	and	darkness),	but	if	we	say	that	the	second	three	days	show
the	creation	of	things	to	fill	the	forms	or	spaces	created	on	the	first	three	days,
then	Day	4	overlaps	at	least	as	much	with	Day	2	as	it	does	with	Day	1.
Moreover,	the	parallel	between	Days	2	and	5	is	not	exact,	because	in	some
ways	the	preparation	of	a	space	for	the	fish	and	birds	of	Day	5	does	not	come
in	Day	2	but	in	Day	3.	It	is	not	until	Day	3	that	God	gathers	the	waters
together	and	calls	them	“seas”	(Gen.	1:10),	and	on	Day	5	the	fish	are
commanded	to	“fill	the	waters	in	the	
seas”	
(Gen.	1:22).	Again	in	verses	26
and	28	the	fish	are	called	“fish	of	the	
sea,”	
giving	repeated	emphasis	to	the
fact	that	the	sphere	the	fish	inhabit	was	specifically	formed	on	Day	3.	Thus,
the	fish	formed	on	Day	5	seem	to	belong	much	more	to	the	place	prepared	for
them	on	Day	3	than	to	the	widely	dispersed	waters	below	the	firmament	on
Day	2.	Establishing	a	parallel	between	Day	2	and	Day	5	faces	further
difficulties	in	that	nothing	is	created	on	Day	5	to	inhabit	the	“waters	above	the
firmament,”	and	the	flying	things	created	on	this	day	(the	Hebrew	word
would	include	flying	insects	as	well	as	birds)	not	only	fly	in	the	sky	created
on	Day	2,	but	also	live	and	multiply	on	the	“earth”	or	“dry	land”	created	on
Day	3.	(Note	God’s	command	on	Day	5:	“Let	birds	multiply	on	the	earth”
[Gen.	1:22].)	Finally,	the	parallel	between	Days	3	and	6	is	not	precise,	for
nothing	is	created	on	Day	6	to	fill	the	seas	that	were	gathered	together	on	Day
3.	With	all	of	these	points	of	imprecise	correspondence	and	overlapping
between	places	and	things	created	to	fill	them,	the	supposed	literary
“framework,”	while	having	an	initial	appearance	of	neatness,	turns	out	to	be
less	and	less	convincing	upon	closer	reading	of	the	text.
2.	Since	all	proposals	for	understanding	Genesis	1	attempt	to	provide
explanations	for	scientific	data	about	the	age	of	the	earth,	this	is	not	a	unique
argument	in	favor	of	the	framework	theory.	However,	we	must	recognize	that
one	aspect	of	the	attractiveness	of	this	theory	is	the	fact	that	it	relieves
evangelicals	of	the	burden	of	even	trying	to	reconcile	scientific	findings	with
Genesis	1.	Yet,	in	the	words	of	one	advocate	of	this	theory,	“So	great	is	the
advantage,	and	for	some	the	relief,	that	it	could	constitute	a	temptation.”	He
wisely	adds,	“We	must	not	espouse	the	theory	on	grounds	of	its	convenience
but	only	if	the	text	leads	us	in	that	direction.”
70
3.	Those	who	have	not	adopted	the	framework	theory	have	seen	no	conflict	in
sequence	between	Genesis	1	and	2,	for	it	has	been	commonly	understood	that
Genesis	2	implies	no	description	of	sequence	in	the	original	creation	of	the
animals	or	plants,	but	simply	recapitulates	some	of	the	details	of	Genesis	1	as
important	for	the	specific	account	of	the	creation	of	Adam	and	Eve	in	Genesis
2.	The	NIV	avoids	the	appearance	of	conflict	by	translating,	“Now	the	L
ORD
God	
had	planted	
a	garden	in	the	East,	in	Eden”	(Gen.	2:8)	and	“Now	the
L
ORD
	God	
had	formed	out	
of	the	ground	all	the	beasts	of	the	field	and	all	the
birds	of	the	air”	(Gen.	2:19).
4.	Genesis	2:5	does	not	really	say	that	plants	were	not	on	the	earth	because
the	earth	was	too	dry	to	support	them.	If	we	adopt	that	reasoning	we	would
also	have	to	say	there	were	no	plants	because	“there	was	no	man	to	till	the
ground”	(Gen.	2:5),	for	that	is	the	second	half	of	the	comment	about	no	rain
coming	on	the	earth.	Moreover,	the	remainder	of	the	sentence	says	that	the
earth	was	the	opposite	of	being	too	dry	to	support	plants:	“streams	came	up
from	the	earth	and	watered	the	whole	surface	of	the	ground”	(Gen.	2:6	NIV).
The	statement	in	Genesis	2:5	is	simply	to	be	understood	as	an	explanation	of
the	general	time	frame	in	which	God	created	man.	Genesis	2:4–6	sets	the
stage,	telling	us	that	“no	plant	of	the	field	was	yet	in	the	earth	and	no	herb	of
the	field	had	yet	sprung	up—for	the	L
ORD
	God	had	not	caused	it	to	rain	upon
the	earth,	and	there	was	no	man	to	till	the	ground;	but	a	mist	went	up	from	the
earth	and	watered	the	whole	face	of	the	ground.”	The	statements	about	lack	of
rain	and	no	man	to	till	the	ground	do	not	give	the	
physical	reason	
why	there
were	no	plants,	but	only	explain	that	God’s	work	of	creation	was	not
complete.	This	introduction	puts	us	back	into	the	first	six	days	of	creation	as	a
general	setting—into	“the	day	that	the	L
ORD
	God	made	the	earth	and	the
heavens”	(Gen.	2:4).	Then	in	that	setting	it	abruptly	introduces	the	main	point
of	chapter	2—the	creation	of	man.	The	Hebrew	text	does	not	include	the	word
“then”	at	the	beginning	of	verse	7,	but	simply	begins,	“And	the	L
ORD
	God
formed	man”	(Gen.	2:7	KJV).
71
5.	Finally,	the	strongest	argument	against	the	framework	view,	and	the	reason
why	comparatively	few	evangelicals	have	adopted	it,	is	that	the	whole	of
Genesis	1	strongly	suggests	not	just	a	literary	framework	but	a	chronological
sequence	of	events.	When	the	narrative	proceeds	from	the	less	complex
aspects	of	creation	(light	and	darkness,	waters,	sky,	and	dry	land)	to	the	more
complex	aspects	(fish	and	birds,	animals	and	man)	we	see	a	progressive	build-
up	and	an	ordered	sequence	of	events	that	are	entirely	understandable
chronologically.	When	a	sequence	of	numbers	(1-2-3-4-5-6)	is	attached	to	a
set	of	days	that	correspond	exactly	to	the	ordinary	week	human	beings
experience	(Day	1,	Day	2,	Day	3,	Day	4,	Day	5,	Day	6,	Day	7,	with	rest	on
Day	7),	the	implication	of	chronological	sequence	in	the	narrative	is	almost
inescapable.	The	sequence	of	days	seems	more	clearly	intended	than	a	literary
framework	which	is	nowhere	made	explicit	in	the	text,	and	in	which	many
details	simply	do	not	fit.	As	Derek	Kidner	observes:
The	march	of	the	days	is	too	majestic	a	progress	to	carry	no
implication	of	ordered	sequence;	it	also	seems	over-subtle	to	adopt	a
view	of	the	passage	which	discounts	one	of	the	primary	impressions	it
makes	on	the	ordinary	reader.	It	is	a	story,	not	only	a	statement.
72
6.	A	sequence	of	days	is	also	implied	in	God’s	command	to	human	beings	to
imitate	his	pattern	of	work	plus	rest:	“Remember	the	sabbath	day,	to	keep	it
holy.	Six	days	you	shall	labor,	and	do	all	your	work;	but	the	seventh	day	is	a
sabbath	to	the	L
ORD
	your	God	.	.	.	for	in	six	days	the	L
ORD
	made	heaven	and
earth,	the	sea,	and	all	that	is	in	them,	and	rested	the	seventh	day”	(Ex.	20:8–
11).	But	if	God	did	not	create	the	earth	by	working	for	six	days	and	resting	on
the	seventh,	then	the	command	to	imitate	him	would	be	misleading	or	make
no	sense.
In	conclusion,	while	the	“framework”	view	does	not	deny	the	truthfulness	of
Scripture,	it	adopts	an	interpretation	of	Scripture	which,	upon	closer
inspection,	seems	very	unlikely.
b.	“Young	Earth”	Theories	of	Creation:
	Another	group	of	evangelical
interpreters	rejects	the	dating	systems	that	currently	give	an	age	of	millions	of
years	to	the	earth	and	argue	instead	that	the	earth	is	quite	young,	perhaps
10,000	to	20,000	years	old.	Young	earth	advocates	have	produced	a	number
of	scientific	arguments	for	a	recent	creation	of	the	earth.
73
	Those	who	hold	to
a	young	earth	generally	advocate	one	or	both	of	the	following	positions:
(1)	Creation	With	an	Appearance	of	Age	(Mature	Creationism):
	Many
who	hold	to	a	young	earth	point	out	that	the	original	creation	must	have	had
an	“appearance	of	age”	even	from	the	first	day.	(Another	term	for	this	view	is
“mature	creationism,”	since	it	affirms	that	God	created	a	mature	creation.)
The	appearance	of	Adam	and	Eve	as	full-grown	adults	is	an	obvious	example.
They	appeared	as	though	they	had	lived	for	perhaps	twenty	or	twenty-five
years,	growing	up	from	infancy	as	human	beings	normally	do,	but	in	fact	they
were	less	than	a	day	old.	Similarly,	they	probably	saw	the	stars	the	first	night
that	they	lived,	but	the	light	from	most	stars	would	take	thousands	or	even
millions	of	years	to	reach	the	earth.	This	suggests	that	God	created	the	stars
with	light	beams	already	in	place.	And	full-grown	trees	would	probably	have
had	rings	(Adam	and	Eve	would	not	have	had	to	wait	years	before	God	told
them	which	trees	of	the	garden	they	could	eat	from	and	which	they	could	not,
nor	would	they	have	had	to	wait	weeks	or	months	before	edible	plants	grew
large	enough	to	provide	them	food).	Following	this	line	of	reasoning,	might
we	go	further	and	suppose	that	many	geological	formations,	when	originally
created,	had	a	similar	appearance	to	formations	that	would	now	take
thousands	or	even	millions	of	years	to	complete	by	present	“slow”	processes?
This	suggestion	has	currently	found	many	supporters,	and,	initially	at	least,	it
seems	to	be	an	attractive	proposal.	Those	who	hold	this	position	often
combine	it	with	certain	objections	to	current	scientific	dating	processes.	They
question	how	we	can	be	certain	of	the	reliability	of	radiometric	dating	beyond
a	few	thousand	years,	for	example,	and	how	scientists	can	know	that	the	rates
of	decay	of	certain	elements	have	been	constant	since	creation.	They	also
suggest	that	events	such	as	the	fall	and	the	subsequent	cursing	of	nature
(which	altered	the	productivity	and	ecological	balance	of	the	earth,	and
caused	man	himself	to	begin	to	age	and	decay,	Gen.	3:17–19),	or	the	flood	in
Noah’s	time	(Gen.	6–9),	may	have	brought	about	significant	differences	in	the
amount	of	radioactive	material	in	living	things.	This	would	mean	that
estimates	of	the	age	of	the	earth	using	present	methods	of	measurement	would
not	be	accurate.
A	common	objection	to	this	“appearance	of	age”	view	is	that	it	“makes	God
an	apparent	deceiver,”
74
	something	that	is	contrary	to	his	nature.	But	is	God	a
“deceiver”	if	he	creates	a	mature	man	and	woman	in	a	day	and	then	tells	us
explicitly	that	he	did	it?	Or	if	he	creates	mature	fish	and	animals	and	full-
grown	trees	and	tells	us	that	he	did	it?	Or	if	he	allows	Adam	and	Eve	to	see
the	stars,	which	he	created	in	order	that	people	might	see	them	and	give	glory
to	him,	on	the	first	night	that	they	lived?	Rather	than	manifesting	deception,	it
seems	that	these	actions	point	to	God’s	infinite	wisdom	and	power.	This	is
particularly	so	if	God	explicitly	tells	us	that	he	created	everything	in	“six
days.”	According	to	this	position,	those	who	are	deceived	are	those	who
refuse	to	hear	God’s	own	explanation	of	how	the	creation	came	about.
The	real	problem	with	the	appearance	of	age	view	is	that	there	are	some
things	in	the	universe	that	it	cannot	easily	account	for.	Everyone	will	agree
that	Adam	and	Eve	were	created	as	adults,	not	newborn	infants,	and	therefore
had	an	appearance	of	age.	Most	who	hold	to	twenty-four-hour	days	in	Genesis
1	would	also	say	there	was	an	appearance	of	age	with	plants	and	trees,	and
with	all	the	animals	when	they	were	first	created	(the	chicken	came	before	the
egg!),	and	probably	with	light	from	the	stars.	But	the	creation	of	fossils
presents	a	real	problem,	for	responsible	Christians	would	not	want	to	suggest
that	God	scattered	fossils	throughout	the	earth	to	give	an	added	appearance	of
age!	This	would	not	be	creating	something	“in	process”	or	in	a	state	of
maturity;	it	would	be	creating	the	remains	of	a	dead	animal,	not	so	that	the
animal	could	serve	Adam	and	Eve,	but	simply	to	make	people	think	the	earth
was	older	than	it	really	was.	Furthermore,	one	would	have	to	say	that	God
created	all	these	dead	animals	and	called	them	“very	good.”
75
While	the	creation	of	stars	with	light	beams	in	place	or	trees	that	are	mature
would	be	for	the	purpose	of	enabling	human	beings	to	glorify	God	for	the
excellence	of	his	creation,	the	depositing	of	fossils	in	the	earth	could	only	be
for	the	purpose	of	misleading	or	deceiving	human	beings	regarding	the	earlier
history	of	the	world.	More	problematic	is	that	Adam,	the	plants,	the	animals,
and	the	stars	all	would	have	appeared	to	have	different	ages	(because	they
were	created	with	mature	functions	in	place),	whereas	modern	geological
research	gives	approximately	the	same	age	estimates	from	radiometric	dating,
astronomical	estimates,	rock	formations,	samples	of	moon	rocks	and
meteorites,	etc.	Why	would	God	create	so	many	different	indications	of	an
earth	that	is	4.5	billion	years	old	if	this	were	not	true?	Would	it	not	be	better
to	conclude	that	the	earth	is	4.5	billion	years	old,	and	that	God	left	many
indications	there	to	show	us	this	fact	rather	than	in	any	way	imply	that	he
deceived	us?	So	it	seems	the	only	credible	explanations	for	the	fossil	record
that	Christians	can	adopt	are:	(a)	current	dating	methods	are	incorrect	by
colossal	proportions	because	of	flawed	assumptions	or	because	of	changes
brought	about	by	the	fall	or	the	flood;	or	(b)	current	dating	methods	are
approximately	correct	and	the	earth	is	many	millions	or	even	billions	of	years
old.
(2)	Flood	Geology:
	Another	common	view	among	evangelicals	is	what	may
be	called	“flood	geology.”	This	is	the	view	that	the	tremendous	natural	forces
unleashed	by	the	flood	at	the	time	of	Noah	(Gen.	6–9)	significantly	altered	the
face	of	the	earth,	causing	the	creation	of	coal	and	diamonds,	for	example,
within	the	space	of	a	year	rather	than	hundreds	of	millions	of	years,	because
of	the	extremely	high	pressure	exerted	by	the	water	on	the	earth.	This	view
also	claims	that	the	flood	deposited	fossils	in	layers	of	incredibly	thick
sediment	all	over	the	earth.
76
	The	flood	geology	view	is	also	called	“neo-
catastrophism”	because	its	advocates	attribute	most	of	the	present	geological
status	of	the	earth	to	the	immense	catastrophe	of	the	flood.
The	geological	arguments	put	forth	by	advocates	of	this	view	are	technical
and	difficult	for	the	nonspecialist	to	evaluate.	Personally,	though	I	think	the
flood	of	Genesis	6–9	was	world-wide,	and	that	it	did	have	a	significant	impact
on	the	face	of	the	earth,	and	that	all	living	people	and	animals	outside	the	ark
perished	in	the	flood,	I	am	not	persuaded	that	all	of	the	earth’s	geological
formations	were	caused	by	Noah’s	flood	rather	than	by	millions	of	years	of
sedimentation,	volcanic	eruptions,	movement	of	glaciers,	continental	drift,
and	so	forth.	The	controversy	over	flood	geology	is	strikingly	different	from
the	other	areas	of	dispute	regarding	creation,	for	its	advocates	have	persuaded
almost	no	professional	geologists,	even	those	who	are	Bible-believing
evangelical	Christians.	By	contrast,	the	books	objecting	to	evolution	that	we
mentioned	above	chronicle	130	years	of	cogent	objections	to	Darwinian
evolution	that	have	been	raised	by	a	significant	number	of	biologists,
biochemists,	zoologists,	anthropologists,	and	paleontologists,	both	Christian
and	non-Christian,	because	evolution	has	so	many	problems	in	explaining
facts	evident	from	observation	of	the	created	world.	If	present	geological
formations	could	only	be	explained	as	the	result	of	a	universal	flood,	then
would	this	not	be	evident	even	to	non-Christians	who	look	at	the	evidence?
Would	not	the	hundreds	of	Christians	who	are	professional	geologists	be
prepared	to	acknowledge	the	evidence	if	it	were	there?	It	may	be	that	the
flood	geologists	are	right,	but	if	they	are,	we	would	expect	to	see	more
progress	in	persuading	some	professional	geologists	that	their	case	is	a
plausible	one.
77
5.	Conclusions	on	the	Age	of	the	Earth.
	How	old	is	the	earth	then?	Where
does	this	discussion	leave	us?	Young’s	arguments	for	an	old	earth	based	on
many	kinds	of	scientific	data	from	different	disciplines	seem	(to	the	present
writer	at	least)	to	be	very	strong.	This	is	particularly	true	of	arguments	based
on	fossil-bearing	rocks,	coral	reefs,	continental	drift,	and	the	similarity	of
results	from	different	kinds	of	radiometric	dating.	Newman	and	Eckelmann’s
arguments	from	astronomy	indicating	a	very	old	universe	give	significant
added	weight.	It	is	understandable,	on	the	one	hand,	that	God	may	have
created	a	universe	in	which	stars	appeared	to	have	been	shining	for	15	billion
years,	Adam	appeared	to	have	been	living	for	25	years,	some	trees	appeared
to	have	been	living	for	50	years,	and	some	animals	appeared	to	have	been
living	for	1	to	10	years.	But,	on	the	other	hand,	it	is	difficult	to	understand
why	God	would	have	created	dozens	or	perhaps	hundreds	of	different	kinds
of	rocks	and	minerals	on	the	earth,	all	of	which	actually	were	only	one	day
old,	but	all	of	which	had	an	appearance	of	being	exactly	4.5	billion	years	old
—exactly	the	apparent	age	that	he	also	gave	the	moon	and	the	meteorites
when	they,	too,	were	only	one	day	old.	And	it	is	difficult	to	understand	why
the	evidence	of	star	life	cycles	and	the	expansion	of	the	universe	would	make
the	universe	appear	to	be	15	billion	years	old	if	it	were	not.	It	is	possible,	but
it	seems	unlikely,	almost	as	if	God’s	only	purpose	in	giving	these	uniform
apparent	ages	was	to	mislead	us	rather	than	simply	to	have	a	mature,
functioning	universe	in	place.	So	the	old	earth	advocates	seem	to	me	to	have	a
greater	weight	of	scientific	evidence	on	their	side,	and	it	seems	that	the
weight	of	evidence	is	increasing	yearly.
On	the	other	hand,	the	interpretations	of	Genesis	1	presented	by	old	earth
advocates,	while	possible,	do	not	seem	as	natural	to	the	sense	of	the	text.
Davis	Young’s	own	solution	of	“seven	successive	figurative	days	of
indeterminate	duration”
78
	really	does	not	solve	the	problem,	for	he	is	willing
to	spread	God’s	creative	activities	around	on	the	various	days	as	needed	in
order	to	make	the	sequence	scientifically	possible.	For	example,	he	thinks	that
some	birds	were	created	before	Day	5:
We	may	also	suggest	that	even	though	birds	were	created	on	the	fifth
day,	nevertheless,	the	most	primitive	birds	or	original	bird	ancestors
were	miraculously	formed	on	a	day	prior	to	the	fifth	day.	Hence	the
data	of	Genesis	1	actually	allow	for	some	overlap	of	the	events	of	the
days.	If	such	overlap	exists,	then	all	apparent	discrepancies	between
Genesis	1	and	science	would	fall	away	(
chapter	6
).
But	this	procedure	allows	us	to	say	that	the	events	of	creation	occurred	at
almost	any	time,	no	matter	whether	Scripture	says	they	occurred	then	or	not.
Once	this	procedure	is	adopted,	then	ultimately	we	can	know	little	if	anything
about	the	sequence	of	creation	events	from	Genesis	1,	because	any	of	the
events	narrated	there	may	have	had	precursors	at	previous	periods	of	time.
This	can	hardly	be	the	impression	the	original	readers	were	intended	to	get
from	the	text.	(Much	more	likely,	however,	is	the	modified	day-age	view
presented	above.)
6.	The	Need	for	Further	Understanding.
	Although	our	conclusions	are
tentative,	at	this	point	in	our	understanding,	Scripture	seems	to	be	more	easily
understood	to	
suggest	
(but	not	to	require)	a	young	earth	view,	while	the
observable	facts	of	creation	seem	increasingly	to	favor	an	old	earth	view.
Both	views	are	possible,	but	neither	one	is	certain.	And	we	must	say	very
clearly	that	the	age	of	the	earth	is	a	matter	that	is	not	directly	taught	in
Scripture,	but	is	something	we	can	think	about	only	by	drawing	more	or	less
probable	inferences	from	Scripture.	Given	this	situation,	it	would	seem	best
(1)	to	admit	that	God	may	not	allow	us	to	find	a	clear	solution	to	this	question
before	Christ	returns,	and	(2)	to	encourage	evangelical	scientists	and
theologians	who	fall	in	both	the	young	earth	and	old	earth	camps	to	begin	to
work	together	with	much	less	arrogance,	much	more	humility,	and	a	much
greater	sense	of	cooperation	in	a	common	purpose.
There	are	difficulties	with	both	old	earth	and	young	earth	viewpoints,
difficulties	that	the	proponents	of	each	view	often	seem	unable	to	see	in	their
own	positions.	Progress	will	certainly	be	made	if	old	earth	and	young	earth
scientists	who	are	Christians	will	be	more	willing	to	talk	to	each	other	without
hostility,	
ad	hominem	
attacks,	or	highly	emotional	accusations,	on	the	one
hand,	and	without	a	spirit	of	condescension	or	academic	pride	on	the	other,
for	these	attitudes	are	not	becoming	to	the	body	of	Christ,	nor	are	they
characteristic	of	the	way	of	wisdom,	which	is	“first	pure,	then	peaceable,
gentle,	open	to	reason,	full	of	mercy	and	good	fruits,	without	uncertainty	or
insincerity,”	and	full	of	the	recognition	that	“the	harvest	of	righteousness	is
sown	in	peace	by	those	who	make	peace”	(James	3:17–18).
As	for	evangelism	and	apologetics	done	in	publications	designed	to	be	read
outside	the	evangelical	world,	young	earth	and	old	earth	proponents	could
cooperate	much	more	in	amassing	the	extremely	strong	arguments	for
creation	by	intelligent	design,	and	in	laying	aside	their	differences	over	the
age	of	the	earth.	Too	often	young	earth	proponents	have	failed	to	distinguish
scientific	arguments	for	creation	by	design	from	scientific	arguments	for	a
young	earth,	and	have	therefore	prevented	old	earth	advocates	from	joining
them	in	a	battle	for	the	minds	of	an	unbelieving	scientific	community.
Moreover,	young	earth	proponents	have	sometimes	failed	to	recognize	that
scientific	arguments	for	a	young	earth	(which	seem	to	them	to	be	very
persuasive)	are	not	nearly	as	strong	as	the	overwhelming	scientific	arguments
for	creation	by	intelligent	design.	As	a	result,	young	earth	proponents	have
too	often	given	the	impression	that	the	only	true	“creationists”	are	those	who
believe	not	only	in	creation	by	God	but	also	in	a	young	earth.	The	result	has
been	unfortunate	divisiveness	and	lack	of	community	among	scientists	who
are	Christians—to	the	delight	of	Satan	and	the	grieving	of	God’s	Holy	Spirit.
Finally,	we	can	view	this	controversy	with	some	expectancy	that	there	will	be
further	progress	in	scientific	understanding	of	the	age	of	the	earth.	It	is	likely
that	scientific	research	in	the	next	ten	or	twenty	years	will	tip	the	weight	of
evidence	decisively	toward	either	a	young	earth	or	an	old	earth	view,	and	the
weight	of	Christian	scholarly	opinion	(from	both	biblical	scholars	and
scientists)	will	begin	to	shift	decisively	in	one	direction	or	another.	This
should	not	cause	alarm	to	advocates	of	either	position,	because	the
truthfulness	of	Scripture	is	not	threatened	(our	interpretations	of	Genesis	1
have	enough	uncertainty	that	either	position	is	possible).	Both	sides	need	to
grow	in	knowledge	of	the	truth,	even	if	this	means	abandoning	a	long-held
position.
F.	Application
The	doctrine	of	creation	has	many	applications	for	Christians	today.	It	makes
us	realize	that	the	material	universe	is	good	in	itself,	for	God	created	it	good
and	wants	us	to	use	it	in	ways	pleasing	to	him.	Therefore	we	should	seek	to	be
like	the	early	Christians,	who	“partook	of	food	with	glad	and	generous	hearts”
(Acts	2:46),	always	with	thanksgiving	to	God	and	trust	in	his	provisions.	A
healthy	appreciation	of	creation	will	keep	us	from	false	asceticism	that	denies
the	goodness	of	creation	and	the	blessings	that	come	to	us	through	it.	It	will
also	encourage	some	Christians	to	do	scientific	and	technological	research
into	the	goodness	of	God’s	abundant	creation,	or	to	support	such	research.
79
The	doctrine	of	creation	will	also	enable	us	to	recognize	more	clearly	that
scientific	and	technological	study	in	itself	glorifies	God,	for	it	enables	us	to
discover	how	incredibly	wise,	powerful,	and	skillful	God	was	in	his	work	of
creation.	“Great	are	the	works	of	the	L
ORD
,	studied	by	all	who	have	pleasure
in	them”	(Ps.	111:2).
The	doctrine	of	creation	also	reminds	us	that	God	is	sovereign	over	the
universe	he	created.	He	made	it	all,	and	he	is	Lord	of	all	of	it.	We	owe	all	that
we	are	and	have	to	him,	and	we	may	have	complete	confidence	that	he	will
ultimately	defeat	all	his	enemies	and	be	manifested	as	Sovereign	King	to	be
worshiped	forever.	In	addition,	the	incredible	size	of	the	universe	and	the
amazing	complexity	of	every	created	thing	will,	if	our	hearts	are	right,	draw
us	continually	to	worship	and	praise	him	for	his	greatness.
Finally,	as	we	indicated	above,	we	can	wholeheartedly	enjoy	creative
activities	(artistic,	musical,	athletic,	domestic,	literary,	etc.)	with	an	attitude	of
thanksgiving	that	our	Creator	God	enables	us	to	imitate	him	in	our	creativity.
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
Are	there	ways	in	which	you	could	be	more	thankful	to	God	for	the
excellence	of	his	creation?	Look	around	you	and	give	some	examples	of
the	goodness	of	the	creation	that	God	has	allowed	you	to	enjoy.	Are
there	ways	in	which	you	could	be	a	better	steward	of	parts	of	God’s
creation	of	which	he	has	entrusted	to	your	care?
2
.	
Might	the	goodness	of	all	that	God	created	encourage	you	to	try	to	enjoy
different	kinds	of	foods	than	those	you	normally	prefer?	Can	children	be
taught	to	thank	God	for	variety	in	the	things	God	has	given	us	to	eat?
Does	the	doctrine	of	creation	provide	an	answer	to	some	strict	animal
rights	advocates	who	say	we	should	not	eat	steak	or	chicken	or	other
meat,	or	wear	clothing	made	from	animal	skins,	since	we	are	simply
another	form	of	animal	ourselves?	(See	Gen.	3:21.)
3
.	
In	order	to	understand	something	of	the	despair	felt	by	contemporary
non-Christians,	just	try	to	imagine	for	a	moment	that	you	believe	that
there	is	no	God	and	that	you	are	just	a	product	of	matter	plus	time	plus
chance,	the	spontaneous	result	of	random	variation	in	organisms	over
millions	of	years.	How	would	you	feel	differently	about	yourself?	About
other	people?	About	the	future?	About	right	and	wrong?
4
.	
Why	do	we	feel	joy	when	we	are	able	to	“subdue”	even	a	part	of	the
earth	and	make	it	useful	for	serving	us—whether	it	be	in	growing
vegetables,	developing	a	better	kind	of	plastic	or	metal,	or	using	wool	to
knit	a	piece	of	clothing?	Should	we	feel	joy	at	the	accomplishment	of
these	and	other	tasks?	What	other	attitudes	of	heart	should	we	feel	as	we
do	them?
5
.	
When	you	think	about	the	immensity	of	the	stars,	and	that	God	put	them
in	place	to	show	us	his	power	and	glory,	how	does	it	make	you	feel	about
your	place	in	the	universe?	Is	this	different	from	the	way	a	non-Christian
would	feel?
6
.	
Before	reading	this	chapter,	what	did	you	think	about	the	theory	of
evolution?	How	has	your	view	changed,	if	at	all?
7
.	
What	are	some	things	that	Christians	can	learn	about	theological
discussion	in	general	from	observing	the	current	controversy	over	the
age	of	the	earth?	What	significance	do	you	see	in	this	controversy	for
your	own	Christian	faith?
SPECIAL	TERMS
concordist	theory
	
ideal	time	theory
	
old-earth	theory
creation	
ex	nihilo
	
immanent
	
pantheism
Cro-Magnon	man
	
literary	framework
	
pictorial-day	theory
day-age	theory
	
		theory
	
progressive	creationism
deism
	
macro-evolution
	
theistic	evolution
dualism
	
materialism
	
transcendent
flood	geology
	
mature	creationism
	
twenty-four-hour	day
gap	theory
	
micro-evolution
	
		theory
homo	sapiens
	
neo-catastrophism
	
young	earth	theory
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the	
bibliography	to
chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be	found	in	
Appendix	4
.)
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92			Litton,	74–76
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1875–76			Pope,	1:361–420
1892–94			Miley,	1:276–310
1940			Wiley,	1:440–72
1960			Purkiser,	145–48,	149–63
1983			Carter,	1:130–32,	145–94,	203–8
1983–			Cottrell,	1:48–191
1987–90			Oden,	1:225–69
3.			Baptist
1767			Gill,	1:366–75
1887			Boyce,	166–73
1907			Strong,	371–410
1917			Mullins,	251–64
1976–83			Henry,	6:108–96
1983–85			Erickson,	365–86
1987–94			Lewis/Demarest,	2:17–70
4.			Dispensational
1947			Chafer,	7:99–101,	146
1949			Thiessen,	111–18
1986			Ryrie,	171–94
5.			Lutheran
1917–24			Pieper,	1:467–82
1934			Mueller,	179–88
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1559			Calvin,	1:159–83	(1.14)
1724–58			Edwards,	1:94–121
1861			Heppe,	190–200
1871–73			Hodge,	1:550–574;	2:3–41
1878			Dabney,	26–38,	247–63
1887–1921			Warfield,	
SSW,	
2:132–41
1889			Shedd,	1:463–526;	2a:3–94
1937–66			Murray,	
CW,	
1:325–29;	
CW,	
2:3–13
1938			Berkhof,	126–40,	150–64
1962			Buswell,	1:134–62,	321–43
7.			Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988–92			Williams,	1:95–116
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955			Ott,	79–86,	92–94,	100
2.			Roman	Catholic:	Post-Vatican	II
1980			McBrien,	1:224–28
Other	Works
Several	of	these	titles	have	been	taken	from	an	extensive	bibliography	on
creation	and	evolution	prepared	by	a	professional	biologist,	Dr.	Wayne	Frair
of	The	King’s	College,	Briarcliff	Manor,	New	York.
Anderson,	J.	Kerby,	and	Harold	G.	Coffin.	
Fossils	in	Focus.	
Grand
Rapids:	Zondervan,	1977.
Austin,	Stephen	A.	
Catastrophes	in	Earth	History.	
El	Cajon,	Calif.:
Institute	of	Creation	Research,	1984.	(young	earth	view)
Barclay,	D.	R.	“Creation.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	177–79.
Blocher,	Henri.	
In	the	Beginning:	The	Opening	Chapters	of	Genesis.
Trans.	by	David	G.	Preston.	Leicester:	Inter-Varsity	Press,	1984.
Cameron,	Nigel	M.	de	S.	
Evolution	and	the	Authority	of	the	Bible.
Exeter:	Paternoster,	1983.
_____,	ed.	
In	the	Beginning.	.	.	.:	A	Symposium	on	the	Bible	and
Creation.	
Glasgow:	The	Biblical	Creation	Society,	1980.
Clotz,	J.	W.	
Genes,	Genesis	and	Evolution.	
St.	Louis,	Mo.:	Concordia
Publishing	House,	1970.
_____.	
Studies	in	Creation.	
St.	Louis,	Mo.:	Concordia	Publishing	House,
1985.
Custance,	Arthur	C.	
Evolution	or	Creation.	
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,
1976.
_____.	
Without	Form	and	Void:	A	Study	of	the	Meaning	of	Genesis	1:2.
Brockville,	Ontario:	Doorway	Papers,	1970.
Davidheiser,	Bolton.	
Evolution	and	the	Christian	Faith.	
Grand	Rapids:
Baker,	1969.
Denton,	Michael.	
Evolution:	A	Theory	in	Crisis.	
Bethesda,	Md.:	Adler
and	Adler,	1986.
De	Young,	Donald	B.	
Astronomy	and	the	Bible:	Questions	and	Answers.
Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1989.	(young	earth	view)
Fields,	Weston	W.	
Unformed	and	Unfilled.	
Nutley,	N.J.:	Presbyterian	and
Reformed,	1976.
Frair,	Wayne,	and	Percival	Davis.	
A	Case	for	Creation.	
Norcross,	Ga.:
CRS	Books,	1983.
Gange,	Robert.	
Origins	and	Destiny:	A	Scientist	Examines	God’s
Handiwork.	
Waco,	Tex.:	Word,	1986.
Geisler,	Norman	L.	and	J.	Kerby	Anderson.	
Origin	Science:	A	Proposal
for	the	Creation-Evolution	Controversy.	
Foreword	by	Walter	L.	Bradley.
Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1987.
Gentry,	R.	V.	
Creation’s	Tiny	Mystery.	
Knoxville,	Tenn.:	Earth	Science
Associates,	1986.
Gish,	D.	T.	
Evolution:	The	Challenge	of	the	Fossil	Record.	
El	Cajon,
Calif.:	Master	Books,	1985.	(young	earth	view)
Houston,	James.	
I	Believe	in	the	Creator.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1980.
Hummel,	Charles	E.	
Creation	or	Evolution?	Resolving	the	Crucial
Issues.	
Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,	1989.
Johnson,	Philip	E.	
Darwin	on	Trial.	
Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity
Press,	1991.
Kaiser,	Christopher	B.	
Creation	and	the	History	of	Science.	
Grand
Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1991.
Kerkut,	G.	A.	
Implications	of	Evolution.	
New	York:	Pergamon,	1960.
Kofahl,	Robert	E.,	and	Kelly	L.	Segraves.	
The	Creation	Explanation:	A
Scientific	Alternative	to	Evolution.	
Wheaton,	Ill.:	Harold	Shaw,	1975.
(young	earth	view)
Lester,	L.	P.,	and	R.	G.	Bohlin.	
The	Natural	Limits	to	Biological	Change.
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1984.
Maatman,	Russell.	
The	Bible,	Natural	Science	and	Evolution.	
Grand
Rapids:	Reformed	Fellowship,	1970.
Morris,	Henry	M.,	ed.	
Scientific	Creationism.	
San	Diego,	Calif.:
Creation-Life,	1974.	(young	earth	view)
_____,	and	John	C.	Whitcomb.	
The	Genesis	Flood.	
Philadelphia:
Presbyterian	and	Reformed,	1961.	(young	earth	view)
_____,	and	John	D.	Morris.	
Science,	Scripture,	and	the	Young	Earth:	An
Answer	to	Current	Arguments	Against	the	Biblical	Doctrine	of	Recent
Creation.	
El	Cajon,	Calif.:	Institute	for	Creation	Research,	1989.	(young
earth	view)
Newman,	Robert	C.,	and	Herman	J.	Eckelmann.	
Genesis	One	and	the
Origin	of	the	Earth.	
Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,	1977.
(argues	against	young	earth	view)
Pitman,	M.	
Adam	and	Evolution.	
Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1984.
Ramm,	Bernard.	
The	Christian	View	of	Science	and	Scripture.	
Grand
Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1954.
Ross,	Hugh.	
Creation	and	Time:	A	Biblical	and	Scientific	Perspective	on
the	Creation-Date	Controversy.	
Colorado	Springs:	NavPress,	1994.	(an
articulate	and	highly	trained	scientist	who	argues	against	the	young	earth
view	on	the	basis	of	recent	scientific	evidence)
Rusch,	W.	H.,	Sr.	
The	Argument—Creationism	vs.	Evolutionism.
Norcross,	Ga:	CRS	Books,	1984.
Schaeffer,	Francis.	
No	Final	Conflict.	
Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity
Press,	1975.
Thaxton,	C.	B.,	W.	L.	Bradley,	and	R.	L.	Olsen.	
The	Mystery	of	Life’s
Origin:	Reassessing	Current	Theories.	
New	York:	Philosophical	Library,
1984.
Van	Till,	Howard	J.,	Davis	A.	Young,	and	Clarence	Menninga.	
Science
Held	Hostage:	What’s	Wrong	With	Creation	Science	and	Evolutionism?
Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,	1988.	(argues	against	young
earth	view)
Whitcomb,	John	C.	
The	World	That	Perished.	
Grand	Rapids:	Baker,
1988.	(young	earth	view)
_____.	
The	Early	Earth.	
Revised	edition.	Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1986.
(young	earth	view)
Wilder-Smith,	A.	E.	
The	Natural	Sciences	Know	Nothing	of	Evolution.	
El
Cajon,	Calif.:	Master	Books,	1981.
Young,	Davis	A.	
Christianity	and	the	Age	of	the	Earth.	
Grand	Rapids:
Zondervan,	1982.	(argues	against	young	earth	view)
_____.	
Creation	and	the	Flood:	An	Alternative	to	Flood	Geology	and
Theistic	Evolution.	
Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1977.	(argues	against	young
earth	view)
Youngblood,	Ronald.	
How	It	All	Began.	
Ventura,	Calif.:	Regal,	1980.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
Nehemiah	9:6:	
And	Ezra	said:	“You	are	the	L
ORD
,	you	alone;	you	have	made
heaven,	the	heaven	of	heavens,	with	all	their	host,	the	earth	and	all	that	is	on
it,	the	seas	and	all	that	is	in	them;	and	you	preserve	all	of	them;	and	the	host
of	heaven	worships	you.
HYMN
“Hallelujah,	Praise	Jehovah!”
This	hymn	contains	the	entire	content	of	Psalm	148	set	to	music.	It	summons
all	creation,	including	“things	visible	and	things	invisible,”	to	worship	God
our	Creator.
Hallelujah,	praise	Jehovah,	from	the	heavens	praise	his	name;
Praise	Jehovah	in	the	highest,	all	his	angels,	praise	proclaim.
All	his	hosts,	together	praise	him,	sun	and	moon	and	stars	on	high;
Praise	him,	O	ye	heav’ns	of	heavens,	and	ye	floods	above	the	sky.
Refrain:
Let	them	praises	give	Jehovah,	for	his	name	alone	is	high,
And	his	glory	is	exalted,	and	his	glory	is	exalted,	and	his	glory	is
exalted
Far	above	the	earth	and	sky.
Let	them	praises	give	Jehovah,	they	were	made	at	his	command;
Them	for	ever	he	established,	his	decree	shall	ever	stand.
From	the	earth,	O	praise	Jehovah,	all	ye	seas,	ye	monsters	all,
Fire	and	hail	and	snow	and	vapors,	stormy	winds	that	hear	his	call.
All	ye	fruitful	trees	and	cedars,	all	ye	hills	and	mountains	high,
Creeping	things	and	beasts	and	cattle,	birds	that	in	the	heavens	fly,
Kings	of	earth,	and	all	ye	people,	princes	great,	earth’s	judges	all;
Praise	his	name,	young	men	and	maidens,	aged	men,	and	children
small.
AUTHOR:	WILLIAM	J.	KIRKPATRICK,	1838–1921
NOTES
1
I	am	grateful	for	many	helpful	comments	on	this	chapter	made	by	friends	with	specialized	knowledge	about	some	aspects	of	it,
especially	Steve	Figard,	Doug	Brandt,	and	Terry	Mortenson.
2
When	we	say	that	the	universe	was	created	“out	of	nothing,”	it	is	important	to	guard	against	a	possible	misunderstanding.	The
word	
nothing	
does	not	imply	some	kind	of	existence,	as	some	philosophers	have	taken	it	to	mean.	We	mean	rather	that	God	did
not	use	any	previously	existing	materials	when	he	created	the	universe.
3
The	RSV	translation	(“so	that	what	is	seen	was	made	out	of	things	which	do	not	appear”)	apparently	affirms	that	God	made	the
universe	out	of	invisible	matter	of	some	sort,	but	the	word	order	of	the	Greek	text	(
mē	ek	phainomenōn
)	shows	that	the	word	“not”
negates	the	phrase	“out	of	appearing	things.”	The	RSV	translation	reads	as	if	the	word	“not”	negated	the	participle	“appearing,”
but	it	would	need	to	appear	immediately	before	it	in	order	to	do	that.	See	discussion	in	Philip	Hughes,	
A	Commentary	on	the
Epistle	to	the	Hebrews	
(Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1977),	pp.	443–52.
4
See	C.	E.	B.	Cranfield,	
A	Critical	and	Exegetical	Commentary	on	the	Epistle	to	the	Romans,	
ICC,	vol.	
1	(Edinburgh:	T.	&	T.
Clark,	1975),	p.	
244:	Greek	
hos	
as	expressing	consequence.
5
See	section	C	(
chapter	15
)	on	God’s	purpose	for	creation.
6
The	word	translated	“host”	(Heb.	
tsābā’
)	is	sometimes	used	to	refer	to	the	planets	and	stars	(Deut.	4:19;	Isa.	34:4;	40:26),	but
none	of	the	examples	cited	in	BDB,	p.	
839	(1.c)	speak	of	the	stars	worshiping	God,	and	most	speak	of	the	heavenly	bodies	as	“the
host	of	heaven”	who	are	wrongly	worshiped	by	pagans	(Deut.	17:3;	2	Kings	17:16;	21:3;	Jer.	8:2;	et	al.).
7
In	spite	of	this	explicit	statement	in	Gen.	2:7,	Derek	Kidner	(who	holds	a	view	of	the	truthfulness	of	Scripture	compatible	with
that	advocated	in	this	book),	does	advocate	the	possibility	of	evolutionary	development	of	a	long	line	of	pre-Adamite	creatures
into	one	of	whom	God	finally	“breathed	human	life”	(
Genesis:	An	Introduction	and	Commentary,	
TOTC	[London	and	Chicago:
InterVarsity	Press,	1967],	p.	
28).	But	he	then	affirms	a	special	creation	of	Eve	(p.	
29).
8
Kidner,	
Genesis,	
p.	57.
9
See	
chapter	11
.
10
See	
chapter	30
,	on	the	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit.
11
See	
chapter	7
,	for	a	discussion	of	the	necessity	of	Scripture	if	we	are	to	interpret	creation	rightly.
12
See	the	discussion	of	God’s	independence	in	
chapter	11
.
13
See	the	discussion	in	
chapter	11
,	on	the	ways	in	which	all	of	creation	reveals	various	aspects	of	God’s	character.
14
See	August	J.	Kling,	“Men	of	Science/	Men	of	Faith,”	
HIS,	
May	1976,	pp.	26–31,	for	a	brief	survey	of	the	life	and	work	of
several	of	these	scientists.
15
For	analysis	of	the	increasingly	large	body	of	scientific	evidence	against	evolution,	see	especially	the	books	by	Michael	Denton
and	Philip	E.	Johnson	cited	in	the	bibliography	to	this	chapter	and	discussed	in	
chapter	15
.
16
Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,	1975.
17
Ibid.,	pp.	25–33.
18
See	the	discussion	in	
chapter	4
,	on	the	relationship	between	Scripture	and	natural	revelation.
19
See	
section	E
	below,	for	a	discussion	of	Darwinian	evolution.
20
We	do	not	need	to	insist	that	the	Hebrew	word	
min	
(“kind”)	corresponds	exactly	with	the	biological	category	“species,”	for	that
is	simply	a	modern	means	of	classifying	different	living	things.	But	the	Hebrew	word	does	seem	to	indicate	a	narrow	specification
of	various	types	of	living	things.	It	is	used,	for	example,	to	speak	of	several	very	specific	types	of	animals	that	bear	young	and	are
distinguished	according	to	their	“kind.”	Scripture	speaks	of	“the	falcon	according	to	its	kind,”	“every	raven	according	to	its	kind,”
“the	hawk	according	to	its	kind,”	“the	heron	according	to	its	kind,”	and	“the	locust	according	to	its	kind”	(Lev.	11:14,	15,	16,	19,
22).	Other	animals	that	exist	according	to	an	individual	“kind”	are	the	cricket,	grasshopper,	great	lizard,	buzzard,	kite,	sea	gull,
and	stork	(Lev.	11:22,	29;	Deut.	14:13,	14,	15,	18).	These	are	very	specific	kinds	of	animals,	and	God	created	them	so	that	they
would	reproduce	only	according	to	their	own	“kinds.”	It	seems	that	this	would	allow	only	for	diversification	within	each	of	these
types	of	animals	(larger	or	smaller	hawks,	hawks	of	different	color	and	with	different	shapes	of	beaks,	etc.),	but	certainly	not	any
“macroevolutionary”	change	into	entirely	different	kinds	of	birds.	(Frair	and	Davis,	
A	Case	for	Creation,	
p.	129,	think	that	“kind”
may	correspond	to	family	or	order	today,	or	else	to	no	precise	twentieth-century	equivalent.)
21
Note	the	phrase	“These	are	the	generations	of	“	introducing	successive	sections	in	the	Genesis	narrative	at	Gen.	2:4	(heavens
and	the	earth);	5:1	(Adam);	6:9	(Noah);	10:1	(the	sons	of	Noah);	11:10	(Shem);	11:27	(Terah,	the	father	of	Abraham);	25:12
(Ishmael);	25:19	(Isaac);	36:1	(Esau);	and	37:2	(Jacob).	The	translation	of	the	phrase	may	differ	in	various	English	versions,	but
the	Hebrew	expression	is	the	same	and	literally	says,	“These	are	the	generations	of.	.	.	.”	By	this	literary	device	the	author	has
introduced	various	sections	of	his	historical	narrative,	tying	it	all	together	in	a	unified	whole,	and	indicating	that	it	is	to	be
understood	as	history-writing	of	the	same	sort	throughout.	If	the	author	intends	us	to	understand	Abraham,	Isaac,	and	Jacob	as
historical	figures,	then	he	also	intends	us	to	understand	Adam	and	Eve	as	historical	figures.
22
Davis	A.	Young,	
Creation	and	the	Flood:	An	Alternative	to	Flood	Geology	and	Theistic	Evolution	
(Grand	Rapids:	Baker,
1977),	p.	
38.	Young	includes	a	discussion	of	the	views	of	Richard	H.	Bube,	one	of	the	leading	proponents	of	theistic	evolution
today	(pp.	33–35).
23
Berkhof,	
Systematic	Theology,	
pp.	139–40.
24
Philip	E.	Johnson,	
Darwin	on	Trial	
(Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,	1991),	points	out	that	some	studies	frequently
claimed	as	evidence	of	evolution	are	really	just	temporary	population	differences	with	no	genetic	change.	For	example,	he
mentions	Kettlewell’s	observation	of	“industrial	melanism”	in	the	peppered	moth,	whereby	the	prevailing	color	of	the	moths
changed	from	white	to	black	and	back	to	white	again	when	leaves	on	trees	were	light	colored,	then	covered	with	soot	from
pollution,	then	again	light	colored	when	the	pollution	ended.	But	at	every	stage,	both	black	and	white	moths	were	present,	even
though	in	differing	proportions	(moths	that	did	not	match	the	leaf	color	were	more	easily	seen	and	eaten	by	predators).	No
evolutionary	change	occurred	at	all,	for	both	black	and	white	moths	were	still	industrial	moths,	just	as	black	and	white	horses	are
both	still	horses.	In	fact,	the	moth	functioned	to	preserve	its	genetic	identity	in	differing	circumstances,	rather	than	evolving	or
becoming	extinct	(see	pp.	26–28,	160–61).
25
Wayne	Frair	and	Percival	Davis,	
A	Case	for	Creation	
(Norcross,	Ga.:	CRS	Books,	1983),	p.	
25.
26
Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,	1991.
27
Johnson,	pp.	15–20	(quotation	from	p.	
18).	Johnson	notes	that	in	a	few	cases	new	“species”	have	been	produced,	in	the	sense	of
a	part	of	a	population	that	is	incapable	of	interbreeding	with	another	part:	this	has	happened	with	fruit	flies	and	with	some	plant
hybrids	(p.	
19).	But	even	though	incapable	of	interbreeding	with	some	other	fruit	flies,	the	new	fruit	flies	still	are	fruit	flies,	not
some	other	kind	of	creature:	the	amount	of	variation	the	fruit	fly	is	capable	of	is	inherently	limited	by	the	range	of	variability	in	its
gene	pool.
28
Johnson	notes	(pp.	29–30)	that	Darwinists	have	even	accounted	for	obviously	disadvantageous	characteristics	by	invoking
pleiotropy,	the	idea	that	several	genetic	changes	may	occur	all	at	once,	so	that	the	negative	ones	come	along	with	the	positive
ones.	On	this	basis	no	existing	characteristic	in	any	animal	could	be	cited	to	disprove	the	claim	that	the	fittest	survive,	for	it	really
becomes	a	claim	that	those	that	have	survived	have	survived.	But	then	how	do	we	really	know	that	survival	of	the	fittest	has	been
the	mechanism	that	has	led	to	current	diversity	of	life	forms?
29
Johnson	does	not	say	that	all	evolutionists	argue	this	way,	but	he	quotes	several	who	do	(pp.	20–23).
30
Johnson,	pp.	32–44.
31
Robert	E.	Kofahl	and	Kelly	L.	Segraves,	
The	Creation	Explanation:	A	Scientific	Alternative	to	Evolution	
(Wheaton,	Ill.:	Harold
Shaw,	1975).	This	book	is	a	fascinating	collection	of	scientific	evidence	favoring	creation	by	intelligent	design.
32
Kofahl	and	Segraves,	
The	Creation	Explanation,	
pp.	2–3.	They	give	many	other	similar	examples.
33
Johnson,	pp.	73–85,	discusses	the	two	examples	sometimes	claimed	out	of	perhaps	100	million	fossils	that	have	been
discovered,	Archaeopteryx	(a	bird	with	some	characteristics	that	resemble	reptiles),	and	some	ape-like	examples	thought	to	be
prehuman	hominids.	Archaeopteryx	is	still	very	much	a	bird,	not	a	near-reptile,	and	studies	of	the	characteristics	of	the	supposedly
prehuman	fossils	include	large	amounts	of	subjective	speculation,	resulting	in	strong	differences	among	experts	who	have
examined	them.
A	helpful	discussion	of	the	gaps	that	remain	in	the	fossil	record	is	found	in	Frair	and	Davis,	
A	Case	for	Creation,	
pp.	55–65.	They
note	that	the	continued	discovery	and	classification	of	fossils	since	Darwin’s	time	has	resulted	in	the	fact	that	“on	the	whole,	the
discontinuities	have	been	emphasized	with	increased	collecting.	There	appears	to	be	little	question	that	the	gaps	are	real,	and	it
seems	increasingly	less	likely	that	they	will	be	filled”	(p.	
57).
34
Johnson,	p.	
50,	apparently	quoting	a	paper	by	Gould	and	Niles	Eldredge,	“Punctuated	Equilibria,	an	Alternative	to	Phyletic
Gradualism,”	printed	as	a	appendix	to	Eldredge’s	book,	
Time	Frames	
(Johnson,	p.	
167).
35
This	view	is	called	“punctuated	equilibrium,”	meaning	that	the	ordinary	equilibrium	of	the	natural	world	was	occasionally
interrupted	(punctuated)	by	the	sudden	appearance	of	new	life	forms.
36
Bethesda,	Md.:	Adler	and	Adler,	1986.
37
Denton,	p.	
345.	An	earlier	analysis	of	evolution	by	a	respected	British	biologist	who	is	himself	an	evolutionist	is	G.	A.	Kerkut,
Implications	of	Evolution	
(New	York:	Pergamon,	1960).	This	is	a	very	technical	study	pointing	out	numerous	remaining
difficulties	in	the	theory	of	evolution.
38
Johnson,	pp.	86–99.
39
Gleason	L.	Archer,	
Encyclopedia	of	Bible	Difficulties,	
p.	57.
40
Johnson,	p.	
104,	quoting	Fred	Hoyle.	In	fact,	one	could	argue	that	the	747	is	more	likely	to	occur	accidentally,	because
intelligent	human	designers	have	been	able	to	make	a	747,	but	they	have	not	been	able	to	make	one	living	cell.
41
Kofahl	and	Segraves,	
The	Creation	Explanation,	
pp.	99–100.
42
Ibid.,	p.	
101,	quoting	Harold	J.	Morowitz,	
Energy	Flow	in	Biology	
(New	York:	Academic	Press,	1968),	p.	
99.	The	classic	study
of	the	mathematical	improbability	of	evolution	is	P.	S.	Moorehead	and	M.	M.	Kaplan,	eds.,	
Mathematical	Challenges	to	the	Neo-
Darwinian	Interpretation	of	Evolution	
(Philadelphia:	The	Wistar	Institute	Symposium	Monograph,	no.	5,	1967).	See	also	the
article	“Heresy	in	the	Halls	of	Biology:	Mathematicians	Question	Darwinism,”	
Scientific	Research	
(November	1987),	pp.	59–66,
and	I.	L.	Cohen,	
Darwin	Was	Wrong—A	Study	in	Probabilities	
(Greenvale,	N.Y.:	New	Research	Publications,	1984).
43
Time,	
September	10,	1973,	p.	
53,	summarizing	the	article	“Directed	Panspermia,”	by	F.	H.	C.	Crick	and	L.	E.	Orgel	in	
Icarus	19
(1973):	341–46.
44
See	
NIDCC,	
p.	283.
45
This	“gap	theory”	is	given	as	one	possible	interpretation	of	Gen.	1:1–2	in	
The	New	Scofield	Reference	Bible	
(Oxford:	Oxford
University	Press,	1967),	in	notes	to	Gen.	1:2	and	Isa.	45:18.	It	also	remains	commonplace	in	much	popular	Bible	teaching.	An
extensive	defense	of	this	theory	is	found	in	Arthur	C.	Custance,	
Without	Form	and	Void:	A	Study	of	the	Meaning	of	Genesis	1:2
(Brockville,	Ontario:	Doorway	Papers,	1970).	An	extensive	critique	is	in	Weston	W.	Fields,	
Unformed	and	Unfilled	
(Nutley,	N.J.:
Presbyterian	and	Reformed,	1976).	A	substantial	critique	of	the	lexical	and	grammatical	arguments	used	in	the	gap	theory	is	also
found	in	Oswald	T.	Allis,	
God	Spake	by	Moses	
(Philadelphia:	Presbyterian	and	Reformed,	1951),	pp.	153–59.
Some	readers	may	wonder	why	I	have	classified	this	view	along	with	secular	views	and	theistic	evolution	as	a	theory	that	seems
“clearly	inconsistent	with	the	teachings	of	Scripture.”	I	should	note	here	that	I	am	doing	this	only	because	the	arguments	for	this
position	seem	to	me	to	be	based	on	highly	unlikely	interpretations	of	the	biblical	text,	and	I	do	not	wish	to	imply	that	those	who
hold	to	the	gap	theory	are	unbelievers,	or	that	they	are	like	many	theistic	evolutionists	who	think	the	Bible	cannot	teach	us	about
science.	On	the	contrary,	advocates	of	the	gap	theory	have	uniformly	been	believers	in	the	total	truthfulness	of	Scripture	on
whatever	subject	it	speaks	to.
46
The	second	word,	
bohû,	
“void,”	only	occurs	two	other	times	in	Scripture	(Isa.	34:11;	Jer.	34:23),	both	picturing	desolate	lands
that	have	experienced	God’s	judgment.	But	the	first	word,	
tohû,	
which	can	mean	“formlessness,	confusion,	unreality,	emptiness”
(
BDB,	
p.	1062),	occurs	nineteen	other	times,	sometimes	to	refer	to	a	desolate	place	resulting	from	judgment	(Isa.	34:11	and	Jer.
34:23,	both	with	
bohû
),	and	sometimes	just	to	refer	to	an	empty	place,	with	no	sense	of	evil	or	judgment	implied	(Job	26:7,	of
“space”	over	which	God	stretches	the	north,	parallel	to	the	“nothingness”	in	which	he	hangs	the	earth;	also	Deut.	32:10;	Job
12:24;	Ps.	107:40).	The	sense	“uninhabitable”	is	especially	appropriate	in	Isa.	45:18,	speaking	of	God’s	creation	of	the	earth:	“He
did	not	create	it	to	be	empty	[
tohû
],	but	formed	it	to	be	inhabited”	(NIV).	(The	fact	that	God	did	not	create	the	earth	to	be	“empty”
but	“formed	it	to	be	inhabited”	[Isa.	45:18]	speaks	of	God’s	completed	work	of	creation	and	does	not	deny	that	it	was	“without
form	and	void”	at	the	earliest	stage	of	creation.)
47
See	a	fuller	discussion	of	the	gaps	in	genealogies	in	Francis	Schaeffer,	
No	Final	Conflict,	
pp.	37–43.
48
The	NIV	translates	the	verse,	“Shubael,	
a	descendant	
of	Gershom,”	but	this	is	simply	an	interpretation,	for	the	Hebrew	text
simply	has	the	word	
ben,	
“son.”	It	should	not	be	objected	that	Gershom	may	have	lived	over	500	years,	for	such	long	life	spans
are	not	found	after	the	flood	(note	Gen.	6:3);	in	fact,	Abraham	was	miraculously	given	a	son	when	he	was	almost	100	(cf.	Rom.
4:19;	Heb.	11:12);	and	Moses,	long	before	David	or	Solomon,	counted	man’s	life	as	70	or	80	years:	“The	years	of	our	life	are
threescore	and	ten,	or	even	by	reason	of	strength	fourscore”	(Ps.	90:10).
49
See	“Chronology	of	the	Old	Testament”	in	
IBD,	
esp.	pp.	268–70.
50
This	table	was	adapted	from	Frair	and	Davis,	
A	Case	for	Creation,	
pp.	122–26,	and	Karl	W.	Butzer,	“Prehistoric	People,”	in
World	Book	Encyclopedia	
(Chicago:	World	Book,	1974),	15:666–74.
51
Kofahl	and	Segraves,	
The	Creation	Explanation,	
p.	207.
52
Two	helpful	discussions	of	the	various	proposed	human	ancestors	are	found	in	Frair	and	Davis,	
A	Case	for	Creation,	
pp.	122–
26,	and	Davis	A.	Young,	
Creation	and	the	Flood,	
pp.	146–55.	Frair	and	Davis	think	that	Neanderthal	man	was	“entirely	human”
although	“racially	distinct”	(p.	
125).
53
Philip	Johnson	notes	that	a	recent	theory	that	has	received	support	from	several	molecular	biologists	is	that	all	humans
descended	from	a	“mitochondrial	Eve”	who	lived	in	Africa	less	than	200,000	years	ago	(
Darwin	on	Trial,	
pp.	83,	177–78).
54
Advocates	of	a	twenty-four-hour	day	can	give	scenarios	whereby	Adam	only	named	representative	types	of	animals	or	named
them	rapidly	without	any	observation	of	their	activities	or	abilities,	but	both	suggestions	are	much	less	likely	interpretations	in
view	of	the	importance	attached	to	naming	in	the	Old	Testament.
55
I	am	assuming	here	that	Moses	wrote	both	Genesis	and	Exodus,	and	that	the	original	readers	were	the	people	of	Israel	in	the
wilderness	around	1440	B.C.
56
In	fact,	the	expression	“and	there	was	evening	and	there	was	morning”	is	never	elsewhere	used	in	the	Hebrew	Old	Testament,
so	it	cannot	be	said	to	be	a	common	expression	used	to	designate	a	normal	day.
57
The	Hebrew	text	does	not	say	“that	your	days	may	be	
many	
(Heb.	
rab
)”	which	is	a	common	Hebrew	expression	(Gen.	21:34;
37:34;	Ex.	2:23;	Num.	9:19;	et	al.),	but	“that	your	days	may	be	
long
”	(Heb.	
’arak,	
“be	long,”	used	also	as	physical	length	in	1
Kings	8:8;	Ps.	129:3;	Isa.	54:2	[”lengthen	your	cords”];	Ezek.	31:5).
58
One	variation	of	this	view	would	say	that	the	six	days	were	twenty-four-hour	days,	but	there	were	millions	of	years	between
each	day	and	the	following	one.	This	is	certainly	possible,	but	the	difficulty	with	this	view	is	that	it	seems	to	be	importing	“gaps”
between	all	the	days	simply	to	account	for	scientific	chronology,	with	no	clear	evidence	in	the	text	to	support	it.	This	view	is
defended	by	Robert	C.	Newman	and	Herman	J.	Eckelmann,	Jr.,	
Genesis	One	and	the	Origin	of	the	Earth	
(Downers	Grove,	Ill.:
InterVarsity	Press,	1977).
59
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1982,	pp.	13–67.
60
Christianity	and	the	Age	of	the	Earth,	
p.	63;	see	also	the	detailed	discussion	on	pp.	93–116,	and	
Creation	and	the	Flood,	
pp.
185–93.
61
See	
Creation	and	the	Flood,	
pp.	171–210,	for	these	examples.	A	continental	drift	of	2	cm.	per	year	x	20,000	years	=	40,000	cm.
or	400	m.	(about	437	yd.	or	
1/4	mile).	This	hardly	accounts	for	the	present	distance	between	South	America	and	Africa.
62
Christianity	and	the	Age	of	the	Earth,	
pp.	84–86.	Coral	reefs	are	not	formed	by	the	immense	pressure	of	a	flood,	but	by	tiny	sea
creatures	(called	coral	polyps)	who	attach	themselves	to	each	other	and	build	colorful	limestone	formations	by	removing	calcium
carbonate	from	seawater	and	depositing	it	around	the	lower	half	of	their	body.	When	they	die,	their	limestone	“skeletons”	remain
behind,	and,	over	tens	of	thousands	of	years,	huge	coral	reefs	are	formed.	This	can	only	happen	in	water	warmer	than	65°	F	(18°
C),	and	in	water	clear	and	shallow	enough	for	photosynthesis	to	occur	in	algae,	which	the	coral	polyps	need	to	produce	their
skeletons.	(See	Robert	D.	Barnes,	“Coral,”	in	
World	Book	Encyclopedia	
[Chicago:	World	Book,	1983],	4:828.)
63
Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,	1977,	pp.	15–34,	89–103.	They	show	that	the	length	of	time	required	for	light	to	reach
the	earth	is	not	the	only	astronomical	evidence	for	a	very	old	universe:	measurements	of	star	movements	show	the	universe	has
apparently	been	expanding	for	over	15	billion	years;	background	radiation	in	the	universe	gives	a	similar	age;	and	the	kind	of	light
coming	from	certain	stars	shows	that	many	stars	have	an	age	consistent	with	this	estimate.	Young	earth	proponents	(see	below)
may	say	that	God	created	the	light	rays	in	place	so	Adam	and	Eve	could	see	stars,	but	it	is	much	harder	to	explain	why	God	would
have	created	these	other	evidences	so	consistent	with	a	universe	about	15	billion	years	old.
64
Of	course,	current	scientific	hypotheses	of	these	sequences	may	be	incorrect.
65
The	second	verb	is	implied	by	the	direct	object	marker	but	is	not	expressed	in	the	Hebrew	text;	it	would	take	the	same	form	as
the	first	verb	in	the	sentence.
66
The	question	of	pollination	without	birds	and	insects	remains	a	difficulty	for	this	view,	though	it	should	be	noted	that	even
today	many	plants	self-pollinate	or	are	cross-pollinated	by	the	wind,	and	we	cannot	be	sure	that	pollination	by	flying	insects	was
required	before	the	fall	and	before	creation	was	complete.	Similarly,	the	need	for	some	birds	to	live	off	creeping	insects	is	a
difficulty,	but	they	possibly	ate	only	plants	and	seeds	before	the	fall.
67
The	following	table	is	adapted	from	
The	NIV	Study	Bible,	
ed.	by	Kenneth	Barker	et	al.	(Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1985),	p.	
6
(note	to	Gen.	1:11).	A	forceful	defense	of	the	“framework”	view	is	found	in	Henri	Blocher,	
In	the	Beginning:	The	Opening
Chapters	of	Genesis,	
trans.	by	David	G.	Preston	(Leicester:	Inter-Varsity	Press,	1984),	pp.	49–59.	Blocher	mentions	several	other
evangelical	scholars	who	hold	this	position,	which	he	calls	the	“literary	interpretation”:	N.	H.	Ridderbos,	Bernard	Ramm,
Meredith	G.	Kline,	D.	F.	Payne,	and	J.	A.	Thompson.	This	“framework”	view	is	called	the	“pictorial	day”	view	in	Millard
Erickson,	
Christian	Theology,	
p.	381.
68
This	framework	view	is	also	defended	by	Ronald	Youngblood,	
How	It	All	Began	
(Ventura,	Calif.:	Regal,	1980),	pp.	25–33.
69
Henri	Blocher,	
In	the	Beginning,	
p.	52.
70
Ibid.,	p.	
50.
71
For	further	discussion	on	Gen.	2:5,	see	Meredith	G.	Kline,	“Because	It	Had	Not	Rained,”	
WTJ	
20	(1957–58):	146–57;	and,	in
response,	Derek	Kidner,	“Genesis	2:5,	6:	Wet	or	Dry?”	
TB	
17	(1966):	109–14.
72
D.	Kidner,	
Genesis:	An	Introduction	and	Commentary,	
TOTC	(Chicago:	InterVarsity	Press,	1967),	pp.	54–55.
73
Several	scientific	arguments	pointing	to	a	young	earth	(about	10,000–20,000	years	old)	are	given	in	Henry	M.	Morris,	ed.,
Scientific	Creationism	
(San	Diego,	Calif.:	Creation-Life,	1974),	esp.	pp.	131–69;	also	Kofahl	and	Segraves,	
The	Creation
Explanation,	
pp.	181–213.
A	response	to	most	of	these	arguments,	from	an	“old	earth”	perspective,	is	given	by	Davis	A.	Young	in	
Christianity	and	the	Age	of
the	Earth,	
pp.	71–131,	and,	specifically	in	response	to	“flood	geology,”	in	
Creation	and	the	Flood,	
pp.	171–213.	Another	book,
Science	Held	Hostage:	What’s	Wrong	With	Creation	Science	and	Evolutionism,	
by	Howard	J.	Van	Till,	Davis	A.	Young,	and
Clarence	Menninga	(Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,	1988),	raises	serious	objections	against	the	evaluation	and	use	of
scientific	research	materials	by	some	prominent	young	earth	advocates	(see	pp.	45–125).	A	preliminary	young	earth	response	to
Young’s	arguments	is	found	in	a	thirty-four-page	pamphlet	by	Henry	M.	Morris	and	John	D.	Morris,	
Science,	Scripture,	and	the
Young	Earth	
(El	Cajon,	Calif.:	Institute	for	Creation	Research,	1989).
74
Millard	Erickson,	
Christian	Theology,	
p.	382.
75
We	should	note	that	old	earth	advocates	must	also	have	God	speaking	in	Gen.	1:31	and	calling	the	old	fossils	“very	good.”	This
is	not	a	decisive	objection	if	the	death	of	animals	before	the	fall	did	not	result	from	sin,	but	it	is	a	difficulty.	Only	flood	geology
advocates	(see	below)	will	say	that	no	fossils	existed	at	Gen.	1:31,	but	that	they	were	deposited	suddenly	by	the	flood	in	Gen.	6–9.
This	perhaps	is	a	consideration	in	favor	of	the	flood	geology	position.
76
See	Henry	M.	Morris	and	John	C.	Whitcomb,	
The	Genesis	Flood	
(Philadelphia:	Presbyterian	and	Reformed,	1961);	John	C.
Whitcomb,	
The	World	That	Perished	
(Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1988);	Stephen	A.	Austin,	
Catastrophes	in	Earth	History	
(El	Cajon,
Calif.:	Institute	for	Creation	Research,	1984).	Other	studies	by	flood	geology	advocates	have	been	published	in	the	
CRSQ,	
though
by	no	means	all	articles	in	that	journal	advocate	the	flood	geology	perspective,	nor	do	all	members	of	the	Creation	Research
Society	hold	to	flood	geology.
77
The	arguments	against	flood	geology	have	been	marshalled	by	an	evangelical	who	is	also	a	professional	geologist;	see	Davis	A.
Young,	
Creation	and	the	Flood:	An	Alternative	to	Flood	Geology	and	Theistic	Evolution,	
and	
Christianity	and	the	Age	of	the
Earth.
78
Creation	and	the	Flood,	
p.	89.
79
Frair	and	Davis,	
A	Case	for	Creation,	
pp.	135–40,	have	many	specific	practical	challenges	to	scientists	who	believe	in	creation
to	do	specific	kinds	of	greatly	needed	research.
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	16
God’s	Providence
If	God	controls	all	things,	how	can	our	actions	have	real
meaning?	What	are	the	decrees	of	God?
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
Once	we	understand	that	God	is	the	all-powerful	Creator	(see	
chapter	15
),	it
seems	reasonable	to	conclude	that	he	also	preserves	and	governs	everything	in
the	universe	as	well.	Though	the	term	
providence	
is	not	found	in	Scripture,	it
has	been	traditionally	used	to	summarize	God’s	ongoing	relationship	to	his
creation.	When	we	accept	the	biblical	doctrine	of	providence,	we	avoid	four
common	errors	in	thinking	about	God’s	relationship	to	creation.	The	biblical
doctrine	is	not	
deism	
(which	teaches	that	God	created	the	world	and	then
essentially	abandoned	it),	nor	
pantheism	
(which	teaches	that	the	creation	does
not	have	a	real,	distinct	existence	in	itself,	but	is	only	part	of	God),	but
providence,	
which	teaches	that	though	God	is	actively	related	to	and	involved
in	the	creation	at	each	moment,	creation	is	distinct	from	him.	Moreover,	the
biblical	doctrine	does	not	teach	that	events	in	creation	are	determined	by
chance	
(or	randomness),	nor	are	they	determined	by	impersonal	
fate	
(or
determinism),	but	by	God,	who	is	the	personal	yet	infinitely	powerful	Creator
and	Lord.
We	may	define	God’s	providence	as	follows:	
God	is	continually	involved	with
all	created	things	in	such	a	way	that	he	(1)	keeps	them	existing	and
maintaining	the	properties	with	which	he	created	them;	(2)	cooperates	with
created	things	in	every	action,	directing	their	distinctive	properties	to	cause
them	to	act	as	they	do;	and	(3)	directs	them	to	fulfill	his	purposes.
Under	the	general	category	of	providence	we	have	three	subtopics,	according
to	the	three	elements	in	the	definition	above:	(1)	Preservation,	(2)
Concurrence,	and	(3)	Government.
We	shall	examine	each	of	these	separately,	then	consider	differing	views	and
objections	to	the	doctrine	of	providence.	It	should	be	noted	that	this	is	a
doctrine	on	which	there	has	been	substantial	disagreement	among	Christians
since	the	early	history	of	the	church,	particularly	with	respect	to	God’s
relationship	to	the	willing	choices	of	moral	creatures.	In	this	chapter	we	will
first	present	a	summary	of	the	position	favored	in	this	textbook	(what	is
commonly	called	the	“Reformed”	or	“Calvinist”	position),
1
	then	consider
arguments	that	have	been	made	from	another	position	(what	is	commonly
called	the	“Arminian”	position).
A.	Preservation
God	keeps	all	created	things	existing	and	maintaining	the	properties	with
which	he	created	them.
Hebrews	1:3	tells	us	that	Christ	is	“upholding	the	universe	by	his	word	of
power.”	The	Greek	word	translated	“upholding”	is	
pherō,	
“carry,	bear.”	This
is	commonly	used	in	the	New	Testament	for	carrying	something	from	one
place	to	another,	such	as	bringing	a	paralyzed	man	on	a	bed	to	Jesus	(Luke
5:18),	bringing	wine	to	the	steward	of	the	feast	(John	2:8),	or	bringing	a	cloak
and	books	to	Paul	(2	Tim.	4:13).	It	does	not	mean	simply	“sustain,”	but	has
the	sense	of	active,	purposeful	control	over	the	thing	being	carried	from	one
place	to	another.	In	Hebrews	1:3,	the	use	of	the	present	participle	indicates
that	Jesus	is	
“continually	
carrying	along	all	things”	in	the	universe	by	his
word	of	power.	Christ	is	actively	involved	in	the	work	of	providence.
Similarly,	in	Colossians	1:17,	Paul	says	of	Christ	that	“in	him	all	things	hold
together.”	The	phrase	“all	things”	refers	to	every	created	thing	in	the	universe
(see	v.	
16),	and	the	verse	affirms	that	Christ	keeps	all	things	existing—in	him
they	continue	to	exist	or	“endure”	(NASB	mg.).	Both	verses	indicate	that	if
Christ	were	to	cease	his	continuing	activity	of	sustaining	all	things	in	the
universe,	then	all	except	the	triune	God	would	instantly	cease	to	exist.	Such
teaching	is	also	affirmed	by	Paul	when	he	says,	“In	him	we	live	and	move	and
have	our	being”	
(Acts	17:28),	and	by	Ezra:	“You	are	the	L
ORD
,	you	alone;
you	have	made	heaven,	the	heaven	of	heavens,	with	all	their	host,	the	earth
and	all	that	is	on	it,	the	seas	and	all	that	is	in	them;	
and	you	preserve	all	of
them;	
and	the	host	of	heaven	worships	you”	(Neh.	9:6).	Peter	also	says	that
“the	heavens	and	earth	that	now	exist”	are	“being	
kept	
until	the	day	of
judgment”	(2	Peter	3:7).
One	aspect	of	God’s	providential	preservation	is	the	fact	that	he	continues	to
give	us	breath	each	moment.	Elihu	in	his	wisdom	says	of	God,	“If	he	should
take	back	his	spirit	to	himself,	and	gather	to	himself	his	breath,	all	flesh
would	perish	together,	and	man	would	return	to	dust”	(Job	34:14–15;	cf.	Ps.
104:29).
God,	in	preserving	all	things	he	has	made,	also	causes	them	to	maintain	the
properties	with	which	he	created	them.	God	preserves	water	in	such	a	way
that	it	continues	to	act	like	water.	He	causes	grass	to	continue	to	act	like	grass,
with	all	its	distinctive	characteristics.	He	causes	the	paper	on	which	this
sentence	is	written	to	continue	to	act	like	paper	so	that	it	does	not
spontaneously	dissolve	into	water	and	float	away	or	change	into	a	living	thing
and	begin	to	grow!	Until	it	is	acted	on	by	some	other	part	of	creation	and
thereby	its	properties	are	changed	(for	instance,	until	it	is	burned	with	fire	and
it	becomes	ash),	this	paper	will	continue	to	act	like	paper	so	long	as	God
preserves	the	earth	and	the	creation	that	he	has	made.
We	should	not,	however,	think	of	God’s	preservation	as	a	continuous	new
creation:	he	does	not	continuously	create	new	atoms	and	molecules	for	every
existing	thing	every	moment.	Rather,	he	
preserves	
what	has	already	been
created:	he	“carries	along	all	things”	by	his	word	of	power	(Heb.	1:3,	author’s
translation).	We	must	also	appreciate	that	created	things	are	
real	
and	that	their
characteristics	are	
real.	
I	do	not	just	imagine	that	the	rock	in	my	hand	is	hard
—it	is	hard.	If	I	bump	it	against	my	head,	I	do	not	just	imagine	that	it	hurts—
it	
does	
hurt!	Because	God	keeps	this	rock	maintaining	the	properties	with
which	he	created	it,	the	rock	has	been	hard	since	the	day	it	was	formed,	and
(unless	something	else	in	creation	interacts	with	it	and	changes	it)	it	will	be
hard	until	the	day	God	destroys	the	heavens	and	the	earth	(2	Peter	3:7,	10–
12).
God’s	providence	provides	a	basis	for	science:	God	has	made	and	continues
to	sustain	a	universe	that	acts	in	predictable	ways.	If	a	scientific	experiment
gives	a	certain	result	today,	then	we	can	have	confidence	that	(if	all	the	factors
are	the	same)	it	will	give	the	same	result	tomorrow	and	a	hundred	years	from
tomorrow.	The	doctrine	of	providence	also	provides	a	foundation	for
technology:	I	can	be	confident	that	gasoline	will	make	my	car	run	today	just
as	it	did	yesterday,	not	simply	because	“it	has	always	worked	that	way,”	but
because	God’s	providence	sustains	a	universe	in	which	created	things
maintain	the	properties	with	which	he	created	them.	The	
result	
may	be	similar
in	the	life	of	an	unbeliever	and	the	life	of	a	Christian:	we	both	put	gasoline	in
our	cars	and	drive	away.	But	he	will	do	so	without	knowing	the	ultimate
reason	why	it	works	that	way,	and	I	will	do	so	with	knowledge	of	the	actual
final	reason	(God’s	providence)	and	with	thanks	to	my	Creator	for	the
wonderful	creation	that	he	has	made	and	preserves.
B.	Concurrence
God	cooperates	with	created	things	in	every	action,	directing	their	distinctive
properties	to	cause	them	to	act	as	they	do.
This	second	aspect	of	providence,	
concurrence,	
is	an	expansion	of	the	idea
contained	in	the	first	aspect,	
preservation.	
In	fact,	some	theologians	(such	as
John	Calvin)	treat	the	fact	of	concurrence	under	the	category	of	preservation,
but	it	is	helpful	to	treat	it	as	a	distinct	category.
In	Ephesians	1:11	Paul	says	that	God	“accomplishes	all	things	according	to
the	counsel	of	his	will.”	The	word	translated	“accomplishes”	(
energeō
)
indicates	that	God	“works”	or	“brings	about”	
all	things	
according	to	his	own
will.	No	event	in	creation	falls	outside	of	his	providence.	Of	course	this	fact	is
hidden	from	our	eyes	unless	we	read	it	in	Scripture.	Like	preservation,	God’s
work	of	concurrence	is	not	clearly	evident	from	observation	of	the	natural
world	around	us.
In	giving	scriptural	proof	for	concurrence,	we	will	begin	with	the	inanimate
creation,	then	move	to	animals,	and	finally	to	different	kinds	of	events	in	the
life	of	human	beings.
1.
	Inanimate	Creation.
	There	are	many	things	in	creation	that	we	think	of	as
merely	“natural”	occurrences.	Yet	Scripture	says	that	God	causes	them	to
happen.	We	read	of	“fire	and	hail,	snow	and	frost,	stormy	wind	fulfilling	his
command!”	(Ps.	148:8).	Similarly,
To	the	
snow	
he	says,	“Fall	on	the	earth”
and	to	the	shower	and	the	
rain,	
“Be	strong.”	.	.	.
By	the	breath	of	God	
ice	
is	given,
and	the	broad	waters	are	frozen	fast.
He	loads	the	thick	cloud	with	moisture;
the	clouds	scatter	his	
lightning.
They	turn	round	and	round	by	his	guidance,
to	accomplish	all	that	he	commands	them
on	the	face	of	the	habitable	world.
Whether	for	correction,	or	for	his	land,
or	for	love,	he	causes	it	to	happen.
(Job	37:6–13;	cf.	similar	statements	in	38:22–30)
Again,	the	psalmist	declares	that	“Whatever	the	L
ORD
	pleases	he	does,	in
heaven	and	on	earth,	in	the	seas	and	all	deeps”	(Ps.	135:6),	and	then	in	the
next	sentence	he	illustrates	God’s	doing	of	his	will	in	the	weather:	“He	it	is
who	makes	the	clouds	rise	at	the	end	of	the	earth,	who	makes	lightnings	for
the	rain	and	brings	forth	the	wind	from	his	storehouses”	(Ps.	135:7;	cf.	104:4).
God	also	causes	the	grass	to	grow:	
“You	cause	the	grass	to	grow	
for	the
cattle,	and	plants	for	man	to	cultivate,	that	he	may	bring	forth	food	from	the
earth”	(Ps.	104:14).	God	directs	the	stars	in	the	heavens,	asking	Job,	“Can	you
bring	forth	the	constellations	in	their	seasons	or	lead	out	the	Bear	with	its
cubs?”	(Job	38:32	NIV;	“the	Bear”	or	Ursa	Major	is	commonly	called	the	Big
Dipper;	v.	
31	refers	to	the	constellations	Pleiades	and	Orion).	Moreover,	God
continually	directs	the	coming	of	the	morning	(Job	38:12),	a	fact	Jesus
affirmed	when	he	said	that	God	“
makes	his	sun	rise	
on	the	evil	and	on	the
good,	and	
sends	rain	
on	the	just	and	on	the	unjust”	(Matt.	5:45).
2.	Animals.
	Scripture	affirms	that	God	feeds	the	wild	animals	of	the	field,	for,
“These	all	look	to	you,	to	give	them	their	food	in	due	season.	When	you	give
to	them,	they	gather	it	up;	when	you	open	your	hand,	they	are	filled	with	good
things.	When	you	hide	your	face,	they	are	dismayed”	(Ps.	104:27–29;	cf.	Job
38:39–41).	Jesus	also	affirmed	this	when	he	said,	“Look	at	the	
birds	
of	the	air
.	.	.	your	heavenly	Father	
feeds	them”	
(Matt.	6:26).	And	he	said	that	not	one
sparrow	“will	fall	to	the	ground	without	your	Father’s	will”	(Matt.	10:29).
3.	Seemingly	“Random”	or	“Chance”	Events.
	From	a	human	perspective,
the	casting	of	lots	(or	its	modern	equivalent,	the	rolling	of	dice	or	flipping	of	a
coin)	is	the	most	typical	of	random	events	that	occur	in	the	universe.	But
Scripture	affirms	that	the	outcome	of	such	an	event	is	from	God:	“The	lot	is
cast	into	the	lap,	but	the	decision	is	wholly	from	the	L
ORD
”	(Prov.	16:33).
2
4.	Events	Fully	Caused	by	God	and	Fully	Caused	by	the	Creature	as
Well.
	For	any	of	these	foregoing	events	(rain	and	snow,	grass	growing,	sun
and	stars,	the	feeding	of	animals,	or	casting	of	lots),	we	could	(at	least	in
theory)	give	a	completely	satisfactory	“natural”	explanation.	A	botanist	can
detail	the	factors	that	cause	grass	to	grow,	such	as	sun,	moisture,	temperature,
nutrients	in	the	soil,	etc.	Yet	Scripture	says	that	
God	
causes	the	grass	to	grow.
A	meteorologist	can	give	a	complete	explanation	of	factors	that	cause	rain
(humidity,	temperature,	atmospheric	pressure,	etc.),	and	can	even	produce
rain	in	a	weather	laboratory.	Yet	Scripture	says	that	
God	
causes	the	rain.	A
physicist	with	accurate	information	on	the	force	and	direction	a	pair	of	dice
was	rolled	could	fully	explain	what	caused	the	dice	to	give	the	result	they	did
—yet	Scripture	says	that	
God	
brings	about	the	decision	of	the	lot	that	is	cast.
This	shows	us	that	it	is	incorrect	for	us	to	reason	that	if	we	know	the	“natural”
cause	of	something	in	this	world,	then	God	did	not	cause	it.	Rather,	if	it	rains
we	should	thank	him.	If	crops	grow	we	should	thank	him.	In	all	of	these
events,	it	is	not	as	though	the	event	was	partly	caused	by	God	and	partly	by
factors	in	the	created	world.	If	that	were	the	case,	then	we	would	always	be
looking	for	some	small	feature	of	an	event	that	we	could	not	explain	and
attribute	that	(say	1	percent	of	the	cause)	to	God.	But	surely	this	is	not	a
correct	view.	Rather,	these	passages	affirm	that	such	events	are	entirely
caused	by	God.	Yet	we	know	that	(in	another	sense)	they	are	entirely	caused
by	factors	in	the	creation	as	well.
The	doctrine	of	concurrence	affirms	that	God	
directs,	
and	
works	through,	
the
distinctive	properties	of	each	created	thing,	so	that	these	things	themselves
bring	about	the	results	that	we	see.	In	this	way	it	is	possible	to	affirm	that	in
one	sense	events	are	fully	(100	percent)	caused	by	God	and	fully	(100
percent)	caused	by	the	creature	as	well.	However,	divine	and	creaturely
causes	work	in	different	ways.	The	divine	cause	of	each	event	works	as	an
invisible,	behind-the-scenes,	directing	cause	and	therefore	could	be	called	the
“primary	cause”	that	plans	and	initiates	everything	that	happens.	But	the
created	thing	brings	about	actions	in	ways	consistent	with	the	creature’s	own
properties,	ways	that	can	often	be	described	by	us	or	by	professional	scientists
who	carefully	observe	the	processes.	These	creaturely	factors	and	properties
can	therefore	be	called	the	“secondary”	causes	of	everything	that	happens,
even	though	they	are	the	causes	that	are	evident	to	us	by	observation.
5.	The	Affairs	of	Nations.
	Scripture	also	speaks	of	God’s	providential	control
of	human	affairs.	We	read	that	God	“makes	nations	great,	and	he	destroys
them:	he	enlarges	nations,	and	leads	them	away”	(Job	12:23).	“Dominion
belongs	to	the	L
ORD
,	and	he	rules	over	the	nations”	(Ps.	22:28).	He	has
determined	the	time	of	existence	and	the	place	of	every	nation	on	the	earth,
for	Paul	says,	“he	made	from	one	every	nation	of	men	to	live	on	all	the	face
of	the	earth,	having	determined	allotted	periods	and	the	boundaries	of	their
habitation”	(Acts	17:26;	cf.	14:16).	And	when	Nebuchadnezzar	repented,	he
learned	to	praise	God,
For	his	dominion	is	an	everlasting	dominion,
and	his	kingdom	endures	from	generation	to	generation;
all	the	inhabitants	of	the	earth	are	accounted	as	nothing;
and	
he	does	according	to	his	will	in	the	host	of	heaven
and	among	the	inhabitants	of	the	earth;
and	none	can	stay	his	hand	or	say	to	him,
“What	are	you	doing?”	(Dan.	4:34–35)
6.	All	Aspects	of	Our	Lives.
	It	is	amazing	to	see	the	extent	to	which
Scripture	affirms	that	God	brings	about	various	events	in	our	lives.	For
example,	our	dependence	on	God	to	give	us	food	each	day	is	affirmed	every
time	we	pray,	“Give	us	this	day	our	daily	bread”	(Matt.	6:11),	even	though	we
work	for	our	food	and	(as	far	as	mere	human	observation	can	discern)	obtain
it	through	entirely	“natural”	causes.	Similarly,	Paul,	looking	at	events	with	the
eye	of	faith,	affirms	that	“my	God	will	supply	every	need”	of	his	children
(Phil	4:19),	even	though	God	may	use	“ordinary”	means	(such	as	other
people)	to	do	so.
God	plans	our	days	before	we	are	born,	for	David	affirms,	“In	your	book	were
written,	every	one	of	them,	the	days	that	were	formed	for	me,	when	as	yet
there	was	none	of	them”	(Ps.	139:16).	And	Job	says	that	man’s	“days	are
determined,	and	the	number	of	his	months	is	with	you,	and	you	have
appointed	his	bounds	that	he	cannot	pass”	(Job	14:5).	This	can	be	seen	in	the
life	of	Paul,	who	says	that	God	“had	set	me	apart	before	I	was	born”	(Gal.
1:15),	and	Jeremiah,	to	whom	God	said,	“Before	I	formed	you	in	the	womb	I
knew	you,	and	before	you	were	born	I	consecrated	you;	I	appointed	you	a
prophet	to	the	nations”	(Jer.	1:5).
All	our	actions	are	under	God’s	providential	care,	for	“in	him	we	live	and
move”	
(Acts	17:28).	The	individual	steps	we	take	each	day	are	directed	by	the
Lord.	Jeremiah	confesses,	“I	know,	O	L
ORD
,	that	the	way	of	man	is	not	in
himself,	that	it	is	not	in	man	who	walks	to	direct	his	steps”	(Jer.	10:23).	We
read	that	“a	man’s	steps	are	ordered	by	the	L
ORD
”	(Prov.	20:24),	and	that	“a
man’s	mind	plans	his	way,	but	the	L
ORD
	directs	his	steps”	(Prov.	16:9).
Similarly,	Proverbs	16:1	affirms,	“The	plans	of	the	mind	belong	to	man,	but
the	answer	of	the	tongue	is	from	the	L
ORD
.”
3
Success	and	failure	come	from	God,	for	we	read,	“For	not	from	the	east	or
from	the	west	and	not	from	the	wilderness	comes	lifting	up;	but	it	is	God	who
executes	judgment,	putting	down	one	and	lifting	up	another”	(Ps.	75:6–7).	So
Mary	can	say,	“He	has	put	down	the	mighty	from	their	thrones,	and	exalted
those	of	low	degree”	(Luke	1:52).	The	L
ORD
	gives	children,	for	children	“are
a	heritage	from	the	L
ORD
,	the	fruit	of	the	womb	a	reward”	(Ps.	127:3).
All	our	talents	and	abilities	are	from	the	Lord,	for	Paul	can	ask	the
Corinthians,	“What	have	you	that	you	did	not	receive?	If	then	you	received	it,
why	do	you	boast	as	if	it	were	not	a	gift?”	(1	Cor.	4:7).	David	knew	that	to	be
true	regarding	his	military	skill,	for,	though	he	must	have	trained	many	hours
in	the	use	of	a	bow	and	arrow,	he	could	say	of	God,	“He	trains	my	hands	for
war,	so	that	my	arms	can	bend	a	bow	of	bronze”	(Ps.	18:34).
God	influences	rulers	in	their	decisions,	for	“the	king’s	heart	is	a	stream	of
water	in	the	hand	of	the	L
ORD
;	he	turns	it	wherever	he	will”	(Prov.	21:1).	An
illustration	of	this	was	when	the	Lord	“turned	the	heart	of	the	king	of
Assyria”	to	his	people,	“so	that	he	aided	them	in	the	work	of	the	house	of
God,	the	God	of	Israel”	(Ezr.	6:22),	or	when	“the	L
ORD
	stirred	up	the	spirit	of
Cyrus	king	of	Persia”	(Ezr.	1:1)	to	help	the	people	of	Israel.	But	it	is	not	just
the	heart	of	the	king	that	God	influences,	for	he	looks	down	“on	all	the
inhabitants	of	the	earth”	and	“fashions	the	hearts	of	them	all”	(Ps.	33:14–15).
When	we	realize	that	the	heart	in	Scripture	is	the	location	of	our	inmost
thoughts	and	desires,	this	is	a	significant	passage.	God	especially	guides	the
desires	and	inclinations	of	believers,	working	in	us	“both	
to	will	
and	to	work
for	his	good	pleasure”	(Phil.	2:13).
All	of	these	passages,	reporting	both	general	statements	about	God’s	work	in
the	lives	of	all	people	and	specific	examples	of	God’s	work	in	the	lives	of
individuals,	lead	us	to	conclude	that	God’s	providential	work	of	concurrence
extends	to	all	aspects	of	our	lives.	Our	words,	our	steps,	our	movements,	our
hearts,	and	our	abilities	are	all	from	the	Lord.
But	we	must	guard	against	misunderstanding.	Here	also,	as	with	the	lower
creation,	God’s	providential	direction	as	an	unseen,	behind-the-scenes,
“primary	cause,”	should	not	lead	us	to	deny	the	reality	of	our	choices	and
actions.	Again	and	again	Scripture	affirms	that	we	really	do	
cause	
events	to
happen.	We	are	significant	and	we	are	responsible.	We	
do	have	choices,	
and
these	are	real	choices	that	bring	about	real	results.	Scripture	repeatedly
affirms	these	truths	as	well.	Just	as	a	rock	is	
really	hard	
because	God	has
made	it	with	the	property	of	hardness,	just	as	water	is	
really	wet	
because	God
has	made	it	with	the	property	of	wetness,	just	as	plants	are	
really	alive
because	God	has	made	them	with	the	property	of	life,	so	our	choices	are	
real
choices	
and	do	have	significant	effects,	because	God	has	made	us	in	such	a
wonderful	way	that	he	has	endowed	us	with	the	property	of	willing	choice.
One	approach	to	these	passages	about	God’s	concurrence	is	to	say	that	if	our
choices	are	real,	they	
cannot	
be	caused	by	God	(see	below	for	further
discussion	of	this	viewpoint).	But	the	number	of	passages	that	affirm	this
providential	control	of	God	is	so	considerable,	and	the	difficulties	involved	in
giving	them	some	other	interpretation	are	so	formidable,	that	it	does	not	seem
to	me	that	this	can	be	the	right	approach	to	them.	It	seems	better	to	affirm	that
God	causes	all	things	that	happen,	but	that	he	does	so	in	such	a	way	that	he
somehow	upholds	our	ability	to	make	
willing,	responsible	choices,	
choices
that	have	
real	and	eternal	results,	
and	for	which	we	are	
held	accountable.
Exactly	how	God	combines	his	providential	control	with	our	willing	and
significant	choices,	Scripture	does	not	explain	to	us.	But	rather	than	deny	one
aspect	or	the	other	(simply	because	we	cannot	explain	how	both	can	be	true),
we	should	accept	both	in	an	attempt	to	be	faithful	to	the	teaching	of	all	of
Scripture.
The	analogy	of	an	author	writing	a	play	may	help	us	to	grasp	how	both
aspects	can	be	true.	In	the	Shakespearean	play	
Macbeth,	
the	character
Macbeth	murders	King	Duncan.	Now	(if	we	assume	for	a	moment	that	this	is
a	fictional	account),	the	question	may	be	asked,	“Who	killed	King	Duncan?”
On	one	level,	the	correct	answer	is	“Macbeth.”	Within	the	context	of	the	play
he	carried	out	the	murder	and	is	rightly	to	blame	for	it.	But	on	another	level,	a
correct	answer	to	the	question,	“Who	killed	King	Duncan?”	would	be
“William	Shakespeare”:	he	wrote	the	play,	he	created	all	the	characters	in	it,
and	he	wrote	the	part	where	Macbeth	killed	King	Duncan.
It	would	not	be	correct	to	say	that	because	Macbeth	killed	King	Duncan,
William	Shakespeare	did	not	kill	him.	Nor	would	it	be	correct	to	say	that
because	William	Shakespeare	killed	King	Duncan,	Macbeth	did	not	kill	him.
Both	are	true.	On	the	level	of	the	characters	in	the	play	Macbeth	fully	(100
percent)	caused	King	Duncan’s	death,	but	on	the	level	of	the	creator	of	the
play,	William	Shakespeare	fully	(100	percent)	caused	King	Duncan’s	death.
In	similar	fashion,	we	can	understand	that	God	fully	causes	things	in	one	way
(as	Creator),	and	we	fully	cause	things	in	another	way	(as	creatures).
Of	course,	someone	may	object	that	the	analogy	does	not	really	solve	the
problem	because	characters	in	a	play	are	not	real	persons;	they	are	only
characters	with	no	freedom	of	their	own,	no	ability	to	make	genuine	choices,
and	so	forth.	But	in	response	we	may	point	out	that	God	is	infinitely	greater
and	wiser	than	we	are.	While	we	as	finite	creatures	can	only	create	fictional
characters	in	a	play,	not	real	persons,	God,	our	infinite	Creator,	has	made	an
actual	world	and	in	it	has	created	us	as	real	persons	who	make	willing
choices.	To	say	that	God	
could	not	
make	a	world	in	which	he	
causes	us	to
make	willing	choices	
(as	some	would	argue	today;	see	discussion	below),	is
simply	to	limit	the	power	of	God.	It	seems	also	to	deny	a	large	number	of
passages	of	Scripture.
4
7.	What	About	Evil?
	If	God	does	indeed	cause,	through	his	providential
activity,	everything	that	comes	about	in	the	world,	then	the	question	arises,
“What	is	the	relationship	between	God	and	evil	in	the	world?”	Does	God
actually	cause	the	evil	actions	that	people	do?	If	he	does,	then	is	God	not
responsible	for	sin?
In	approaching	this	question,	it	is	best	first	to	read	the	passages	of	Scripture
that	most	directly	address	it.	We	can	begin	by	looking	at	several	passages	that
affirm	that	God	did,	indeed,	cause	evil	events	to	come	about	and	evil	deeds	to
be	done.	But	we	must	remember	that	in	all	these	passages	it	is	very	clear	that
Scripture	nowhere	shows	God	as	
directly	doing	anything	evil,	
but	rather	as
bringing	about	evil	deeds	through	the	willing	actions	of	moral	creatures.
Moreover,	
Scripture	never	blames	God	for	evil	or	shows	God	as	taking
pleasure	in	evil,	
and	Scripture	never	excuses	human	beings	for	the	wrong	they
do.	However	we	understand	God’s	relationship	to	evil,	we	must	
never	
come
to	the	point	where	we	think	that	we	are	not	responsible	for	the	evil	that	we	do,
or	that	God	takes	pleasure	in	evil	or	is	to	be	blamed	for	it.	Such	a	conclusion
is	clearly	contrary	to	Scripture.
There	are	literally	dozens	of	Scripture	passages	that	say	that	God	(indirectly)
brought	about	some	kind	of	evil.	I	have	quoted	such	an	extensive	list	(in	the
next	few	paragraphs)	because	Christians	often	are	unaware	of	the	extent	of
this	forthright	teaching	in	Scripture.	Yet	it	must	be	remembered	that	in	all	of
these	examples,	the	evil	is	actually	done	not	by	God	but	by	people	or	demons
who	choose	to	do	it.
A	very	clear	example	is	found	in	the	story	of	Joseph.	Scripture	clearly	says
that	Joseph’s	brothers	were	wrongly	jealous	of	him	(Gen.	37:11),	hated	him
(Gen.	37:4,	5,	8),	wanted	to	kill	him	(Gen.	37:20),	and	did	wrong	when	they
cast	him	into	a	pit	(Gen.	37:24)	and	then	sold	him	into	slavery	in	Egypt	(Gen.
37:28).	Yet	later	Joseph	could	say	to	his	brothers,	“
God	sent	me	before	you	
to
preserve	life”	(Gen.	45:5),	and	“You	meant	evil	against	me;	but	
God	meant	it
for	good,	
to	bring	it	about	that	many	people	should	be	kept	alive,	as	they	are
today”	(Gen.	50:20).
5
	Here	we	have	a	combination	of	evil	deeds	brought
about	by	sinful	men	who	are	rightly	held	accountable	for	their	sin	and	the
overriding	providential	control	of	God	whereby	God’s	own	purposes	were
accomplished.	Both	are	clearly	affirmed.
The	story	of	the	exodus	from	Egypt	repeatedly	affirms	that	God	hardened	the
heart	of	Pharaoh:	God	says,	“I	will	harden	his	heart”	(Ex.	4:21),	“I	will	harden
Pharaoh’s	heart”	(Ex.	7:3),	“the	L
ORD
	hardened	the	heart	of	Pharaoh”	(Ex.
9:12),	“the	L
ORD
	hardened	Pharaoh’s	heart”	(Ex.	10:20,	repeated	in	10:27	and
again	in	11:10),	“I	will	harden	Pharaoh’s	heart”	(Ex.	14:4),	and	“the	L
ORD
hardened	the	heart	of	Pharaoh	king	of	Egypt”	(Ex.	14:8).	It	is	sometimes
objected	that	Scripture	also	says	that	Pharaoh	hardened	his	own	heart	(Ex.
8:15,	32;	9:34),	and	that	God’s	act	of	hardening	Pharaoh’s	heart	was	only	in
response	to	the	initial	rebellion	and	hardness	of	heart	that	Pharaoh	himself
exhibited	of	his	own	free	will.	But	it	should	be	noted	that	God’s	promises	that
he	would	harden	Pharaoh’s	heart	(Ex.	4:21;	7:3)	are	made	long	before
Scripture	tells	us	that	Pharaoh	hardened	his	own	heart	(we	read	of	this	for	the
first	time	in	Ex.	8:15).	Moreover,	our	analysis	of	concurrence	given	above,	in
which	both	divine	and	human	agents	can	cause	the	same	event,	should	show
us	that	both	factors	can	be	true	at	the	same	time:	even	when	Pharaoh	hardens
his	own	heart,	that	is	not	inconsistent	with	saying	that	God	is	causing	Pharaoh
to	do	this	and	thereby	God	is	hardening	the	heart	of	Pharaoh.	Finally,	if
someone	would	object	that	God	is	just	intensifying	the	evil	desires	and
choices	that	were	already	in	Pharaoh’s	heart,	then	this	kind	of	action	could
still	in	theory	at	least	cover	all	the	evil	in	the	world	today,	since	all	people
have	evil	desires	in	their	hearts	and	all	people	do	in	fact	make	evil	choices.
What	was	God’s	purpose	in	this?	Paul	reflects	on	Exodus	9:16	and	says,	“For
the	scripture	says	to	Pharaoh,	‘I	have	raised	you	up	for	the	very	purpose	of
showing	my	power	in	you,	so	that	my	name	may	be	proclaimed	in	all	the
earth’	”	(Rom.	9:17).	Then	Paul	infers	a	general	truth	from	this	specific
example:	“So	then	he	has	mercy	upon	whomever	he	wills,	and	he	hardens	the
heart	of	whomever	he	wills”	(Rom.	9:18).	In	fact,	God	also	hardened	the
hearts	of	the	Egyptian	people	so	that	they	pursued	Israel	into	the	Red	Sea:	“I
will	harden	the	hearts	of	the	Egyptians	so	that	they	shall	go	in	after	them,	and
I	will	get	glory	over	Pharaoh	and	all	his	host,	his	chariots,	and	his	horsemen”
(Ex.	14:17).	This	theme	is	repeated	in	Psalm	105:25:	“He	turned	their	hearts
to	hate	his	people.”
Later	in	the	Old	Testament	narrative	similar	examples	are	found	of	the
Canaanites	who	were	destroyed	in	the	conquest	of	Palestine	under	Joshua.	We
read,	“For	it	was	the	L
ORD
’s	doing	to	harden	their	hearts	that	they	should
come	against	Israel	in	battle,	in	order	that	they	should	be	utterly	destroyed”
(Josh.	11:20;	see	also	Judg.	3:12;	9:23).	And	Samson’s	demand	to	marry	an
unbelieving	Philistine	woman	“was	from	the	L
ORD
;	for	he	was	seeking	an
occasion	against	the	Philistines.	At	that	time	the	Philistines	had	dominion
over	Israel”	(Judg.	14:4).	We	also	read	that	the	sons	of	Eli,	when	rebuked	for
their	evil	deeds,	“would	not	listen	to	the	voice	of	their	father;	for	it	was	the
will	of	the	L
ORD
	to	slay	them”	(1	Sam.	2:25).	Later,	“an	evil	spirit	from	the
L
ORD
”	tormented	King	Saul	(1	Sam.	16:14).
When	David	sinned,	the	L
ORD
	said	to	him	through	Nathan	the	prophet,	“I	will
raise	up	evil	against	you	out	of	your	own	house;	and	I	will	take	your	wives
before	your	eyes,	and	give	them	to	your	neighbor,	and	he	shall	lie	with	your
wives	in	the	sight	of	this	sun.	For	you	did	it	secretly;	but	I	will	do	this	thing
before	all	Israel,	and	before	the	sun”	(2	Sam.	12:11–12;	fulfilled	in	16:22).	In
further	punishment	for	David’s	sin,	“the	L
ORD
	struck	the	child	that	Uriah’s
wife	bore	to	David,	and	it	became	sick”	and	eventually	died	(2	Sam.	12:15–
18).	David	remained	mindful	of	the	fact	that	God	could	bring	evil	against
him,	because	at	a	later	time,	when	Shimei	cursed	David	and	threw	stones	at
him	and	his	servants	(2	Sam.	16:5–8),	David	refused	to	take	vengeance	on
Shimei	but	said	to	his	soldiers,	“Let	him	alone,	and	let	him	curse;	for	the
L
ORD
	has	bidden	him”	(2	Sam.	16:11).
Still	later	in	David’s	life,	the	Lord	“incited”
6
	David	to	take	a	census	of	the
people	(2	Sam.	24:1),	but	afterward	David	recognized	this	as	sin,	saying,	“I
have	sinned	greatly	in	what	I	have	done”	(2	Sam.	24:10),	and	God	sent
punishment	on	the	land	because	of	this	sin	(2	Sam.	24:12–17).	However,	it	is
also	clear	that	“the	anger	of	the	L
ORD
	was	kindled	against	Israel”	(2	Sam.
24:1),	so	God’s	inciting	of	David	to	sin	was	a	means	by	which	he	brought
about	punishment	on	the	people	of	Israel.	Moreover,	the	means	by	which	God
incited	David	is	made	clear	in	1	Chronicles	21:1:	“Satan	stood	up	against
Israel,	and	
incited	
David	to	number	Israel.”	In	this	one	incident	the	Bible
gives	us	a	remarkable	insight	into	the	three	influences	that	contributed	in
different	ways	to	one	action:	God,	in	order	to	bring	about	his	purposes,
worked	through	Satan	to	incite	David	to	sin,	but	Scripture	regards	David	as
being	responsible	for	that	sin.	Again,	after	Solomon	turned	away	from	the
Lord	because	of	his	foreign	wives,	“the	L
ORD
	raised	up	an	adversary	against
Solomon,	Hadad	the	Edomite”	(1	Kings	11:14),	and	“God	also	raised	up	as	an
adversary	to	him,	Rezon	the	son	of	Eliada”	(1	Kings	11:23).	These	were	evil
kings	raised	up	by	God.
In	the	story	of	Job,	though	the	L
ORD
	gave	Satan	permission	to	bring	harm	to
Job’s	possessions	and	children,	and	though	this	harm	came	through	the	evil
actions	of	the	Sabeans	and	the	Chaldeans,	as	well	as	a	windstorm	(Job	1:12,
15,	17,	19),	yet	Job	looks	beyond	those	secondary	causes	and,	with	the	eyes
of	faith,	sees	it	all	as	from	the	hand	of	the	Lord:	“the	L
ORD
	gave,	and	the
L
ORD
	has	taken	away;	
blessed	be	the	name	of	the	L
ORD
”	
(Job	1:21).	The	Old
Testament	author	follows	Job’s	statement	immediately	with	the	sentence,	“In
all	this	Job	did	not	sin	or	charge	God	with	wrong”	(Job	1:22).	Job	has	just
been	told	that	evil	marauding	bands	had	destroyed	his	flocks	and	herds,	yet
with	great	faith	and	patience	in	adversity,	he	says,	“
The	L
ORD
	
has	taken
away.”	Though	he	says	that	the	L
ORD
	had	done	this,	yet	he	does	not	blame
God	for	the	evil	or	say	that	God	had	done	wrong:	he	says,	“Blessed	be	the
name	of	the	L
ORD
.”	To	
blame	
God	for	evil	that	he	had	brought	about	through
secondary	agents	would	have	been	to	sin.	Job	does	not	do	this,	Scripture
never	does	this,	and	neither	should	we.
Elsewhere	in	the	Old	Testament	we	read	that	the	Lord	“put	a	lying	spirit	in	the
mouth”	of	Ahab’s	prophets	(1	Kings	22:23)	and	sent	the	wicked	Assyrians	as
“the	rod	of	my	anger”	to	punish	Israel	(Isa.	10:5).	He	also	sent	the	evil
Babylonians,	including	Nebuchadnezzar,	against	Israel,	saying,	“I	will	bring
them	against	this	land	and	its	inhabitants”	(Jer.	25:9).	Then	God	promised	that
later	he	would	punish	the	Babylonians	also:	“I	will	punish	the	king	of
Babylon	and	that	nation,	the	land	of	the	Chaldeans,	for	their	iniquity,	says	the
L
ORD
,	making	the	land	an	everlasting	waste”	(Jer.	25:12).	If	there	is	a
deceiving	prophet	who	gives	a	false	message,	then	the	Lord	says,	“if	the
prophet	be	deceived	and	speak	a	word,	I,	the	L
ORD
,	have	deceived	that
prophet,	and	I	will	stretch	out	my	hand	against	him,	and	will	destroy	him
from	the	midst	of	my	people	Israel”	(Ezek.	14:9,	in	the	context	of	bringing
judgment	on	Israel	for	their	idolatry).	As	the	culmination	of	a	series	of
rhetorical	questions	to	which	the	implied	answer	is	always	“no,”	Amos	asks,
“Is	a	trumpet	blown	in	a	city,	and	the	people	are	not	afraid?	Does	evil	befall	a
city,	unless	the	L
ORD
	has	done	it?”	(Amos	3:6).	There	follows	a	series	of
natural	disasters	in	Amos	4:6–12,	where	the	L
ORD
	reminds	the	people	that	he
gave	them	hunger,	drought,	blight	and	mildew,	locusts,	pestilence,	and	death
of	men	and	horses,	“yet	you	did	not	return	to	me”	(Amos	4:6,	8,	9,	10,	11).
In	many	of	the	passages	mentioned	above,	God	brings	evil	and	destruction	on
people	in	judgment	upon	their	sins:	They	have	been	disobedient	or	have
strayed	into	idolatry,	and	then	the	L
ORD
	uses	evil	human	beings	or	demonic
forces	or	“natural”	disasters	to	bring	judgment	on	them.	(This	is	not	always
said	to	be	the	case—Joseph	and	Job	come	to	mind—but	it	is	often	so.)
Perhaps	this	idea	of	judgment	on	sin	can	help	us	to	understand,	at	least	in	part,
how	God	can	righteously	bring	about	evil	events.	All	human	beings	are	sinful,
for	Scripture	tells	us	that	“all	have	sinned	and	fall	short	of	the	glory	of	God”
(Rom.	3:23).	None	of	us	deserves	God’s	favor	or	his	mercy,	but	only	eternal
condemnation.	Therefore,	when	God	brings	evil	on	human	beings,	whether	to
discipline	his	children,	or	to	lead	unbelievers	to	repentance,	or	to	bring	a
judgment	of	condemnation	and	destruction	upon	hardened	sinners,	none	of	us
can	charge	God	with	doing	wrong.	Ultimately	all	will	work	in	God’s	good
purposes	to	bring	glory	to	him	and	good	to	his	people.	Yet	we	must	realize
that	in	punishing	evil	in	those	who	are	not	redeemed	(such	as	Pharaoh,	the
Canaanites,	and	the	Babylonians),	God	is	also	glorified	through	the
demonstration	of	his	justice,	holiness,	and	power	(see	Ex.	9:16;	Rom.	9:14–
24).
Through	the	prophet	Isaiah	God	says,	“I	form	the	light,	and	create	darkness:	I
make	peace,	and	
create	evil:
7
	I	the	L
ORD
	do	all	these	things”	(Isa.	45:7	KJV;
the	Hebrew	word	for	“create”	here	is	
bāra’,	
the	same	word	used	in	Gen.	1:1).
In	Lamentations	3:38	we	read,	“Is	it	not	from	the	mouth	of	the	Most	High	that
good	and	evil	come?”
8
	The	people	of	Israel,	in	a	time	of	heartfelt	repentance,
cry	out	to	God	and	say,	“O	L
ORD
,	why	do	you	make	us	err	from	your	ways
and	harden	our	heart,	so	that	we	fear	you	not?”	(Isa.	63:17).
9
The	life	of	Jonah	is	a	remarkable	illustration	of	God’s	concurrence	in	human
activity.	The	men	on	board	the	ship	sailing	to	Tarshish	threw	Jonah	overboard,
for	Scripture	says,	“So	
they	
took	up	Jonah	and	threw	him	into	the	sea;	and	the
sea	ceased	from	its	raging”	(Jonah	1:15).	Yet	only	five	verses	later	Jonah
acknowledges	God’s	providential	direction	in	their	act,	for	he	says	to	God,
“
You	
cast	me	into	the	deep,	into	the	heart	of	the	seas”	(Jonah	2:3).	Scripture
simultaneously	affirms	that	the	men	threw	Jonah	into	the	sea	and	that	God
threw	him	into	the	sea.	The	providential	direction	of	God	did	not	force	the
sailors	to	do	something	against	their	will,	nor	were	they	conscious	of	any
divine	influence	on	them—indeed,	they	cried	to	the	Lord	for	forgiveness	as
they	threw	Jonah	overboard	(Jonah	1:14).	What	Scripture	reveals	to	us,	and
what	Jonah	himself	realized,	was	that	God	was	bringing	about	his	plan
through	the	willing	choices	of	real	human	beings	who	were	morally
accountable	for	their	actions.	In	a	way	not	understood	by	us	and	not	revealed
to	us,	God	
caused	
them	to	make	a	
willing	choice	
to	do	what	they	did.
The	most	evil	deed	of	all	history,	the	crucifixion	of	Christ,	was	ordained	by
God—not	just	the	fact	that	it	would	occur,	but	also	all	the	individual	actions
connected	with	it.	The	church	at	Jerusalem	recognized	this,	for	they	prayed:
For	truly	in	this	city	there	were	gathered	together	against	your	holy
servant	Jesus,	whom	you	anointed,	both	Herod	and	Pontius	Pilate,
with	the	Gentiles	and	the	peoples	of	Israel,	
to	do	whatever	your	hand
and	your	plan	had	predestined	to	take	place.	
(Acts	4:27)
All	the	actions	of	all	the	participants	in	the	crucifixion	of	Jesus	had	been
“predestined”	by	God.	Yet	the	apostles	clearly	attach	no	moral	blame	to	God,
for	the	actions	resulted	from	the	willing	choices	of	sinful	men.	Peter	makes
this	clear	in	his	sermon	at	Pentecost:	“this	Jesus,	delivered	up	according	to	the
definite	plan	and	foreknowledge	of	God,	
you	crucified	and	killed	by	the	hands
of	lawless	men”	
(Acts	2:23).	In	one	sentence	he	links	God’s	plan	and
foreknowledge	with	the	moral	blame	that	attaches	to	the	actions	of	“lawless
men.”	They	were	not	forced	by	God	to	act	against	their	wills;	rather,	God
brought	about	his	plan	
through	their	willing	choices,	
for	which	they	were
nevertheless	responsible.
In	an	example	similar	to	the	Old	Testament	account	of	God	sending	a	lying
spirit	into	the	mouth	of	Ahab’s	prophets,	we	read	of	those	who	refuse	to	love
the	truth,	“Therefore	God	sends	upon	them	a	strong	delusion,	to	make	them
believe	what	is	false,	so	that	all	may	be	condemned	who	did	not	believe	the
truth	but	had	pleasure	in	unrighteousness”	(2	Thess.	2:11–12).	And	Peter	tells
his	readers	that	those	who	oppose	them	and	persecute	them,	who	reject	Christ
as	Messiah,	“stumble	because	they	disobey	the	word,	as	they	were	destined	to
do”	(1	Peter	2:8).
10
8.	Analysis	of	Verses	Relating	to	God	and	Evil.
	After	looking	at	so	many
verses	that	speak	of	God’s	providential	use	of	the	evil	actions	of	men	and
demons,	what	can	we	say	by	way	of	analysis?
a.	God	Uses	All	Things	to	Fulfill	His	Purposes	and	Even	Uses	Evil	for	His
Glory	and	for	Our	Good:
	Thus,	when	evil	comes	into	our	lives	to	trouble	us,
we	can	have	from	the	doctrine	of	providence	a	deeper	assurance	that	“God
causes	all	things	to	work	together	for	good	to	those	who	love	God,	to	those
who	are	called	according	to	his	purpose”	(Rom.	8:28	NASB).	This	kind	of
conviction	enabled	Joseph	to	say	to	his	brothers,	“You	meant	evil	against	me;
but	
God	meant	it	for	good”	
(Gen.	50:20).
We	can	also	realize	that	God	is	glorified	even	in	the	punishment	of	evil.
Scripture	tells	us	that	“the	L
ORD
	has	made	everything	for	its	purpose,	even	the
wicked	for	the	day	of	trouble”	(Prov.	16:4).
11
	Similarly,	the	psalmist	affirms,
“Surely	the	wrath	of	men	shall	praise	you”	(Ps.	76:10).	And	the	example	of
Pharaoh	(Rom.	9:14–24)	is	a	clear	example	of	the	way	God	uses	evil	for	his
own	glory	and	for	the	good	of	his	people.
b.	Nevertheless,	God	Never	Does	Evil,	and	Is	Never	to	Be	Blamed	for
Evil:
	In	a	statement	similar	to	those	cited	above	from	Acts	2:23	and	4:27–28,
Jesus	also	combines	God’s	predestination	of	the	crucifixion	with	moral	blame
on	those	who	carry	it	out:	“For	the	Son	of	man	goes	
as	it	has	been
determined;	
but	woe	to	that	man	by	whom	he	is	betrayed!”	(Luke	22:22;	cf.
Matt.	26:24;	Mark	14:21).	And	in	a	more	general	statement	about	evil	in	the
world,	Jesus	says,	“Woe	to	the	world	for	temptations	to	sin!	For	it	is	necessary
that	temptations	come,	but	woe	to	the	man	by	whom	the	temptation	comes!”
(Matt.	18:7).
James	speaks	similarly	in	warning	us	not	to	blame	God	for	the	evil	we	do
when	he	says,	“Let	no	one	say	when	he	is	tempted,	‘I	am	tempted	by	God’;
for	God	cannot	be	tempted	with	evil	and	he	himself	tempts	no	one;	but	each
person	is	tempted	when	he	is	lured	and	enticed	by	his	own	desire”	(James
1:13–14).	The	verse	does	not	say	that	God	never	causes	evil;	it	affirms	that
we	should	never	think	of	him	as	the	personal	agent	who	is	tempting	us	or	who
is	to	be	held	accountable	for	the	temptation.	We	can	never	blame	God	for
temptation	nor	think	that	he	will	approve	of	us	if	we	give	in	to	it.	We	are	to
resist	evil	and	always	blame	ourselves	or	others	who	tempt	us,	but	we	must
never	blame	God.	Even	a	verse	such	as	Isaiah	45:7,	which	speaks	of	God
“creating	evil,”	does	not	say	that	God	himself	
does	
evil,	but	should	be
understood	to	mean	that	God	ordained	that	evil	would	come	about	through	the
willing	choices	of	his	creatures.
These	verses	all	make	it	clear	that	“secondary	causes”	(human	beings,	and
angels	and	demons)	are	
real,	
and	that	human	beings	do	cause	evil	and	are
responsible	for	it.	Though	God	ordained	that	it	would	come	about,	both	in
general	terms	and	in	specific	details,	yet	
God	is	removed	from	actually	doing
evil,	
and	his	bringing	it	about	through	“secondary	causes”	does	not	impugn
his	holiness	or	render	him	blameworthy.	John	Calvin	wisely	says:
Thieves	and	murderers	and	other	evildoers	are	the	instruments	of
divine	providence,	and	the	Lord	himself	uses	these	to	carry	out	the
judgments	that	he	has	determined	with	himself.	Yet	I	deny	that	they
can	derive	from	this	any	excuse	for	their	evil	deeds.	Why?	Will	they
either	involve	God	in	the	same	iniquity	with	themselves,	or	will	they
cloak	their	own	depravity	with	his	justice?	They	can	do	neither.
12
A	little	later,	Calvin	heads	a	chapter,	“God	So	Uses	the	Works	of	the	Ungodly,
and	So	Bends	Their	Minds	to	Carry	Out	His	Judgments,	That	He	Remains
Pure	From	Every	Stain.”
13
We	should	notice	that	the	alternatives	to	saying	that	God	
uses	evil	for	his
purposes,	
but	that	
he	never	does	evil	
and	is	
not	to	be	blamed	
for	it,	are	not
desirable	ones.	If	we	were	to	say	that	God	himself	does	evil,	we	would	have
to	conclude	that	he	is	not	a	good	and	righteous	God,	and	therefore	that	he	is
not	really	God	at	all.	On	the	other	hand,	if	we	maintain	that	God	does	not	use
evil	to	fulfill	his	purposes,	then	we	would	have	to	admit	that	there	is	evil	in
the	universe	that	God	did	not	intend,	is	not	under	his	control,	and	might	not
fulfill	his	purposes.	This	would	make	it	very	difficult	for	us	to	affirm	that	“all
things”	work	together	for	good	for	those	who	love	God	and	are	called
according	to	his	purpose	(Rom.	8:28).	If	evil	came	into	the	world	in	spite	of
the	fact	that	God	did	not	intend	it	and	did	not	want	it	to	be	there,	then	what
guarantee	do	we	have	that	there	will	not	be	more	and	more	evil	that	he	does
not	intend	and	that	he	does	not	want?	And	what	guarantee	do	we	have	that	he
will	be	able	to	use	it	for	his	purposes,	or	even	that	he	can	triumph	over	it?
Surely	this	is	an	undesirable	alternative	position.
c.	God	Rightfully	Blames	and	Judges	Moral	Creatures	for	the	Evil	They
Do:
	Many	passages	in	Scripture	affirm	this.	One	is	found	in	Isaiah:	“These
have	
chosen	
their	own	ways,	and	their	soul	
delights	in	
their	abominations;	I
also	will	choose	affliction	for	them,	and	bring	their	fears	upon	them;	because,
when	I	called,	no	one	answered,	when	I	spoke	they	did	not	listen;	but	they	did
what	was	evil	in	my	eyes,	and	
chose	
that	in	which	I	did	not	delight”	(Isa.
66:3–4).	Similarly,	we	read,	“God	made	man	upright,	but	they	have	sought
out	many	devices”	(Eccl.	7:29).	
The	blame	for	evil	is	always	on	the
responsible	creature,	
whether	man	or	demon,	who	does	it,	and	
the	creature
who	does	evil	is	always	worthy	of	punishment.	
Scripture	consistently	affirms
that	God	is	righteous	and	just	to	punish	us	for	our	sins.	And	if	we	object	that
he	should	not	find	fault	with	us	because	we	cannot	resist	his	will,	then	we
must	ponder	the	apostle	Paul’s	own	response	to	that	question:	“You	will	say
to	me	then,	‘Why	does	he	still	find	fault?	For	who	can	resist	his	will?’	But
who	are	you,	a	man,	to	answer	back	to	God?	Will	what	is	molded	say	to	its
molder,	‘Why	have	you	made	me	thus?’	”	(Rom.	9:19–20).	In	every	case
where	we	do	evil,	we	know	that	we	
willingly	
choose	to	do	it,	and	we	realize
that	we	are	rightly	to	be	blamed	for	it.
d.	Evil	Is	Real,	Not	an	Illusion,	and	We	Should	Never	Do	Evil,	for	It	Will
Always	Harm	Us	and	Others:
	Scripture	consistently	teaches	that	we	never
have	a	right	to	do	evil,	and	that	we	should	persistently	oppose	it	in	ourselves
and	in	the	world.	We	are	to	pray,	“Deliver	us	from	evil”	(Matt.	6:13),	and	if
we	see	anyone	wandering	from	the	truth	and	doing	wrong,	we	should	attempt
to	bring	him	back.	Scripture	says,	“If	any	one	among	you	wanders	from	the
truth	and	someone	brings	him	back,	let	him	know	that	whoever	brings	back	a
sinner	from	the	error	of	his	way	will	save	his	soul	from	death	and	will	cover	a
multitude	of	sins”	(James	5:19–20).	We	should	never	even	
will	
evil	to	be
done,	for	entertaining	sinful	desires	in	our	minds	is	to	allow	them	to	“wage
war”	against	our	souls	(1	Peter	2:11)	and	thereby	to	do	us	spiritual	harm.	If
we	are	ever	tempted	to	say,	“Why	not	do	evil	that	good	may	come?”	as	some
people	were	slanderously	charging	Paul	with	teaching,	we	should	remember
what	Paul	says	about	people	who	teach	that	false	doctrine:	“Their
condemnation	is	just”	(Rom.	3:8).
In	thinking	about	God	using	evil	to	fulfill	his	purposes,	we	should	remember
that	there	are	things	that	are	
right	
for	God	to	do	but	
wrong	
for	us	to	do:	He
requires	others	to	worship	him,	and	he	accepts	worship	from	them.	He	seeks
glory	for	himself.	He	will	execute	final	judgment	on	wrongdoers.	He	also
uses	evil	to	bring	about	good	purposes,	but	he	does	not	allow	us	to	do	so.
Calvin	quotes	a	statement	of	Augustine	with	approval:	“There	is	a	great
difference	between	what	is	fitting	for	man	to	will	and	what	is	fitting	for
God.	.	.	.	For	through	the	bad	wills	of	evil	men	God	fulfills	what	he
righteously	wills.”
14
	And	Herman	Bavinck	uses	the	analogy	of	a	parent	who
will	himself	use	a	very	sharp	knife	but	will	not	allow	his	child	to	use	it,	to
show	that	God	himself	uses	evil	to	bring	about	good	purposes	but	never
allows	his	children	to	do	so.	Though	we	are	to	imitate	God’s	moral	character
in	many	ways	(cf.	Eph.	5:1),	this	is	one	of	the	ways	in	which	we	are	not	to
imitate	him.
e.	In	Spite	of	All	of	the	Foregoing	Statements,	We	Have	to	Come	to	the
Point	Where	We	Confess	That	We	Do	Not	Understand	How	It	Is	That
God	Can	Ordain	That	We	Carry	Out	Evil	Deeds	and	Yet	Hold	Us
Accountable	for	Them	and	Not	be	Blamed	Himself:
	We	can	affirm	that	all
of	these	things	are	true,	because	Scripture	teaches	them.	But	Scripture	does
not	
tell	us	exactly	
how	
God	brings	this	situation	about	or	how	it	can	be	that
God	holds	us	accountable	for	what	he	ordains	to	come	to	pass.	Here	Scripture
is	silent,	and	we	have	to	agree	with	Berkhof	that	ultimately	“the	problem	of
God’s	relation	to	sin	remains	a	mystery.”
15
9.	Are	We	“Free”?	Do	We	Have	“Free	Will”?
	If	God	exercises	providential
control	over	all	events	are	we	in	any	sense	free?	The	answer	depends	on	what
is	meant	by	the	word	
free.	
In	some	senses	of	the	word	
free,	
everyone	agrees
that	we	are	free	in	our	will	and	in	our	choices.	Even	prominent	theologians	in
the	Reformed	or	Calvinistic	tradition	concur.	Both	Louis	Berkhof	in	his
Systematic	Theology	
(pp.	103,	173)	and	John	Calvin	in	his	
Institutes	of	the
Christian	Religion
16
	are	willing	to	speak	
in	some	sense	
of	the	“free”	acts	and
choices	of	man.	However,	Calvin	explains	that	the	term	is	so	subject	to
misunderstanding	that	he	himself	tries	to	avoid	using	it.	This	is	because	“free
will	is	not	sufficient	to	enable	man	to	do	good	works,	unless	he	be	helped	by
grace.”
17
	Therefore,	Calvin	concludes:
Man	will	then	be	spoken	of	as	having	this	sort	of	free	decision,	not
because	he	has	free	choice	equally	of	good	and	evil,	but	because	he
acts	wickedly	by	will,	not	by	compulsion.	Well	put,	indeed,	but	what
purpose	is	served	by	labeling	with	a	proud	name	such	a	slight	thing?
Calvin	continues	by	explaining	how	this	term	is	easily	misunderstood:
But	how	few	men	are	there,	I	ask,	who	when	they	hear	free	will
attributed	to	man	do	not	immediately	conceive	him	to	be	master	of
both	his	own	mind	and	will,	able	of	his	own	power	to	turn	himself
toward	either	good	or	evil.	.	.	.	If	anyone,	then,	can	use	this	word
without	understanding	it	in	a	bad	sense,	I	shall	not	trouble	him	on	this
account	.	.	.	I’d	prefer	not	to	use	it	myself,	and	I	should	like	others,	if
they	seek	my	advice,	to	avoid	it.
18
Thus,	when	we	ask	whether	we	have	“free	will,”	it	is	important	to	be	clear	as
to	what	is	meant	by	the	phrase.	Scripture	nowhere	says	that	we	are	“free”	in
the	sense	of	being	outside	of	God’s	control
19
	or	of	being	able	to	make
decisions	that	are	not	caused	by	anything.	(This	is	the	sense	in	which	many
people	seem	to	assume	we	must	be	free;	see	discussion	below.)	Nor	does	it
say	we	are	“free”	in	the	sense	of	being	able	to	do	right	on	our	own	apart	from
God’s	power.	But	we	are	nonetheless	free	in	the	greatest	sense	that	any
creature	of	God	could	be	free—we	make	
willing	
choices,	choices	that	have
real	effects.
20
	We	are	aware	of	no	restraints	on	our	will	from	God	when	we
make	decisions.
21
	We	must	insist	that	we	have	the	power	of	
willing	
choice;
otherwise	we	will	fall	into	the	error	of	fatalism	or	determinism	and	thus
conclude	that	our	choices	do	not	matter,	or	that	we	cannot	really	make	willing
choices.	On	the	other	hand,	the	kind	of	freedom	that	is	demanded	by	those
who	deny	God’s	providential	control	of	all	things,	a	freedom	to	be	outside	of
God’s	sustaining	and	controlling	activity,	would	be	impossible	if	Jesus	Christ
is	indeed	“continually	carrying	along	things	by	his	word	of	power”	(Heb.	1:3,
author’s	translation).	If	this	is	true,	then	to	be	outside	of	that	providential
control	would	simply	be	not	to	exist!	An	absolute	“freedom,”	totally	free	of
God’s	control,	is	simply	not	possible	in	a	world	providentially	sustained	and
directed	by	God	himself.
C.	Government
1.
	Scriptural	Evidence.
	We	have	discussed	the	first	two	aspects	of
providence,	(1)	preservation	and	(2)	concurrence.	This	third	aspect	of	God’s
providence	indicates	that	
God	has	a	purpose	in	all	that	he	does	in	the	world
and	he	providentially	governs	or	directs	all	things	in	order	that	they
accomplish	his	purposes.	
We	read	in	the	Psalms,	“His	kingdom	rules	over	all”
(Ps.	103:19).	Moreover,	“he	does	according	to	his	will	in	the	host	of	heaven
and	among	the	inhabitants	of	the	earth;	and	none	can	stay	his	hand	or	say	to
him,	‘What	are	you	doing?’	”	(Dan.	4:35).	Paul	affirms	that	“from	him	and
through	him	and	to	him	are	all	things”	(Rom.	11:36),	and	that	“God	has	put
all	things	in	subjection	under	his	feet”	(1	Cor.	15:27).	God	is	the	one	who
“accomplishes	
all	things	
according	to	the	counsel	of	his	will”	(Eph.	1:11),	so
that	ultimately	“at	the	name	of	Jesus”	every	knee	will	bow	“in	heaven	and	on
earth	and	under	the	earth,	and	every	tongue	confess	that	Jesus	Christ	is	Lord,
to	the	glory	of	God	the	Father”	(Phil.	2:10–11).	It	is	because	Paul	knows	that
God	is	sovereign	over	all	and	works	his	purposes	in	every	event	that	happens
that	he	can	declare	that	“God	causes	all	things	to	work	together	for	good	to
those	who	love	God,	to	those	who	are	called	according	to	his	purpose”	(Rom.
8:28	NASB).
2.	Distinctions	Concerning	the	Will	of	God.
	Though	
in	God	
his	will	is
unified,	and	not	divided	or	contradictory,	we	cannot	begin	to	understand	the
depths	of	God’s	will,	and	only	in	a	small	part	is	it	revealed	to	us.	For	this
reason,	as	we	saw	in	chapter	13,
22
	two	aspects	of	God’s	will	appear	to	us.	On
the	one	hand,	there	is	God’s	
moral	will	
(sometimes	called	his	“revealed”
will).	This	includes	the	moral	standards	of	Scripture,	such	as	the	Ten
Commandments	and	the	moral	commands	of	the	New	Testament.	God’s
moral	commands	are	given	as	descriptions	of	how	
we	
should	conduct
ourselves	if	we	would	act	rightly	before	him.	On	the	other	hand,	another
aspect	of	God’s	will	is	his	
providential	government	
of	all	things	(sometimes
called	his	“secret	will”).	This	includes	all	the	events	of	history	that	God	has
ordained	to	come	about,	for	example,	the	fact	that	Christ	would	be	crucified
by	“lawless	men”	(Acts	2:23).	It	also	includes	all	the	other	evil	acts	that	were
mentioned	in	the	preceding	section.
Some	have	objected	to	this	distinction	between	two	aspects	of	the	will	of
God,	arguing	that	it	means	there	is	a	“self-contradiction”	in	God.
23
	However,
even	in	the	realm	of	human	experience,	we	know	that	we	can	will	and	carry
out	something	that	is	painful	and	that	we	do	not	desire	(such	as	punishing	a
disobedient	child	or	getting	an	inoculation	that	temporarily	makes	us	ill)	in
order	to	bring	about	a	long-term	result	that	we	desire	more	than	the	avoidance
of	short-term	pain	(to	bring	about	the	obedience	of	the	child,	for	example,	or
to	prevent	us	from	getting	a	more	serious	illness).	And	God	is	infinitely
greater	and	wiser	than	we	are.	Certainly	it	is	possible	for	him	to	will	that	his
creatures	do	something	that	in	the	short	term	displeases	him	in	order	that	in
the	long	term	he	would	receive	the	greater	glory.	To	say	that	this	is	a	“self-
contradiction”	in	God	is	to	fail	to	understand	the	distinctions	that	have	been
made	so	that	this	explanation	is	not	contradictory.
24
D.	The	Decrees	of	God
The	decrees	of	God	are	
the	eternal	plans	of	God	whereby,	before	the	creation
of	the	world,	he	determined	to	bring	about	everything	that	happens.	
This
doctrine	is	similar	to	the	doctrine	of	providence,	but	here	we	are	thinking
about	God’s	decisions	
before	the	world	was	created,	
rather	than	his
providential	actions	in	time.	His	providential	actions	are	the	outworking	of
the	eternal	decrees	that	he	made	long	ago.	(See	
chapter	2
,	for	“decree”	used	in
a	somewhat	different	sense.)
David	confesses,	“in	your	book	were	written,	every	one	of	them,	the	days	that
were	formed	for	me,	when	as	yet	there	was	none	of	them”	(Ps.	139:16;	cf.	Job
14:5:	the	days,	months,	and	bounds	of	man	are	determined	by	God).	There
was	also	a	“definite	
plan	
and	foreknowledge	of	God”	(Acts	2:23)	by	which
Jesus	was	put	to	death,	and	the	actions	of	those	who	condemned	and	crucified
him	were	“predestined”	(Acts	4:28)	by	God.	Our	salvation	was	determined
long	ago	because	God	“chose	us	in	him	(Christ)	
before	the	foundation	of	the
world,	
that	we	should	be	holy	and	blameless	before	him”	(Eph.	1:4).	Our
good	works	as	believers	are	those	“which	God	
prepared	beforehand,	
that	we
should	walk	in	them”	(Eph.	2:10;	cf.	Jude	4).
These	examples	take	in	many	diverse	aspects	of	human	activity.	It	seems
appropriate	to	conclude	from	these	examples	that	all	that	God	does	he	has
planned	before	the	creation	of	the	world—in	fact,	these	things	have	been	an
eternal	plan	
with	him.	The	benefit	of	an	emphasis	on	God’s	decrees	is	that	it
helps	us	to	realize	that	God	does	not	make	up	plans	suddenly	as	he	goes
along.	He	knows	the	end	from	the	beginning,	and	he	will	accomplish	all	his
good	purposes.	This	should	greatly	increase	our	trust	in	him,	especially	in
difficult	circumstances.
E.	The	Importance	of	Our	Human	Actions
We	may	sometimes	forget	that	God	works	
through	human	actions	
in	his
providential	management	of	the	world.	If	we	do,	then	we	begin	to	think	that
our	actions	and	our	choices	do	not	make	much	difference	or	do	not	have
much	effect	on	the	course	of	events.	To	guard	against	any	misunderstanding
of	God’s	providence	we	make	the	following	points	of	emphasis.
1.
	We	Are	Still	Responsible	for	Our	Actions.
	God	has	made	us	
responsible
for	our	actions,	which	have	
real	and	eternally	significant	results.	
In	all	his
providential	acts	God	will	preserve	these	characteristics	of	responsibility	and
significance.
Some	analogies	from	the	natural	world	might	help	us	understand	this.	God
has	created	a	rock	with	the	characteristic	of	being	
hard,	
and	so	it	is.	God	has
created	water	with	the	characteristic	of	being	
wet,	
and	so	it	is.	God	has
created	plants	and	animals	with	the	characteristic	of	being	
alive,	
and	so	they
are.	Similarly,	God	has	created	us	with	the	characteristic	of	being	
responsible
for	our	actions,	
and	so	we	are!	If	we	do	right	and	obey	God,	he	will	reward	us
and	things	will	go	well	with	us	both	in	this	age	and	in	eternity.	If	we	do	wrong
and	disobey	God,	he	will	discipline	and	perhaps	punish	us,	and	things	will	go
ill	with	us.	The	realization	of	these	facts	will	help	us	have	pastoral	wisdom	in
talking	to	others	and	in	encouraging	them	to	avoid	laziness	and	disobedience.
The	fact	that	we	are	responsible	for	our	actions	means	that	we	should	never
begin	to	think,	“God	made	me	do	evil,	and	therefore	I	am	not	responsible	for
it.”	Significantly,	Adam	began	to	make	excuses	for	the	very	first	sin	in	terms
that	sounded	suspiciously	like	this:	“The	woman	whom	you	gave	to	be	with
me,	she	gave	me	fruit	of	the	tree,	and	I	ate”	(Gen.	3:12).	Unlike	Adam,
Scripture	
never	
blames	God	for	sin.	If	we	ever	begin	to	
think	
that	God	is	to
blame	for	sin,	we	have	thought	
wrongly	
about	God’s	providence,	for	it	is
always	the	creature,	not	God	who	is	to	be	blamed.	Now	we	may	object	that	it
is	not	right	for	God	to	hold	us	responsible	if	he	has	in	fact	ordained	all	things
that	happen,	but	Paul	corrects	us:	“You	will	say	to	me	then,	‘Why	does	he	still
find	fault?	For	who	can	resist	his	will?’	But	who	are	you,	a	man,	to	answer
back	to	God?”	(Rom.	9:19–20).	We	must	realize	and	settle	in	our	hearts	that	it
is	
right	
for	God	to	rebuke	and	discipline	and	punish	evil.	And,	when	we	are
responsible	to	do	so,	it	is	right	for	us	to	rebuke	and	discipline	evil	in	our
families,	in	the	church,	and	even,	in	some	ways,	in	the	society	around	us.	We
should	never	say	about	an	evil	event,	“God	willed	it	and	therefore	it	is	good,”
because	we	must	recognize	that	some	things	that	God’s	will	of	decree	has
planned	are	not	in	themselves	good,	and	should	not	receive	our	approval,	just
as	they	do	not	receive	God’s	approval.
2.	Our	Actions	Have	Real	Results	and	Do	Change	the	Course	of	Events.
In	the	ordinary	working	of	the	world,	if	I	neglect	to	take	care	of	my	health	and
have	poor	eating	habits,	or	if	I	abuse	my	body	through	alcohol	or	tobacco,	I
am	likely	to	die	sooner.	God	has	ordained	that	our	
actions	
do	have	effects.
God	has	ordained	that	
events	
will	come	about	
by	our	causing	them.	
Of	course,
we	do	not	know	what	God	has	planned	even	for	the	rest	of	this	day,	to	say
nothing	of	next	week	or	next	year.	But	we	
do	
know	that	if	we	trust	God	and
obey	him,	we	will	discover	that	he	has	planned	
good	things	
to	come	about
through	that	obedience!	We	cannot	simply	disregard	others	whom	we	meet,
for	God	brings	many	people	across	our	paths	and	gives	
us	
the	responsibility	to
act	toward	them	in	eternally	significant	ways—whether	for	good	or	ill.
Calvin	wisely	notes	that	to	encourage	us	to	use	ordinary	caution	in	life	and	to
plan	ahead,	“God	is	pleased	to	hide	all	future	events	from	us,	in	order	that	we
should	resist	them	as	doubtful,	and	not	cease	to	oppose	them	with	ready
remedies,	until	they	are	either	overcome	or	pass	beyond	all	care.	.	.	.	God’s
providence	does	not	always	meet	us	in	its	naked	form,	but	God	in	a	sense
clothes	it	with	the	means	employed.”
25
By	contrast,	if	we	anticipate	that	some	dangers	or	evil	events	may	come	in	the
future,	and	if	we	do	not	use	reasonable	means	to	avoid	them,	then	we	may	in
fact	discover	that	our	lack	of	action	was	the	means	that	God	used	to	allow
them	to	come	about!
3.	Prayer	Is	One	Specific	Kind	of	Action	That	Has	Definite	Results	and
That	Does	Change	the	Course	of	Events.
	God	has	also	ordained	that	prayer
is	a	very	significant	means	of	bringing	about	results	in	the	world.
26
	When	we
earnestly	intercede	for	a	specific	person	or	situation,	we	will	often	find	that
God	had	ordained	that	our	prayer	would	be	a	
means	
he	would	use	to	bring
about	the	changes	in	the	world.	Scripture	reminds	us	of	this	when	it	tells	us,
“You	do	not	have,	because	you	do	not	ask”	(James	4:2).	Jesus	says,	“Hitherto
you	have	asked	nothing	in	my	name;	ask,	and	you	will	receive,	that	your	joy
may	be	full”	(John	16:24).
4.	In	Conclusion,	We	Must	Act!
	The	doctrine	of	providence	in	no	way
encourages	us	to	sit	back	in	idleness	to	await	the	outcome	of	certain	events.
Of	course,	God	may	impress	on	us	the	need	to	wait	on	him	before	we	act	and
to	trust	in	him	rather	than	in	our	own	abilities—that	is	certainly	not	wrong.
But	simply	to	say	that	we	are	trusting	in	God	
instead	of	
acting	responsibly	is
sheer	laziness	and	is	a	distortion	of	the	doctrine	of	providence.
In	practical	terms,	if	one	of	my	sons	has	school	work	that	must	be	done	the
next	day,	I	am	right	to	make	him	complete	that	work	before	he	can	go	out	to
play.	I	realize	that	his	grade	is	in	God’s	hands,	and	that	God	has	long	ago
determined	what	it	would	be,	but	I	do	not	know	what	it	will	be,	and	neither
does	he.	What	I	do	know	is	that	if	he	studies	and	does	his	school	work
faithfully,	he	will	receive	a	good	grade.	If	he	doesn’t,	he	will	not.	So	Calvin
can	say:
Now	it	is	very	clear	what	our	duty	is:	Thus,	if	the	Lord	has	committed
to	us	the	protection	of	our	life,	our	duty	is	to	protect	it;	if	he	offers
helps	to	us,	to	use	them;	if	he	forewarns	us	of	dangers,	not	to	plunge
headlong;	if	he	makes	remedies	available,	not	to	neglect	them.	But	no
danger	will	hurt	us,	say	they,	unless	it	is	fatal,	and	in	this	case	it	is
beyond	remedies.	But	what	if	the	dangers	are	not	fatal,	because	the
Lord	has	provided	you	with	remedies	for	repulsing	and	overcoming
them?
27
One	good	example	of	vigorous	activity	combined	with	trust	in	God	is	found
in	2	Samuel	10:12,	where	Joab	says,	“
Be	strong	
and	let	us	show	ourselves
courageous	for	the	sake	of	our	people	and	for	the	cities	of	our	God,”	but	then
adds	immediately	in	the	same	sentence,	
“and	may	the	Lord	do	what	is	good	in
His	sight”	
(NASB).	Joab	will	both	fight	and	trust	God	to	do	what	he	thinks	to
be	good.
Similar	examples	are	found	in	the	New	Testament.	When	Paul	was	in	Corinth,
in	order	to	keep	him	from	being	discouraged	about	the	opposition	he	had
received	from	the	Jews,	the	Lord	appeared	to	him	one	night	in	a	vision	and
said	to	him,	“Do	not	be	afraid,	but	speak	and	do	not	be	silent;	for	I	am	with
you,	and	no	man	shall	attack	you	to	harm	you;	for	
I	have	many	people	in	this
city”	
(Acts	18:9–10).	If	Paul	had	been	a	fatalist	with	an	improper
understanding	of	God’s	providence,	he	would	have	listened	to	God’s	words,
“I	have	many	people	in	this	city,”	and	concluded	that	God	had	determined	to
save	many	of	the	Corinthians,	and	that	therefore	it	did	not	matter	whether
Paul	stayed	there	or	not:	God	had	already	chosen	many	people	to	be	saved!
Paul	would	have	thought	that	he	may	as	well	pack	his	bags	and	leave!	But
Paul	does	not	make	that	mistake.	He	rather	concludes	that	if	God	has	chosen
many	people,	then	it	will	probably	be	through	the	
means	
of	Paul’s	preaching
the	gospel	that	those	many	people	would	be	saved.	Therefore	Paul	makes	a
wise	decision:	“
And	he	stayed	a	year	and	six	months,	
teaching	the	word	of
God	among	them”	(Acts	18:11).
Paul	put	this	kind	of	responsible	action	in	the	light	of	God’s	providence	into	a
single	sentence	in	2	Timothy	2:10,	where	he	said,	“I	endure	everything	
for	the
sake	of	the	elect,	
that	they	also	may	obtain	salvation	in	Christ	Jesus	with	its
eternal	glory.”	He	did	not	argue	from	the	fact	that	God	had	chosen	some	to	be
saved	that	nothing	had	to	be	done;	rather,	he	concluded	that	
much	
had	to	be
done	in	order	that	God’s	purposes	might	come	about	by	the	
means	
that	God
had	also	established.	Indeed,	Paul	was	willing	to	endure	“everything,”
including	all	kinds	of	hardship	and	suffering,	that	God’s	eternal	plans	might
come	about.	A	hearty	belief	in	God’s	providence	is	not	a	discouragement	but
a	spur	to	action.
A	related	example	is	found	in	the	story	of	Paul’s	journey	to	Rome.	God	had
clearly	revealed	to	Paul	that	no	one	on	the	ship	would	die	from	the	long	storm
they	had	endured.	Indeed,	Paul	stood	before	the	passengers	and	crew	and	told
them	to	take	heart,
for	there	will	be	no	loss	of	life	among	you,	but	only	of	the	ship.	For
this	very	night	there	stood	by	me	an	angel	of	the	God	to	whom	I
belong	and	whom	I	worship,	and	he	said,	“Do	not	be	afraid,	Paul;	you
must	stand	before	Caesar;	and	lo,	God	has	granted	you	all	those	who
sail	with	you.”	So	take	heart,	men,	for	I	have	faith	in	God	that	it	will
be	exactly	as	I	have	been	told.	But	we	shall	have	to	run	on	some
island.	(Acts	27:22–26)
But	shortly	after	Paul	had	said	this,	he	noticed	that	the	sailors	on	board	the
ship	were	secretly	trying	to	lower	a	lifeboat	into	the	sea,	“seeking	to	escape
from	the	ship”	(Acts	27:30).	They	were	planning	to	leave	the	others	helpless
with	no	one	who	knew	how	to	sail	the	ship.	When	Paul	saw	this,	he	did	not
adopt	an	erroneous,	fatalistic	attitude,	thinking	that	God	would	miraculously
get	the	ship	to	shore.	Rather,	he	immediately	went	to	the	centurion	who	was
in	charge	of	the	sailors	and	“Paul	said	to	the	centurion	and	the	soldiers,	‘
Unless	these	men	stay	in	the	ship,	you	cannot	be	saved’	”	(Acts	27:31).
Wisely,	Paul	knew	that	God’s	providential	oversight	and	even	his	clear
prediction	of	what	would	happen	still	involved	the	use	of	ordinary	human
means	
to	bring	it	about.	He	was	even	so	bold	to	say	that	those	means	were
necessary:	
“Unless	these	men	stay	in	the	ship,	
you	cannot	be	saved”	
(Acts
27:31).	We	would	do	well	to	imitate	his	example,	combining	complete	trust	in
God’s	providence	with	a	realization	that	the	use	of	ordinary	means	is
necessary	for	things	to	come	out	the	way	God	has	planned	them	to	come	out.
5.	What	If	We	Cannot	Understand	This	Doctrine	Fully?
	Every	believer
who	meditates	on	God’s	providence	will	sooner	or	later	come	to	a	point	where
he	or	she	will	have	to	say,	“I	cannot	understand	this	doctrine	fully.”	In	some
ways	that	must	be	said	about	every	doctrine,	since	our	understanding	is	finite,
and	God	is	infinite	(see	
chapter	1
).	But	particularly	is	this	so	with	the	doctrine
of	providence:	we	should	believe	it	because	Scripture	teaches	it	even	when
we	do	not	understand	fully	how	it	fits	in	with	other	teachings	of	Scripture.
Calvin	has	some	wise	advice:
Let	those	for	whom	this	seems	harsh	consider	for	a	little	while	how
bearable	their	squeamishness	is	in	refusing	a	thing	attested	by	clear
Scriptural	proofs	because	it	exceeds	their	mental	capacity,	and	find	fault
that	things	are	put	forth	publicly,	which	if	God	had	not	judged	useful
for	men	to	know,	he	would	never	have	bidden	his	prophets	and	apostles
to	teach.	For	our	wisdom	ought	to	be	nothing	else	than	to	embrace	with
humble	teachableness,	and	at	least	without	finding	fault,	whatever	is
taught	in	sacred	Scripture.
28
F.	Further	Practical	Application
Although	we	have	already	begun	to	speak	of	the	practical	application	of	this
doctrine,	three	additional	points	should	be	made.
1.
	Do	Not	Be	Afraid,	but	Trust	in	God.
	Jesus	emphasizes	the	fact	that	our
sovereign	Lord	watches	over	us	and	cares	for	us	as	his	children.	He	says,
“Look	at	the	birds	of	the	air:	they	neither	sow	nor	reap	nor	gather	into	barns,
and	yet	your	heavenly	Father	feeds	them.	Are	you	not	of	more	value	than
they?	
.	.	.	Therefore	do	not	be	anxious,	saying,	‘What	shall	we	eat?’	or	‘What
shall	we	drink?’	or	‘What	shall	we	wear?’	”	(Matt.	6:26,	31).	If	God	feeds	the
birds	and	clothes	the	grass	of	the	field,	he	will	take	care	of	us.	Similarly,	Jesus
says,	“Are	not	two	sparrows	sold	for	a	penny?	And	not	one	of	them	will	fall
to	the	ground	without	your	Father’s	will.	.	.	.	Fear	not,	therefore;	you	are	of
more	value	than	many	sparrows”	(Matt.	10:29–31).
David	was	able	to	sleep	in	the	midst	of	his	enemies,	because	he	knew	that
God’s	providential	control	made	him	“dwell	in	safety,”	and	he	could	say,	“In
peace	I	will	both	lie	down	and	sleep”	(Ps.	4:8).	Many	of	the	psalms	encourage
us	to	trust	God	and	not	to	fear,	because	the	L
ORD
	keeps	and	protects	his
people—for	example,	Psalm	91	(“He	who	dwells	in	the	shelter	of	the	Most
High	.	.	.”)	or	Psalm	121	(“I	lift	up	my	eyes	to	the	hills	.	.	.”).	Because	of	our
confidence	in	God’s	providential	care,	we	need	not	fear	any	evil	or	harm,
even	if	it	does	come	to	us—it	can	only	come	by	God’s	will	and	ultimately	for
our	good.	Thus	Peter	can	say	that	“now	for	a	little	while	you	may	have	to
suffer	various	trials,	so	that	the	genuineness	of	your	faith,	more	precious	than
gold	.	.	.	may	redound	to	praise	and	glory	and	honor	at	the	revelation	of	Jesus
Christ”	(1	Peter	1:6–7).	In	all	of	this	we	need	not	worry	about	the	future	but
trust	in	God’s	omnipotent	care.
2.	Be	Thankful	for	All	Good	Things	That	Happen.
	If	we	genuinely	believe
that	all	good	things	are	caused	by	God,	then	our	hearts	will	indeed	be	full
when	we	say,	“Bless	the	L
ORD
,	O	my	soul,	and	forget	not	all	his	benefits”	(Ps.
103:2).	We	will	thank	him	for	our	daily	food	(cf.	Matt.	6:11;	1	Tim.	4:4–5);
indeed,	we	will	“give	thanks	in	all	circumstances”	(1	Thess.	5:18).
3.	There	Is	No	Such	Thing	as	“Luck”	or	“Chance.”
	All	things	come	to	pass
by	God’s	wise	providence.	This	means	that	we	should	adopt	a	much	more
“personal”	understanding	of	the	universe	and	the	events	in	it.	The	universe	is
not	governed	by	impersonal	fate	or	luck,	but	by	a	personal	God.	Nothing	“just
happens”—we	should	see	God’s	hand	in	events	throughout	the	day,	causing
all	things	to	work	together	for	good	for	those	who	love	him.
This	confidence	in	God’s	wise	providence	certainly	does	not	equal
superstition,	for	that	is	a	belief	in	impersonal	or	demonic	control	of
circumstances,	or	control	by	a	capricious	deity	concerned	for	meaningless
ritual	rather	than	obedience	and	faith.	A	deepened	appreciation	for	the
doctrine	of	providence	will	not	make	us	more	superstitious;	it	will	make	us
trust	in	God	more	and	obey	him	more	fully.
G.	Another	Evangelical	View:	the	Arminian	Position
There	is	a	major	alternative	position	held	by	many	evangelicals,	which	for
convenience	we	shall	call	the	“Arminian”	view.
29
	Among	denominations	in
contemporary	evangelicalism,	Methodists	and	Nazarenes	tend	to	be
thoroughly	Arminian,	whereas	Presbyterians	and	the	Christian	Reformed	tend
to	be	thoroughly	Reformed	(at	least	by	denominational	statement	of	faith).
Both	views	are	found	among	Baptists,	Episcopalians	(though	the	Thirty-Nine
Articles	have	a	clearly	Reformed	emphasis),	Dispensationalists,	Evangelical
Free	Churches,	Lutherans	(though	Martin	Luther	was	in	the	Reformed	camp
on	this	issue),	the	Churches	of	Christ,	and	most	charismatic	and	Pentecostal
groups	(though	Pentecostal	denominations	such	as	the	Assemblies	of	God
have	been	predominantly	Arminian).
Those	who	hold	an	Arminian	position	maintain	that	in	order	to	preserve	the
real	human	freedom	
and	
real	human	choices	
that	are	necessary	for	genuine
human	personhood,	God	cannot	cause	or	plan	our	voluntary	choices.
Therefore	they	conclude	that	God’s	providential	involvement	in	or	control	of
history	must	
not	
include	
every	specific	detail	
of	every	event	that	happens,	but
that	God	instead	simply	
responds	
to	human	choices	and	actions	as	they	come
about	and	does	so	in	such	a	way	that	his	purposes	are	ultimately	accomplished
in	the	world.
Those	who	hold	this	position	argue	that	God’s	purposes	in	the	world	are	more
general	and	could	be	accomplished	through	many	different	kinds	of	specific
events.	So	God’s	purpose	or	plan	for	the	world	“is	not	a	blueprint
encompassing	all	future	contingencies”	but	“a	dynamic	program	for	the
world,	the	outworking	of	which	depends	in	part	on	man.”
30
	Cottrell	says,
“God	does	not	have	a	specific,	unconditional	purpose	for	each	discrete
particle,	object,	person,	and	event	within	the	creation.”
31
	Arminians	believe
that	God	achieves	his	overall	goal	by	responding	to	and	utilizing	the	free
choices	of	human	beings,	whatever	they	may	be.
32
	Pinnock	says	that
“predestination	does	not	apply	to	every	individual	activity,	but	is	rather	the
comprehensive	purpose	of	God	which	is	
the	structural	context	
in	which
history	moves.”
33
Moreover,	advocates	of	the	Arminian	position	maintain	that	God’s	will	cannot
include	evil.	Pinnock	says,	“The	fall	of	man	is	an	eloquent	refutation	to	the
theory	that	God’s	will	is	always	done.”
34
	He	states	that	it	“is	not	the	case”	that
God’s	will	“is	also	accomplished	in	the	lostness	of	the	lost.”
35
	And	I.	Howard
Marshall	quite	clearly	affirms,	“It	is	not	true	that	everything	that	happens	is
what	God	desires.”
36
	These	statements	make	it	clear	that	the	differences
between	the	Reformed	and	Arminian	positions	are	not	merely	differences	in
terminology:	there	is	a	real	disagreement	in	substance.	Several	arguments	are
advanced	in	defense	of	the	Arminian	position.	I	have	attempted	to	summarize
them	in	the	four	major	points	that	follow.
1.
	The	Verses	Cited	as	Examples	of	God’s	Providential	Control	Are
Exceptions	and	Do	Not	Describe	the	Way	That	God	Ordinarily	Works	in
Human	Activity.
	In	surveying	the	Old	Testament	passages	referring	to	God’s
providential	involvement	in	the	world,	David	J.	A.	Clines	says	that	God’s
predictions	and	statements	of	his	purposes	refer	to	limited	or	specific	events:
Almost	all	of	the	specific	references	to	God’s	plans	have	in	view	a
particular	event	or	a	limited	series	of	events,	for	example,	“his
purposes	against	the	land	of	the	Chaldeans”	(Jer.	50:45).	Furthermore,
it	is	not	a	matter	of	a	
single	
divine	plan;	various	passages	speak	of
various	intentions,	and	some	references	are	in	fact	to	God’s	plans	in
the	plural.	.	.	.	[The	passages	are]	an	assertion	that	within	history	God
is	working	his	purposes	out.
37
Jack	Cottrell	agrees	that	in	some	cases	God	intervenes	in	the	world	in	an
uncommon	way,	using	“subtle	manipulation	of	such	[natural]	laws	and	of
mental	states.”	But	he	calls	these	unusual	events	“special	providence,”	and
says,	“It	is	natural	that	the	Old	Testament	teems	with	accounts	of	special
providence.	But	we	have	no	reason	to	assume	that	God	was	working	in
Australia	and	South	America	in	such	ways	at	the	same	time.”
38
2.	The	Calvinist	View	Wrongly	Makes	God	Responsible	for	Sin.
	Those
who	hold	an	Arminian	position	ask,	“How	can	God	be	holy	if	he	decrees	that
we	sin?”	They	affirm	that	God	is	not	the	“author	of	sin,”	that	“God	cannot	be
tempted	with	evil	and	he	himself	tempts	no	one”	(James	1:13),	that	“God	is
light	and	in	him	is	no	darkness	at	all”	(1	John	1:5),	and	that	“the	L
ORD
	is
upright	.	.	.	and	there	is	no	unrighteousness	in	him”	(Ps.	92:15).
The	view	of	God’s	providence	advocated	above,	they	would	say,	makes	us
into	puppets	or	robots	who	cannot	do	anything	other	than	what	God	causes	us
to	do.	But	this	brings	moral	reproach	on	God,	for	Marshall	says,	“I	am
responsible	for	what	my	agent	does.”
39
	Pinnock	affirms	that	“it	is	simply
blasphemous	to	maintain,	as	this	theory	does,	that	man’s	rebellion	against
God	is	
in	any	sense	
the	product	of	God’s	sovereign	will	or	primary
causation.”
40
3.	Choices	Caused	by	God	Cannot	Be	Real	Choices.
	When	the	Calvinist
claims	that	God	causes	us	to	choose	things	voluntarily,	those	who	hold	an
Arminian	position	would	respond	that	any	choices	that	are	ultimately	caused
by	God	cannot	be	real	choices,	and	that,	if	God	really	causes	us	to	make	the
choices	we	make,	then	we	are	not	real	persons.	Cottrell	says	that	the	Calvinist
view	of	God	as	the	primary	cause	and	men	as	secondary	causes	really	breaks
down	so	there	is	only	one	cause,	God.	If	a	man	uses	a	lever	to	move	a	rock,	he
argues,	“the	lever	is	not	a	true	second	cause	but	is	only	an	instrument	of	the
real	cause	of	the	movement.	.	.	.	In	my	judgment	the	concept	of	cause	has	no
real	significance	when	used	in	this	sense.	In	such	a	system	man	contributes
only	what	has	been	predetermined.”
41
Pinnock	writes:
Personal	fellowship	of	the	kind	envisioned	in	the	Gospel	only	exists
where	consummated	in	a	free	decision.	If	we	wish	to	understand
God’s	grace	as	personal	address	to	his	creatures,	we	must	comprehend
it	in	dynamic,	non-manipulative,	non-coercive	terms,	as	the	Bible
does.
42
He	also	says:
If	the	world	were	a	completely	determined	structure	on	which	no
decision	of	man’s	would	have	any	effect,	that	basic	intuition	of	man’s
that	he	is	an	
actor	
and	a	
free	agent	
would	be	nonsensical:	There
would	then	be	no	point	to	his	making	plans	or	exerting	efforts
intended	to	transform	the	world.	.	.	.	Human	freedom	is	the
precondition	of	moral	and	intellectual	responsibility.
43
Why	then,	in	the	Arminian	view,	did	the	fall	and	sin	come	about?	Pinnock
answers	that	“they	occur	because	God	refuses	to	mechanize	man	or	to	force
his	will	upon	him.”
44
	And	Marshall	says,	with	respect	to	the	“possibility	of
my	predetermining	a	course	of	action	involving	myself	and	another	subject,”
that	“on	the	level	of	free	agents	it	is	impossible.”
45
	He	objects	that	the
analogy	of	God	and	world	as	being	like	an	author	and	a	play	is	unhelpful
because	if	we	ask	whether	the	characters	are	indeed	free,	“this	is	an	unreal
question.”
46
However,	it	should	be	noted	that	Arminian	theologians	are	certainly	willing	to
allow	some	kinds	of	influence	by	God	on	human	beings.	Marshall	says,
“Prayer	also	influences	men.	.	.	.	The	wills	of	men	can	thus	be	affected	by
prayer	or	else	we	would	not	pray	for	them.	
To	believe	in	prayer	is	thus	to
believe	in	some	kind	of	limitation	of	human	freedom,	and	in	some	kind	of
incomprehensible	influence	upon	the	wills	of	men.”	
47
To	drive	home	their	point	about	the	essential	freedom	of	the	human	will,
advocates	of	an	Arminian	position	draw	attention	to	the	frequency	of	the	free
offer	of	the	gospel	in	the	New	Testament.	They	would	say	that	these
invitations	to	people	to	repent	and	come	to	Christ	for	salvation,	if	
bona	fide,
must	imply	the	
ability	
to	respond	to	them.	Thus,	all	people	without	exception
have	the	ability	to	respond,	not	just	those	who	have	been	sovereignly	given
that	ability	by	God	in	a	special	way.
In	further	support	of	this	point,	Arminians	would	see	1	Corinthians	10:13	as
clearly	affirming	our	ability	not	to	sin.	Paul	says	to	the	Corinthians,	“No
temptation	has	overtaken	you	that	is	not	common	to	man.	God	is	faithful,	and
he	will	not	let	you	be	tempted	beyond	your	strength,	but	with	the	temptation
will	also	provide	the	way	of	escape,	
that	you	may	be	able	to	endure	it.”	
But,	it
is	said,	this	statement	would	be	false	if	God	sometimes	ordains	that	we	sin,
for	then	we	would	not	be	“able”	to	escape	from	temptation	without	sinning.
4.	The	Arminian	View	Encourages	Responsible	Christian	Living,	While
the	Calvinistic	View	Encourages	a	Dangerous	Fatalism.
	Christians	who
hold	an	Arminian	position	argue	that	the	Calvinist	view,	when	thoroughly
understood,	destroys	motives	for	responsible	Christian	behavior.	Randall
Basinger	says	that	the	Calvinist	view	“establishes	that	what	is	ought	to	be	and
rules	out	the	consideration	that	things	could	and/or	should	have	been
different.”
48
	Basinger	continues	by	saying	that	Christians
who	evoke	and	act	on	the	basis	of	God’s	sovereignty	are	guilty	of	an
arbitrary,	unlivable,	and	dangerous	fatalism.	.	.	.	In	contrast	to	this,	the
Arminian	believes	that	what	actually	occurs	in	the	world	is,	to	an
extent,	consequent	on	the	human	will;	God’s	exhaustive	control	over
the	world	is	denied.	This	means	that	things	can	occur	that	God	does
not	will	or	want;	things	not	only	
can	
be	different	but	often	
should	
be
different.	And	from	all	this	follows	our	responsibility	to	work	with
God	to	bring	about	a	better	world.
49
However,	Basinger	goes	on	to	make	a	further	point:	Calvinists,	in	practice,
often	avoid	such	fatalism	and	“live	and	talk	like	Arminians.”
50
	Thus,	on	the
one	hand,	Basinger’s	challenge	is	a	warning	against	the	practical	extremes	to
which	he	claims	Calvinism	should	logically	drive	Christians.	On	the	other
hand,	his	objection	claims	that	when	Calvinists	live	the	way	they	know	they
must	live,	in	responsible	obedience	to	God,	they	are	either	inconsistent	with
their	view	of	divine	sovereignty	or	else	not	allowing	their	view	of	God’s
sovereign	control	to	affect	their	daily	lives.
H.	Response	to	the	Arminian	Position
Many	within	the	evangelical	world	will	find	these	four	Arminian	arguments
convincing.	They	will	feel	that	these	arguments	represent	what	they
intuitively	know	about	themselves,	their	own	actions,	and	the	way	the	world
functions,	and	that	these	arguments	best	account	for	the	repeated	emphasis	in
Scripture	on	our	responsibility	and	the	real	consequences	of	our	choices.
However,	there	are	some	answers	that	can	be	given	to	the	Arminian	position.
1.
	Are	These	Scripture	Passages	Unusual	Examples,	or	Do	They	Describe
the	Way	God	Works	Ordinarily?
	In	response	to	the	objection	that	the
examples	of	God’s	providential	control	only	refer	to	limited	or	specific
events,	it	may	be	said	first	that	the	examples	are	so	numerous	(see	the
beginning	of	
chapter	16
)	that	they	seem	to	be	designed	to	describe	to	us	the
ways	in	which	God	works	all	the	time.	God	does	not	just	cause	
some	
grass	to
grow;	he	causes	all	grass	to	grow.	He	does	not	just	send	
some	
rain;	he	sends
all	the	rain.	He	does	not	just	keep	
some	
sparrows	from	falling	to	the	ground
without	his	will;	he	keeps	all	sparrows	from	falling	to	the	ground	without	his
will.	He	does	not	just	know	every	word	on	David’s	tongue	before	he	speaks	it;
he	knows	the	words	on	all	our	tongues	before	we	speak	them.	He	has	not	just
chosen	Paul	and	the	Christians	in	the	Ephesian	churches	to	be	holy	and
blameless	before	him;	he	has	chosen	all	Christians	to	be	holy	and	blameless
before	him.	This	is	why	Cottrell’s	claim,	that	God	was	working	differently	in
Australia	and	South	America	than	in	the	Old	Testament,
51
	is	so	unconvincing:
Scripture	is	given	to	tell	us	the	ways	of	God,	and	when	we	have	dozens	of
examples	throughout	Old	and	New	Testaments	where	there	is	such	clear
teaching	on	this,	it	is	appropriate	for	us	to	conclude	that	this	is	the	way	in
which	God	
always	
works	with	human	beings.	By	contrast,	there	seems	to	be
nothing	in	Scripture	that	would	indicate	that	some	things	are	outside	God’s
providential	control,	or	that	these	ways	of	God’s	acting	are	unusual	or
unrepresentative	of	the	ways	in	which	he	acts	generally.
Moreover,	many	of	the	verses	that	speak	of	God’s	providence	are	very
general:	Christ	“continually	carries	along	
all	things	
by	his	word	of	power”
(Heb.	1:3,	author’s	translation),	and	“in	him	all	things	hold	together”	(Col.
1:17).	“In	him	we	live	and	move	and	have	our	being”	(Acts	17:28).	He
“accomplishes	
all	things	
according	to	the	counsel	of	his	will”	(Eph.	1:11).
52
He	provides	our	food	(Matt.	6:11),	supplies	all	our	needs	(Phil.	4:19),	directs
our	steps	(Prov.	20:24)	and	works	in	us	to	will	and	to	do	his	good	pleasure
(Phil.	2:13).	Such	Scripture	passages	have	in	view	more	than	exceptional
examples	of	an	unusual	intervention	by	God	in	the	affairs	of	human	beings;
they	describe	the	way	God	always	works	in	the	world.
2.	Does	the	Calvinistic	Doctrine	of	God’s	Providence	Make	God
Responsible	for	Sin?
	Against	the	Calvinistic	view	of	God’s	providence
(which	allows	that	he	decrees	to	permit	sin	and	evil)	Arminians	would	say
that	God	is	not	responsible	for	sin	and	evil	
because	he	did	not	ordain	them	or
cause	them	in	any	way.	
This	is	indeed	
one	way	
of	absolving	God	from
responsibility	and	blame	for	sin,	but	is	it	the	biblical	way?
The	problem	is	whether	the	Arminian	position	can	really	account	for	many
texts	that	clearly	say	that	God	ordains	that	some	people	sin	or	do	evil	(see
Section	B.7	in	chapter	16
).	The	death	of	Christ	is	the	prime	example	of	this,
but	there	are	many	others	in	Scripture	(Joseph’s	brothers,	Pharaoh,	the
Egyptians,	the	Canaanites,	Eli’s	sons,	David’s	census,	and	the	Babylonians,	to
mention	a	few).	The	response	could	be	made	that	these	were	unusual	events,
exceptions	to	God’s	ordinary	way	of	acting.	But	it	does	not	solve	the	problem,
for,	on	the	Arminian	view,	how	can	God	be	holy	if	he	ordains	even	one	sinful
act?
The	Calvinist	position	seems	preferable:	God	himself	never	sins	but	always
brings	about	his	will	
through	secondary	causes;	
that	is,	through	personal
moral	agents	who	voluntarily,	willingly	do	what	God	has	ordained.	These
personal	moral	agents	(both	human	beings	and	evil	angels)	are	to	blame	for
the	evil	they	do.	While	the	Arminian	position	objects	that,	on	a	human	level,
people	are	also	responsible	for	
what	they	cause	others	to	do,	
we	can	answer
that	Scripture	is	not	willing	to	apply	such	reasoning	to	God.	Rather,	Scripture
repeatedly	gives	examples	where	God	in	a	mysterious,	hidden	way	somehow
ordains	that	people	do	wrong,	but	continually	places	the	blame	for	that	wrong
on	the	individual	human	who	does	wrong	and	never	on	God	himself.	The
Arminian	position	seems	to	have	failed	to	show	why	God	
cannot	
work	in	this
way	in	the	world,	preserving	both	his	holiness	and	our	individual	human
responsibility	for	sin.
3.	Can	Choices	Ordained	by	God	Be	Real	Choices?
	In	response	to	the
claim	that	choices	ordained	by	God	cannot	be	real	choices,	it	must	be	said	that
this	is	simply	an	assumption	based	once	again	on	human	experience	and
intuition,	not	on	specific	texts	of	Scripture.
53
	Yet	Scripture	does	not	indicate
that	we	can	extrapolate	from	our	human	experience	when	dealing	with	God’s
providential	control	of	his	creatures,	especially	human	beings.	Arminians
have	simply	not	answered	the	question,	Where	does	Scripture	say	that	a
choice	ordained	by	God	is	not	a	real	choice?
54
	When	we	read	passages
indicating	that	God	works	through	our	will,	our	power	to	choose,	and	our
personal	volition,	on	what	basis	can	we	say	that	a	choice	brought	about	by
God	through	these	means	is	not	a	real	choice?	It	seems	better	to	affirm	that
God	
says	
that	our	choices	are	real	and	to	conclude	that	therefore	they	
are	real.
Scripture	repeatedly	affirms	that	our	choices	are	genuine	choices,	that	they
have	
real	
results,	and	that	those	results	last	for	eternity.	“Do	this,	and	you	will
live”	(Luke	10:28).	“For	God	so	loved	the	world	that	he	gave	his	only	Son,
that	
whoever	believes	in	him	
should	not	perish	but	have	eternal	life”	(John
3:16).
This	causes	us	to	conclude	that	God	has	made	us	in	such	a	way	that	(1)	he
ordains	all	that	we	do,	and	(2)	we	exercise	our	personal	will	and	make	real,
voluntary	choices.	Because	we	cannot	understand	this	should	we	therefore
reject	it?	We	cannot	understand	(in	any	final	sense)	how	a	plant	can	live,	or
how	a	bumblebee	can	fly,	or	how	God	can	be	omnipresent	or	eternal.	Should
we	therefore	reject	those	facts?	Should	we	not	rather	simply	accept	them	as
true	either	because	we	see	that	plants	in	fact	do	live	and	bumblebees	in	fact	do
fly,	or	because	Scripture	itself	teaches	that	God	is	omnipresent	and	eternal?
Calvin	several	times	distinguishes	between	“necessity”	and	“compulsion”
with	regard	to	our	will:	unbelievers	necessarily	sin,	but	no	compulsion	forces
them	to	sin	against	their	will.
55
	In	response	to	the	objection	that	an	act	cannot
be	willing	or	voluntary	if	it	is	a	necessary	act,	Calvin	points	to	both	the	good
deeds	of	God	(who	
necessarily	
does	good)	and	the	evil	deeds	of	the	Devil
(who	
necessarily	
does	evil):
If	the	fact	that	he	must	do	good	does	not	hinder	God’s	free	will	in
doing	good;	if	the	Devil,	who	can	only	do	evil,	yet	sins	with	his	will
—who	shall	say	that	man	therefore	sins	less	willingly	because	he	is
subject	to	the	necessity	of	sinning?
56
Who	are	we	to	say	that	choices	somehow	caused	by	God	
cannot	
be	real?	On
what	basis	can	we	prove	that?	God	in	Scripture	tells	us	that	he	ordains	all	that
comes	to	pass.	He	also	tells	us	that	our	choices	and	actions	are	significant	
in
his	sight,	
and	that	we	are	responsible	
before	him	
for	our	actions.	We	need
simply	to	believe	these	things	and	to	take	comfort	in	them.	After	all,	
he	alone
determines	what	is	significant,	what	is	real,	and	what	is	genuine	personal
responsibility	in	the	universe.
But	do	our	actions	have	any	effect	on	God?	At	this	point	Arminians	will
object	that	while	Calvinists	may	
say	
that	a	choice	caused	by	God	is	a	real
choice,	it	is	not	real	in	any	ultimate	sense,	because,	on	a	Calvinist	view,
nothing	that	God	does	can	ever	be	a	response	to	what	we	do.	Jack	Cottrell
says:
Calvinism	is	still	a	theology	of	determinism	as	long	as	it	declares	that
nothing	God	does	can	be	conditioned	by	man	or	can	be	a	reaction	to
something	in	the	world.	The	idea	that	a	sovereign	God	must	always
act	
and	never	
react	
is	a	point	on	which	almost	all	Calvinists	seem	to
agree.	.	.	.	Reformed	theologians	agree	that	the	eternal	decree	is
unconditional	or	absolute.	.	.	.	“Decretal	theology”	decrees	that	“God
cannot	be	affected	by,	nor	respond	to,	anything	external	to	him,”	says
Daane.
57
But	here	Cottrell	has	misunderstood	Reformed	theology	for	two	reasons.
First,	he	has	quoted	James	Daane,	who,	though	he	belongs	to	the	Christian
Reformed	Church,	has	written	as	an	opponent,	not	a	defender,	of	classical
Reformed	theology,	and	his	statement	does	not	represent	a	position	Reformed
theologians	would	endorse.	Second,	Cottrell	has	confused	God’s	decrees
before	creation	with	God’s	actions	in	time.	It	is	true	that	Calvinists	would	say
that	God’s	eternal	decrees	were	not	influenced	by	any	of	our	actions	and
cannot	be	changed	by	us,	since	they	were	made	
before	creation.
58
	But	to
conclude	from	that	that	Calvinists	think	God	does	not	react	
in	time	
to
anything	we	do,	or	is	not	influenced	by	anything	we	do,	is	simply	false.	No
Calvinist	theologian	known	to	me	has	ever	said	that	God	is	not	influenced	by
what	we	do	or	does	not	react	to	what	we	do.	He	is	grieved	at	our	sin.	He
delights	in	our	praise.	He	answers	our	prayers.	To	say	that	God	does	not	react
to	our	actions	is	to	deny	the	whole	history	of	the	Bible	from	Genesis	to
Revelation.
Now	a	Calvinist	would	add	that	God	has	eternally	decreed	that	he	would
respond	to	us	as	he	does.	In	fact,	he	has	decreed	that	we	would	act	as	we	do
and	he	would	respond	to	our	actions.	But	his	responses	are	still	genuine
responses,	his	answers	to	prayers	are	still	genuine	answers	to	prayer,	his
delight	in	our	praise	is	still	genuine	delight.	Cottrell	may	of	course	object	that
a	response	that	God	has	planned	long	ago	is	not	a	real	response,	but	this	is	far
different	from	saying	that	Calvinists	believe	God	does	not	respond	to	what	we
do.	Moreover,	we	return	to	the	same	unsupported	assumption	underlying	this
objection:	on	what	scriptural	basis	can	Cottrell	say	that	a	response	God	has
planned	long	ago	is	not	a	real	response?
59
Here	it	is	helpful	for	us	to	realize	that	there	is	no	other	reality	in	the	universe
except	what	God	himself	has	made.	Is	a	thunderstorm	caused	by	God	a	
real
thunderstorm?	Is	a	king	that	God	establishes	on	a	throne	a	
real	
king?	Is	a
word	that	God	causes	me	to	speak	(Ps.	139:4;	Prov.	16:1)	a	
real	
word?	Of
course	they	are	real!	There	
is	
no	other	reality	than	that	which	God	brings
about!	Then	is	a	human	choice	that	God	somehow	causes	to	happen	a	
real
choice?	Yes,	it	is,	in	the	same	way	that	a	thunderstorm	or	a	king	is	real
according	to	their	own	characteristics	and	properties.	The	choice	that	I	make
is	not	a	“forced”	or	“involuntary”	choice—we	make	choices	all	the	time,	and
we	have	absolutely	no	sense	of	being	forced	or	compelled	to	choose	one	thing
rather	than	another.
Now	some	may	object	that	this	view	makes	us	mere	“puppets”	or	“robots.”
But	we	are	not	puppets	or	robots;	we	are	
real	persons.	
Puppets	and	robots	do
not	have	the	power	of	personal	choice	or	even	individual	thought.	We,	by
contrast,	think,	decide,	and	choose.	Again	the	Arminian	wrongly	takes
information	from	our	situation	as	human	beings	and	then	uses	that
information	to	place	limitations	on	what	God	
can	
or	
cannot	
do.	All	of	these
analogies	from	human	experience	fail	to	recognize	that	God	is	far	greater	than
our	limited	human	abilities.	Moreover,	we	are	far	more	real	and	complex	than
any	robot	or	puppet	would	ever	be—we	are	real	persons	created	by	an
infinitely	powerful	and	infinitely	wise	God.
Much	of	our	difficulty	in	understanding	how	God	can	cause	us	to	choose
something	willingly	comes	from	the	finite	nature	of	our	creaturely	existence.
In	a	hypothetical	world	where	all	living	things	created	by	God	were	plants
rooted	in	the	ground,	we	might	imagine	one	plant	arguing	to	another	that	God
could	not	
make	living	creatures	who	could	move	about	on	the	earth,	for	how
could	they	carry	their	roots	with	them?	And	if	their	roots	were	not	in	the
ground,	how	could	they	receive	nourishment?	An	“Arminian”	plant	might
even	argue,	“In	order	for	God	to	create	a	world	with	living	things,	he	
had	to
create	them	with	roots	and	with	the	characteristic	of	living	all	their	lives	in	a
single	place.	To	say	that	God	
could	not	
create	living	things	that	move	about
on	the	earth	does	not	challenge	God’s	omnipotence,	for	that	is	simply	to	say
that	he	cannot	do	things	that	logically	cannot	be	done.	Therefore	it	is
impossible	that	God	could	create	a	world	where	living	things	also	have	the
capacity	of	moving	about	on	the	earth.”	The	problem	with	this	plant	is	that	it
has	limited	God’s	power	by	virtue	of	its	own	“plant-like”	experience.
On	a	higher	level,	we	could	imagine	a	creation	that	had	both	plants	and
animals	but	no	human	beings.	In	that	creation,	we	can	imagine	an	argument
between	a	“Calvinist”	dog	and	a	“Arminian”	dog,	where	the	“Calvinist”	dog
would	argue	that	it	
is	
possible	for	God	to	create	creatures	that	not	only	can
communicate	by	barking	to	one	another	but	also	can	record	their	barks	in
marks	on	paper	and	can	send	them	silently	to	be	understood	by	other	creatures
many	days’	journey	distant,	creatures	who	have	never	been	seen	by	the
sending	creature	who	first	marked	his	barks	down	on	paper.	The	“Arminian”
dog	would	reply	that	God	
cannot	
do	such	a	thing,	because	
essential	
to	the
idea	of	creaturely	communication	is	
hearing	
and	
seeing	
(and	usually
smelling!
)	the	creature	from	whom	one	receives	the	communication.	To	say
that	there	can	be	communication	without	ever	hearing	or	seeing	or	smelling
the	other	creature	is	an	absurd	idea!	It	is	beyond	the	range	of	possible
occurrences	and	is	logically	inconceivable.	Therefore	it	is	impossible	to	think
that	God	could	create	a	creature	with	such	communicating	abilities.
In	both	cases	the	“Arminian”	plant	and	the	“Arminian”	dog	are	in	the	wrong,
because	they	have	incorrectly	limited	the	kind	of	thing	God	could	create	by
deriving	what	was	possible	for	God	(in	their	opinion)	from	their	own	finite
creaturely	existence.	But	this	is	very	similar	to	the	Arminian	theologian	who
simply	asserts	(on	the	basis	of	his	own	perception	of	human	experience)	that
God	
cannot	
create	a	creature	who	makes	willing,	voluntary,	meaningful
choices,	and	that	those	choices	are	nonetheless	ordained	by	God.	Similarly,
the	Arminian	theologian	who	argues	that	God	
cannot	
ordain	that	evil	come
about	and	not	yet	himself	be	responsible	for	evil,	is	limiting	God	based
merely	on	observation	of	finite	human	experience.
4.	Does	a	Calvinistic	View	of	Providence	Encourage	Either	a	Dangerous
Fatalism	or	a	Tendency	to	“Live	Like	Arminians”?
	The	view	of
providence	presented	above	emphasizes	the	need	for	responsible	obedience,
so	it	is	not	correct	to	say	that	it	encourages	the	kind	of	fatalism	that	says	that
whatever	is,	should	be.	Those	who	accuse	Reformed	writers	of	believing	this
have	simply	not	understood	the	Reformed	doctrine	of	providence.
But	do	Calvinists	“live	like	Arminians”	anyway?	Both	Calvinists	and
Arminians	believe	that	our	actions	have	real	results	and	that	they	are	eternally
significant.	Both	agree	that	we	are	responsible	for	our	actions	and	that	we
make	voluntary,	willing	choices.	Both	groups	will	agree	that	God	answers
prayer,	that	proclaiming	the	gospel	results	in	people	being	saved,	and	that
obedience	to	God	results	in	blessing	in	life,	while	disobedience	results	in	lack
of	God’s	blessing.
But	the	differences	are	very	significant.	Calvinists	when	true	to	their	doctrine
will	live	with	a	far	more	comprehensive	trust	in	God	in	all	circumstances	and
a	far	greater	freedom	from	worry	about	the	future,	because	they	are
convinced,	not	just	that	God	will	somehow	cause	his	major	purposes	to	work
out	right	in	the	end,	but	that	
all	things	
work	together	for	good	for	those	who
love	God	and	are	called	according	to	his	purpose	(Rom.	8:28).	They	will	also
be	thankful	to	God	for	
all	
the	benefits	that	come	to	us	from	whatever	quarter,
for	the	one	who	believes	in	providence	is	assured	that	the	ultimate	reason	for
all	things	that	happen	is	not	some	chance	occurrence	in	the	universe,	nor	is	it
the	“free	will”	of	another	human	being,	but	it	is	ultimately	the	goodness	of
God	himself.	They	will	also	have	great	patience	in	adversity,	knowing	that	it
has	not	come	about	because	God	was	unable	to	prevent	it,	but	because	it,	too,
is	part	of	his	wise	plan.	So	the	differences	are	immense.	Calvin	says:
Gratitude	of	mind	for	the	favorable	outcome	of	things,	patience	in
adversity,	and	also	incredible	freedom	from	worry	about	the	future	all
necessarily	follow	upon	this	knowledge.	.	.	.	Ignorance	of	providence	is
the	ultimate	of	all	miseries;	the	highest	blessedness	lies	in	the
knowledge	of	it.
60
5.	Additional	Objections	to	the	Arminian	Position.
	In	addition	to
responding	to	the	four	specific	Arminian	claims	mentioned	above	some
remaining	objections	to	it	need	to	be	considered.
a.	On	an	Arminian	View,	How	Can	God	Know	the	Future?:
	According	to
the	Arminian	view,	our	human	choices	are	not	caused	by	God.	They	are
totally	free.	But	Scripture	gives	many	examples	of	God	predicting	the	future
and	of	prophecies	being	fulfilled	exactly.	How	can	God	predict	the	future	in
this	way	if	it	is	not	certain	what	will	happen?
In	response	to	this	question,	Arminians	give	three	different	kinds	of	answer.
Some	say	that	God	is	not	able	to	know	details	about	the	future;	specifically,
they	deny	that	God	is	able	to	know	what	choices	individual	human	beings	will
make	in	the	future.
61
	This	seems	to	me	to	be	the	most	consistent	Arminian
position,	but	the	result	is	that,	while	God	may	be	able	to	make	some	fairly
accurate	predictions	based	on	complete	knowledge	of	the	present,	these
cannot	be	certain	predictions.	Ultimately	it	also	means	that	God	is	ignorant	of
all	future	human	choices,	
which	means	that	he	does	not	even	know	what	the
stock	market	will	do	tomorrow,	or	who	will	be	elected	as	the	next	president	of
the	United	States,	or	who	will	be	converted.	On	this	view,	what	event	of
human	history	
could	
God	know	with	certainty	in	advance?	No	event.	This	is	a
radical	revision	of	the	idea	of	omniscience	and	seems	to	be	clearly	denied	by
the	dozens	of	examples	of	unfailing	predictive	prophecy	in	Scripture,	the
fulfillment	of	which	demonstrates	that	God	is	the	true	God	in	opposition	to
false	gods.
62
Other	Arminians	simply	affirm	that	God	
knows	
everything	that	will	happen,
but	this	does	not	mean	that	he	has	
planned	
or	
caused	
what	will	happen—it
simply	means	that	he	has	the	ability	to	see	into	the	future.	(The	phrase
sometimes	used	to	express	this	view	is	“Foreknowledge	does	not	imply
foreordination.”)	This	is	probably	the	most	common	Arminian	view,	and	it	is
ably	expressed	by	Jack	Cottrell:	“I	affirm	that	God	has	a	true	foreknowledge
of	future	free-will	choices	without	himself	being	the	agent	that	causes	them	or
renders	them	certain.”
63
The	problem	with	this	position	is	that,	even	if	God	did	not	plan	or	cause
things	to	happen,	the	fact	that	they	are	foreknown	means	that	they	will
certainly	come	about.	
And	this	means	that	our	decisions	are	predetermined	
by
something	
(whether	fate	or	the	inevitable	cause-and-effect	mechanism	of	the
universe),	and	they	still	are	not	free	in	the	sense	the	Arminian	wishes	them	to
be	free.	If	our	future	choices	are	known,	then	they	are	fixed.	And	if	they	are
fixed,	then	they	are	not	“free”	in	the	Arminian	sense	(undetermined	or
uncaused).
A	third	Arminian	response	is	called	“middle	knowledge.”	Those	who	take	this
view	would	say	that	the	future	choices	of	people	are	not	determined	by	God,
but	that	God	knows	them	anyway,	because	he	knows	
all	future	possibilities,
and	he	knows	how	each	free	creature	will	respond	in	any	set	of	circumstances
that	might	occur.
64
	William	Craig	says:
God’s	insight	into	the	will	of	a	free	creature	is	of	such	a	surpassing
quality	that	God	knows	exactly	what	the	free	creature	would	do	were
God	to	place	him	in	a	certain	set	of	circumstances.	.	.	.	By	knowing
what	every	possible	free	creature	would	do	in	any	possible	situation,
God	can	by	bringing	about	that	situation	know	what	the	creature	will
freely	do.	.	.	.	Thus	he	foreknows	with	certainty	everything	that
happens	in	the	world.
65
But	Craig’s	view	does	not	sustain	a	view	of	freedom	in	the	sense	Arminians
usually	maintain:	that	no	cause	or	set	of	causes	made	a	person	choose	the	way
he	or	she	did.	On	Craig’s	view,	the	surrounding	circumstances	and	the
person’s	own	disposition	
guarantee	
that	a	certain	choice	will	be	made—
otherwise,	God	could	not	know	what	the	choice	would	be	from	his	exhaustive
knowledge	of	the	person	and	the	circumstances.	But	if	God	knows	what	the
choice	will	be,	and	if	that	choice	is	guaranteed,	then	it	could	not	be	otherwise.
Moreover,	if	both	the	person	and	the	circumstances	have	been	created	by
God,	then	ultimately	the	outcome	has	been	determined	by	God.	This	sounds
very	close	to	freedom	in	a	Calvinist	sense,	but	it	is	certainly	not	the	kind	of
freedom	that	most	Arminians	would	accept.
b.	On	an	Arminian	View,	How	Can	Evil	Exist	If	God	Did	Not	Want	It?:
Arminians	quite	clearly	say	that	the	entrance	of	evil	into	the	world	was	not
according	to	the	will	of	God.	Pinnock	says,	“The	fall	of	man	is	an	eloquent
refutation	to	the	theory	that	God’s	will	is	always	done.”
66
	But	how	can	evil
exist	if	God	did	not	want	it	to	exist?	If	evil	happens	in	spite	of	the	fact	that
God	does	not	want	it	to	happen,	this	seems	to	deny	God’s	omnipotence:	he
wanted	to	prevent	evil,	but	he	was	unable	to	do	so.	How	then	can	we	believe
that	this	God	is	omnipotent?
The	common	Arminian	response	is	to	say	that	God	was	
able	
to	prevent	evil
but	he	chose	to	
allow	for	the	possibility	
of	evil	in	order	to	guarantee	that
angels	and	humans	would	have	the	freedom	necessary	for	meaningful
choices.	In	other	words,	God	
had	to	
allow	for	the	possibility	of	sinful	choices
in	order	to	allow	genuine	human	choices.	Cottrell	says,	“This	God-given
freedom	includes	human	freedom	to	rebel	and	to	sin	against	the	Creator
himself.	By	creating	a	world	in	which	sin	was	possible,	God	thereby	bound
himself	to	
react	
in	certain	specific	ways	should	sin	become	a	reality.”
67
But	this	is	not	a	satisfactory	response	either,	for	it	implies	that	God	will	have
to	allow	for	the	possibility	of	sinful	choices	in	heaven	eternally.	On	the
Arminian	position,	if	any	of	our	choices	and	actions	in	heaven	are	to	be
genuine	and	real,	then	they	will	
have	to	
include	the	possibility	of	sinful
choices.	But	this	implies	that	even	in	heaven,	for	all	eternity,	we	will	face	the
real	possibility	of	choosing	evil—and	therefore	the	possibility	of	rebelling
against	God	and	losing	our	salvation	and	being	cast	out	of	heaven!	This	is	a
terrifying	thought,	but	it	seems	a	necessary	implication	of	the	Arminian	view.
Yet	there	is	an	implication	that	is	more	troubling:	If	
real	
choices	have	to	allow
for	the	possibility	of	choosing	evil,	then	(1)	God’s	choices	are	not	real,	since
he	cannot	choose	evil,	or	(2)	God’s	choices	are	real,	and	there	is	the	genuine
possibility	that	God	might	someday	choose	to	do	evil—perhaps	a	little,	and
perhaps	a	great	deal.	If	we	ponder	the	second	implication	it	becomes
terrifying.	But	it	is	contrary	to	the	abundant	testimony	of	Scripture.
68
	On	the
other	hand,	the	first	implication	is	clearly	false:	God	is	the	definition	of	what
is	real,	and	it	is	clearly	an	error	to	say	that	his	choices	are	not	real.	Both
implications	therefore	provide	good	reason	for	rejecting	the	Arminian
position	that	real	choices	must	allow	the	possibility	of	choosing	evil.	But	this
puts	us	back	to	the	earlier	question	for	which	there	does	not	seem	to	be	a
satisfactory	answer	from	the	Arminian	position:	How	can	evil	exist	if	God	did
not	want	it	to	exist?
c.	On	an	Arminian	View,	How	Can	We	Know	That	God	Will	Triumph
Over	Evil?:
	If	we	go	back	to	the	Arminian	assertion	that	evil	is	
not	
according
to	the	will	of	God,	another	problem	arises:	if	all	the	evil	now	in	the	world
came	into	the	world	even	though	God	did	not	want	it,	how	can	we	be	sure	that
God	will	triumph	over	it	in	the	end?	Of	course,	God	
says	
in	Scripture	that	he
will	triumph	over	evil.	But	if	he	was	unable	to	keep	it	out	of	his	universe	in
the	first	place	and	it	came	in	against	his	will,	and	if	he	is	unable	to	predict	the
outcome	of	any	future	events	that	involve	free	choices	by	human,	angelic,	and
demonic	agents,	how	then	can	we	be	sure	that	God’s	declaration	that	he	will
triumph	over	all	evil	is	in	itself	true?	Perhaps	this	is	just	a	hopeful	prediction
of	something	that	(on	the	Arminian	viewpoint)	God	simply	cannot	know.	Far
from	the	“incredible	freedom	from	worry	about	the	future”	which	the
Calvinist	has	because	he	knows	that	an	omnipotent	God	makes	“all	things
work	together	for	good”	(Rom.	8:28	KJV),	the	Arminian	position	seems
logically	to	drive	us	to	a	deep-seated	anxiety	about	the	ultimate	outcome	of
history.
Both	of	these	last	two	objections	regarding	evil	make	us	realize	that,	while	we
may	have	difficulties	in	thinking	about	the	Reformed	view	of	evil	as	ordained
by	God	and	completely	under	the	control	of	God,	there	are	far	more	serious
difficulties	with	the	Arminian	view	of	evil	as	not	ordained	or	even	willed	by
God,	and	therefore	not	assuredly	under	the	control	of	God.
d.	The	Difference	in	the	Unanswered	Questions:
	Since	we	are	finite	in	our
understanding,	we	inevitably	will	have	some	unanswered	questions	about
every	biblical	doctrine.	Yet	on	this	issue	the	questions	that	Calvinists	and
Arminians	must	leave	unanswered	are	quite	different.	On	the	one	hand,
Calvinists	must	say	that	they	do	not	know	the	answer	to	the	following
questions:
1.		Exactly	how	God	can	ordain	that	we	do	evil	willingly,	and	yet
God	not	be	blamed	for	evil.
2.		Exactly	how	God	can	cause	us	to	choose	something	willingly.
To	both,	Calvinists	would	say	that	the	answer	is	somehow	to	be	found	in	an
awareness	of	God’s	infinite	greatness,	in	the	knowledge	of	the	fact	that	he	can
do	far	more	than	we	could	ever	think	possible.	So	the	effect	of	these
unanswered	questions	is	to	increase	our	appreciation	of	the	greatness	of	God.
On	the	other	hand,	Arminians	must	leave	unanswered	questions	regarding
God’s	knowledge	of	the	future,	why	he	would	allow	evil	when	it	is	against	his
will,	and	whether	he	will	certainly	triumph	over	evil.	Their	failure	to	resolve
these	questions	tends	to	diminish	the	greatness	of	God—his	omniscience,	his
omnipotence,	and	the	absolute	reliability	of	his	promises	for	the	future.	And
these	unanswered	questions	tend	to	exalt	the	greatness	of	man	(his	freedom	to
do	what	God	does	not	want)	and	the	power	of	evil	(it	comes	and	remains	in
the	universe	even	though	God	does	not	want	it).	Moreover,	by	denying	that
God	can	make	creatures	who	have	real	choices	that	are	nevertheless	caused
by	him,	the	Arminian	position	diminishes	the	wisdom	and	skill	of	God	the
Creator.
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
Has	thinking	about	the	doctrine	of	providence	increased	your	trust	in
God?	How	has	it	changed	the	way	you	think	about	the	future?	Are	there
difficulties	or	hardships	in	your	life	at	this	time?	Give	an	example	of	a
specific	difficulty	that	you	are	now	facing	and	explain	how	the	doctrine
of	providence	will	help	you	in	the	way	you	think	about	it.
2
.	
Can	you	name	five	good	things	that	have	happened	to	you	so	far	today?
Were	you	thankful	to	God	for	any	of	them?
3
.	
Do	you	sometimes	think	of	luck	or	chance	as	causing	events	that	happen
in	your	life?	If	you	ever	feel	that	way,	does	it	increase	or	decrease	your
anxiety	about	the	future?	Now	think	for	a	moment	about	some	events
that	you	might	have	attributed	to	luck	in	the	past.	Instead,	begin	to	think
about	those	events	as	under	the	control	of	your	wise	and	loving	heavenly
Father.	How	does	that	make	you	feel	differently	about	them	and	about
the	future	generally?
4
.	
Do	you	ever	fall	into	a	pattern	of	little	“superstitious”	actions	or	rituals
that	you	think	will	bring	good	luck	or	prevent	bad	luck	(such	as	not
walking	under	a	ladder,	being	afraid	when	a	black	cat	walks	across	your
path,	not	stepping	on	cracks	on	a	sidewalk,	carrying	a	certain	item	“just
for	good	luck,”	etc.)?	Do	you	think	those	actions	tend	to	increase	or
decrease	your	trust	in	God	during	the	day	and	your	obedience	to	him?
5
.	
Explain	how	a	proper	understanding	of	the	doctrine	of	providence	should
lead	a	Christian	to	a	more	active	prayer	life.
6
.	
What	has	been	the	overall	effect	of	this	chapter	on	how	you	think	and
feel	about	God	and	the	events	of	your	life?
SPECIAL	TERMS
Arminian
	
	
preservation
Calvinist
	
	
primary	cause
concurrence
	
	
providence
decrees	of	God
	
	
Reformed
free	choices
	
	
secondary	cause
free	will
	
	
voluntary	choices
government
	
	
willing	choices
middle	knowledge
	
	
	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the	
bibliography	to
chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be	found	in	
Appendix	4
.)
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.		Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92			Litton,	76–90
1930			Thomas,	176–83
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1847			Finney,	515–44
1875–76			Pope,	1:437–56;	2:363–67,	386–90
1892–94			Miley,	1:211–349;	2:271–308
1940			Wiley,	1:478–88
1983			Carter,	1:122–24,	130–33,	222–23
1983–			Cottrell,	2:9–228,	265–333,	379–418
1987–90			Oden,	1:270–316
3.			Baptist
1767			Gill,	1:246–51,	397–434
1887			Boyce,	115–25,	217–30
1907			Strong,	353–70,	410–43
1917			Mullins,	265–76
1976–83			Henry,	5:307–33;	6:455–91
1983–85			Erickson,	345–64,	387–432
1987–94			Lewis/Demarest,	1:291–335;	2:71–122
4.			Dispensational
1947			Chafer,	1:225–59
1949			Thiessen,	100–110,	119–32
5.			Lutheran
1917–24			Pieper,	1:483–97
1934			Mueller,	176–78,	189–95,	236–41
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1559			Calvin,	1:197–237,	309–407	(1.16–18;	2.4–5)
1724–58			Edwards,	1:3–93;	2:107–110,	525–43
1861			Heppe,	133–89,	251–80
1871–73			Hodge,	1:535–49,	575–616;	2:280–312
1878			Dabney,	120–32,	221–23,	276–91
1887–1921			Warfield,	
SSW,	
1:93–115;	
SSW,	
2:411–47
1889			Shedd,	1:393–462,	527–33
1937–66			Murray,	
CW,	
3:161–67,	185–89;	
CW,	
2:60–66
1938			Berkhof,	100–108,	165–78
1962			Buswell,	1:163–76
7.			Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988–92			Williams,	1:117–40,	215–19
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955			Ott,	87–91
2.			Roman	Catholic:	Post-Vatican	II
1980			McBrien	(no	explicit	treatment)
Other	Works
Basinger,	David,	and	Randall	Basinger,	eds.	
Predestination	and	Free
Will:	Four	Views	of	Divine	Sovereignty	and	Human	Freedom.	
Downers
Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,	1986.
Berkouwer,	G.	C.	
The	Providence	of	God.	
Trans.	by	Lewis	B.	Smedes.
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1952.
Cameron,	N.	M.	de	S.	“Providence.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	177–79.
Carson,	D.	A.	
Divine	Sovereignty	and	Human	Responsibility:	Biblical
Perspectives	in	Tension.	
New	Foundations	Theological	Library.	Atlanta:
John	Knox,	and	London:	Marshall,	Morgan	and	Scott,	1981.
_____.	
How	Long,	O	Lord?	Reflections	on	Suffering	and	Evil.	
Grand
Rapids:	Baker,	and	Leicester:	Inter-Varsity	Press,	1990.
Craig,	William	Lane.	
The	Only	Wise	God:	The	Compatibility	of	Divine
Foreknowledge	and	Human	Freedom.	
Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1987.
Feinberg,	John.	
The	Many	Faces	of	Evil:	Theological	Systems	and	the
Problem	of	Evil.	
Zondervan,	1994.
Flavel,	John.	
The	Mystery	of	Providence.	
Edinburgh	and	Carlisle,	Pa.:
Banner	of	Truth,	1976.	Reprint	of	1698	edition.
Helm,	Paul.	
The	Providence	of	God.	
Leicester	and	Downers	Grove,	Ill.:
InterVarsity	Press,	1994.
Parker,	T.	H.	L.	“Providence	of	God.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	890–91.
Pink,	Arthur	W.	
The	Sovereignty	of	God.	
Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1930.
Warfield,	B.	B.	
Calvin	and	Calvinism.	
London	and	New	York:	Oxford
University	Press,	1931.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
Romans	8:28:	
We	know	that	in	everything	God	works	for	good	with	those
who	love	him,	who	are	called	according	to	his	purpose.
HYMN
“God	Moves	in	a	Mysterious	Way”
God	moves	in	a	mysterious	way
his	wonders	to	perform;
He	plants	his	footsteps	in	the	sea,
and	rides	upon	the	storm.
Deep	in	unfathomable	mines
of	never-failing	skill
He	treasures	up	his	bright	designs,
and	works	his	sovereign	will.
Ye	fearful	saints,	fresh	courage	take;
the	clouds	ye	so	much	dread
Are	big	with	mercy,	and	shall	break
in	blessings	on	your	head.
Judge	not	the	Lord	by	feeble	sense,
but	trust	him	for	his	grace;
Behind	a	frowning	providence
he	hides	a	smiling	face.
His	purposes	will	ripen	fast,
unfolding	every	hour;
The	bud	may	have	a	bitter	taste,
but	sweet	will	be	the	flow’r.
Blind	unbelief	is	sure	to	err,
and	scan	his	work	in	vain;
God	is	his	own	interpreter,
and	he	will	make	it	plain.
AUTHOR:	WILLIAM	COWPER,	1774
NOTES
1
Though	philosophers	may	use	the	term	
determinism	
(or	
soft	determinism
)	to	categorize	the	position	I	advocate	in	this	chapter,	I
do	not	use	that	term	because	it	is	too	easily	misunderstood	in	everyday	English:	(1)	It	suggests	a	system	in	which	human	choices
are	not	real	and	make	no	difference	in	the	outcome	of	events;	and	(2)	it	suggests	a	system	in	which	the	ultimate	cause	of	events	is
a	mechanistic	universe	rather	than	a	wise	and	personal	God.	Moreover,	(3)	it	too	easily	allows	critics	to	group	the	biblical	view
with	non-Christian	deterministic	systems	and	blur	the	distinctions	between	them.
The	view	advocated	in	this	chapter	is	also	sometimes	called	“compatibilism,”	because	it	holds	that	absolute	divine	sovereignty	is
compatible	with	human	significance	and	real	human	choices.	I	have	no	objection	to	the	nuances	of	this	term,	but	I	have	decided
not	to	use	it	because	(1)	I	want	to	avoid	the	proliferation	of	technical	terms	in	studying	theology,	and	(2)	it	seems	preferable
simply	to	call	my	position	a	traditional	Reformed	view	of	God’s	providence,	and	thereby	to	place	myself	within	a	widely
understood	theological	tradition	represented	by	John	Calvin	and	the	other	systematic	theologians	listed	in	the	“Reformed”
category	at	the	end	of	this	chapter.
2
It	is	true	that	Eccl.	9:11	says	that	“the	race	is	not	to	the	swift,	nor	the	battle	to	the	strong,	nor	bread	to	the	wise,	nor	riches	to	the
intelligent,	nor	favor	to	the	men	of	skill;	but	time	and	
chance	
happen	to	them	all.”	But	Michael	Eaton	correctly	observes,	“On	the
lips	of	an	Israelite	‘chance’	means	what	is	unexpected,	not	what	is	random”	(
Ecclesiastes,	
TOTC	[Leicester	and	Downers	Grove,
Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,	1983],	p.	
70).	The	rare	word	here	translated	“chance”	(Heb.,	
pega‘
)	occurs	only	once	more	in	the	Bible	(1
Kings	5:4[18],	of	an	evil	
event
).
3
David	J.	A.	Clines,	“Predestination	in	the	Old	Testament,”	in	
Grace	Unlimited,	
ed.	by	Clark	H.	Pinnock	(Minneapolis:	Bethany
House,	1975),	pp.	116–17,	objects	that	these	verses	simply	affirm	that	“when	it	comes	to	conflict	between	God	and	man,
undoubtedly	it	cannot	be	man	who	wins	the	day.”	He	says	that	these	verses	do	not	describe	life	in	general,	but	describe	unusual
situations	where	God	overcomes	man’s	will	in	order	to	bring	about	his	special	purposes.	Clines	denies	that	these	verses	mean	that
God	always	acts	this	way	or	that	these	verses	represent	God’s	control	of	human	conduct	generally.	Yet	no	such	restriction	is	seen
in	these	passages	(see	Prov.	16:1,	9).	The	verses	do	not	say	that	God	directs	a	man’s	steps	in	rare	instances	where	God	needs	to
intervene	to	fulfill	his	purposes;	they	simply	make	general	statements	about	the	way	the	world	works—God	directs	man’s	steps	in
general,	not	simply	when	there	is	conflict	between	God	and	man.
4
I.	Howard	Marshall,	“Predestination	in	the	New	Testament”	in	
Grace	Unlimited,	
by	Clark	H.	Pinnock,	pp.	132–33,	139,	objects
to	the	analogy	of	an	author	and	a	play	because	the	actors	“are	bound	by	the	characters	assigned	to	them	and	the	lines	that	they
have	learned”	so	that	even	if	the	dramatist	“makes	[the	characters]	say	‘I	love	my	creator’	in	his	drama,	this	is	not	mutual	love	in
the	real	sense.”
But	Marshall	limits	his	analysis	to	what	is	possible	with	human	beings	acting	on	a	human	level.	He	does	not	give	consideration	to
the	possibility	(in	fact,	the	reality!)	that	God	is	able	to	do	far	more	than	human	beings	are	able	to	do,	and	that	he	can	wonderfully
create	genuine	human	beings	rather	than	mere	characters	in	a	play.	A	better	approach	to	the	analogy	of	an	author	and	a	play	would
be	if	Marshall	would	apply	to	this	question	a	very	helpful	statement	that	he	made	in	another	part	of	the	essay:	“The	basic	difficulty
is	that	of	attempting	to	explain	the	nature	of	
the	relationship	between	an	infinite	God	and	finite	creatures.	
Our	temptation	is	to
think	of	divine	causation	in	much	the	same	way	as	human	causation,	and	this	produces	difficulties	as	soon	as	we	try	to	relate
divine	causation	and	human	freedom.	It	is	beyond	our	ability	to	explain	how	God	can	cause	us	to	do	certain	things	(or	to	cause	the
universe	to	come	into	being	and	to	behave	as	it	does)”	(pp.	137–38).	I	can	agree	fully	with	everything	in	Marshall’s	statement	at
that	point,	and	find	that	to	be	a	very	helpful	way	of	approaching	this	problem.
5
Ps.	105:17	says	that	God	“had	sent	a	man	ahead	of	them,	Joseph,	who	was	sold	as	a	slave.”
6
The	Hebrew	word	used	when	2	Sam.	24:1	says	that	the	Lord	
incited	
David	against	Israel	is	
sûth,	
“to	incite,	allure,	instigate”
(BDB,	p.	
694).	It	is	the	same	word	used	in	2	Chron.	21:1	to	say	that	Satan	
incited	
David	to	number	Israel,	in	1	Kings	21:25	to	say
that	Jezebel	
incited	
Ahab	to	do	evil,	in	Deut.	13:6(7)	to	warn	against	a	loved	one	
enticing	
a	family	member	secretly	to	serve	other
gods,	and	in	2	Chron.	18:31	to	say	that	God	
moved	
the	Syrian	army	to	withdraw	from	Jehoshaphat.
7
Other	translations	render	the	Hebrew	word	
rā‘,	
“evil,”	as	“disaster”	(NIV)	or	“woe”	(RSV)	or	“calamity”	(NASB),	and	indeed
the	word	can	be	used	to	apply	to	natural	disasters	such	as	these	words	imply.	But	there	is	no	compelling	reason	to	restrict	it	to
natural	disasters,	for	the	word	is	an	extremely	common	word	used	of	evil	generally:	It	is	used	of	the	tree	of	the	knowledge	of	good
and	
evil	
(Gen.	2:9),	of	the	
evil	
among	mankind	that	brought	the	judgment	of	the	flood	(Gen.	6:5),	and	of	the	
evil	
of	the	men	of
Sodom	(Gen.	13:13).	It	is	used	to	say,	“Depart	from	
evil	
and	do	good”	(Ps.	34:14),	and	to	speak	of	the	wrong	of	those	who	call
evil	
good	and	good	
evil	
(Isa.	5:20),	and	of	the	sin	of	those	whose	“feet	run	to	
evil”	
(Isa.	59:7;	see	also	47:10,	11;	56:2;	57:1;	59:15;
65:12;	66:4).	Dozens	of	other	times	throughout	the	Old	Testament	it	refers	to	moral	evil	or	sin.	The	contrast	with	“peace”
(
shālôm
)	in	the	same	phrase	in	Isa.	45:7	might	argue	that	only	“calamity”	is	in	view,	but	not	necessarily	so,	for	moral	evil	and
wickedness	is	certainly	also	the	opposite	of	the	wholeness	of	God’s	“shalom”	or	peace.	(In	Amos	3:6,	
rā	‘āh
is	a	different	but
related	word	and	has	a	similar	range	of	meanings.)	But	Isa.	45:7	does	not	say	that	God	
does	evil	
(see	discussion	below).
8
The	Hebrew	for	“evil”	here	is	
rā	‘āh,	
as	in	Amos	3:6.
9
Another	kind	of	evil	is	physical	infirmity.	With	regard	to	this,	the	Lord	says	to	Moses,	“Who	has	made	man’s	mouth?	Who
makes	him	dumb,	or	deaf,	or	seeing,	or	blind?	Is	it	not	I,	the	L
ORD
?”	(Ex.	4:11).
10
The	“destining”	in	this	verse	is	best	taken	to	refer	to	both	the	stumbling	and	the	disobedience.	It	is	incorrect	to	say	that	God
only	destined	the	fact	that	those	who	disobey	would	stumble,	because	it	is	not	a	fact	but	persons	(“they”)	who	are	said	to	be
“destined”	in	this	case.	(See	discussion	in	Wayne	Grudem,	
The	First	Epistle	of	Peter,	
TNTC	[Leicester:	Inter-Varsity	Press,	and
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1988],	pp.	106–10.)
11
David	J.	A.	Clines,	“Predestination	in	the	Old	Testament,”	p.	
116,	retranslates	this,	“The	Lord	has	made	everything	with	its
counterpart,	so	the	wicked	will	have	his	day	of	doom.”	He	does	this	in	order	to	avoid	the	conclusion	that	the	Lord	has	made	some
wicked	people	for	the	day	of	evil.	But	his	translation	is	not	convincing.	The	Hebrew	word	translated	“purpose”	in	the	RSV	(
ma
‘aneh
)	occurs	only	eight	times	in	the	Old	Testament	and	usually	refers	to	an	“answer”	to	a	question	or	a	statement.	So	it	means
something	like	“appropriate	response”	or	“corresponding	purpose.”	But	the	preposition	
le	
is	much	more	accurately	translated
“for”	(not	“with”),	so	in	either	case	the	sentence	affirms	that	the	Lord	has	made	everything	for	its	appropriate	purpose	or	the
response	appropriate	to	it.	Therefore,	whether	we	translate	“purpose”	or	“counterpart,”	the	verse	affirms	that	even	the	wicked	have
been	made	by	the	Lord	“for	[Heb.	
le
]	the	day	of	evil.”
12
John	Calvin,	
Institutes	of	the	Christian	Religion,	
Library	of	Christian	Classics,	ed.	by	John	T.	McNeill	and	trans.	by	F.	L.
Battles,	2	vols.	(Philadelphia:	Westminster,	1960),	1:217	(1.16.5).
13
John	Calvin,	
Institutes,	
1:228	(1.18.title).
14
John	Calvin,	
Institutes,	
1:234	(1.18.3).
15
Louis	Berkhof,	
Systematic	Theology,	
p.	175.
16
Institutes,	
1:296	(2.3.5),	quoting	St.	Bernard	with	approval:	“Among	all	living	beings	man	alone	is	free.	.	.	.	For	what	is
voluntary	is	also	free.”	Later	in	the	same	passage	he	quotes	St.	Bernard	with	approval	again,	where	he	admits	that	the	will	is	in
bondage	to	sin	and	therefore	sins	of	necessity,	but	then	says	that	“this	necessity	is	as	it	were	voluntary.	.	.	.	Thus	the	soul	.	.	.	is	at
the	same	time	enslaved	and	free:	enslaved	because	of	necessity;	free	because	of	will.”	A	little	later	Calvin	himself	says	that	“man,
while	he	sins	of	necessity,	yet	sins	no	less	voluntarily”	(1:309	[2.4.1]).	Calvin	clearly	says	that	Adam,	before	there	was	sin	in	the
world,	“by	free	will	had	the	power,	if	he	so	willed,	to	attain	eternal	life.	.	.	.	Adam	could	have	stood	if	he	wished,	seeing	that	he
fell	solely	by	his	own	will.	.	.	.	His	choice	of	good	and	evil	was	free”	(1:195	[1.15.8]).	So	Calvin	can	use	the	term	
free	will	
if	it
means	“voluntary,	willing,”	and	he	can	use	it	of	Adam	before	the	fall.	Yet	he	carefully	avoids	applying	the	term	
free	will	
to	sinful
human	beings	if	by	it	people	mean	“able	to	do	good	in	one’s	own	strength”	(see	text	above).
17
Institutes,	
1:262	(2.2.6).
18
Ibid.,	1:264,	266	(2.2.7–8).
19
In	fact,	our	ability	to	make	willing	choices	at	all	is	simply	a	created	reflection	of	God’s	will	and	his	ability	to	make	willing
choices.	However,	if	we	were	to	be	
totally	
free	in	our	choices,	we	would	be	equal	to	God	in	our	will,	and	that	is	something	we
many	never	expect	either	in	this	life	or	in	the	one	to	come.
20
Arminian	theologians	dissent	from	this	understanding	of	free	will	and	argue	for	a	freedom	that	means	our	decisions	are	not
caused	by	anything	outside	ourselves	(see	discussion	of	Jack	Cottrell’s	objection	that	freedom	must	mean	more	than	willing
choices	in	section	G,	below).
21
John	Feinberg	says,	“If	the	act	is	according	to	the	agent’s	
desires,	
then	even	though	the	act	is	causally	determined,	it	is	free	and
the	agent	is	morally	responsible”	(“God	Ordains	All	Things,”	in	
Predestination	and	Free	Will:	Four	Views	of	Divine	Sovereignty
and	Human	Freedom,	
ed.	by	David	Basinger	and	Randall	Basinger	[Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,	1986],	p.	
37).
22
See	
chapter	13
	for	a	further	discussion	of	God’s	secret	and	revealed	will.
23
This	is	the	objection	of	I.	Howard	Marshall,	“Predestination	in	the	New	Testament,”	p.	
173.
24
John	Calvin	says	of	those	who	object	to	two	senses	of	the	will	of	God,	“Let	them	tell	me,	I	pray,	whether	he	exercises	his
judgments	willingly	or	unwillingly.	.	.	.	When	we	do	not	grasp	how	God	wills	to	take	place	what	he	forbids	to	be	done,	let	us
recall	our	mental	incapacity.”	He	also	quotes	with	approval	the	statement	of	Augustine:	“There	is	a	great	difference	between	what
is	fitting	for	man	to	will	and	what	is	fitting	for	God	.	.	.	for	through	the	bad	wills	of	evil	men	God	fulfills	what	he	righteously
wills”	(
Institutes,	
1:233–34	[1.18.3]).
25
John	Calvin,	
Institutes,	
1:216	(1.17.4).
26
See	
chapter	18
	for	a	more	extensive	discussion	of	prayer.
27
John	Calvin,	
Institutes,	
1:216	(1.17.4).
28
Institutes,	
1:237	(1.18.4).
29
The	term	
Arminianism	
was	recently	chosen	in	the	title	of	a	responsible	series	of	essays	representing	this	position:	See	Clark	H.
Pinnock,	ed.,	
The	Grace	of	God,	The	Will	of	Man:	A	Case	for	Arminianism	
(Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1989).	In	the	following
section	I	quote	extensively	from	this	book	and	from	an	earlier	book	edited	by	Pinnock,	
Grace	Unlimited.	
These	two	books	are
excellent	recent	defenses	of	the	Arminian	position.
Jacob	Arminius	(1560–1609)	was	a	Dutch	theologian	who	differed	with	the	predominant	Calvinism	of	his	day.	Though	he	is	not
personally	quoted	or	referred	to	very	often	by	Arminians	today,	his	name	has	become	attached	to	a	range	of	positions	that	have	in
common	the	fact	that	they	differ	from	the	Calvinist	position	on	the	question	of	man’s	free	will,	both	with	respect	to	God’s
providence	in	general	(the	subject	of	this	chapter)	and	with	respect	to	predestination	or	election	in	specific	(the	subject	of	chapter
32).
The	term	
Arminian	
should	be	distinguished	from	the	term	
Armenian,	
which	refers	to	people	who	live	in	or	descend	from
inhabitants	of	the	ancient	country	of	Armenia	in	western	Asia	(now	part	of	Turkey,	Iran,	and	the	CIS).
30
Clark	Pinnock,	“Responsible	Freedom	in	the	Flow	of	Biblical	History,”	in	
Grace	Unlimited,	
p.	18.
31
Jack	Cottrell,	“The	Nature	of	the	Divine	Sovereignty,”	in	
The	Grace	of	God,	the	Will	of	Man,	
p.	107.	Cottrell’s	essay	is,	in	my
view,	the	most	comprehensive	and	persuasive	of	the	many	excellent	Arminian	essays	in	this	book—the	book	as	a	whole	is
responsibly	done	and	is	probably	the	best	recent	representation	of	Arminian	thinking.	Cottrell	does	not	deny	divine	omniscience
regarding	future	events	as	do	the	essays	by	Clark	Pinnock	and	Richard	Rice	in	the	same	volume,	and	this	places	him	closer	to	the
intuitive	Arminianism	that	seems	right	to	many	evangelical	laypersons	today.
32
I.	Howard	Marshall	claims	this	at	several	points	in	“Predestination	in	the	New	Testament,”	
Grace	Unlimited,	
pp.	127–43.
Marshall	uses	the	analogy	of	a	jazz	band	where	individual	players	can	improvise	freely	but	the	overall	goal	and	unity	of	the	piece
are	preserved	nonetheless	(p.	
133).	Thus,	“the	Bible	has	the	picture	of	a	God	deciding	fresh	measures	in	history	and	interacting
with	the	wills	of	men	alongside	the	picture	of	a	God	planning	things	in	eternity	past,	and	both	pictures	are	equally	valid”
(Marshall,	p.	
141).
33
Pinnock,	“Responsible	Freedom,”	p.	
102.
34
Ibid.,	p.	
102.
35
Ibid.,	p.	
106.
36
Marshall,	“Predestination	in	the	New	Testament,”	p.	
139.
37
David	J.	A.	Clines,	“Predestination	in	the	Old	Testament,”	p.	
122;	see	also	pp.	116–17.	Similarly,	James	D.	Strauss,	“God’s
Promise	and	Universal	History,”	
Grace	Unlimited,	
p.	196,	says	that	the	example	of	Jacob	and	Esau	that	Paul	mentions	in	Rom.
9:9–13	refers	to	God’s	corporate	plans	for	the	descendants	of	Jacob	and	Esau	and	should	not	be	taken	as	an	illustration	of	how
God	works	in	people’s	lives	or	hearts	generally.
38
Jack	Cottrell,	“The	Nature	of	the	Divine	Sovereignty,”	pp.	112–13.
39
Marshall,	“Predestination,”	p.	
136.
40
Pinnock,	“Responsible	Freedom,”	p.	
102.
41
Jack	Cottrell,	“The	Nature	of	the	Divine	Sovereignty,”	pp.	104–5.
42
Pinnock,	
Grace	Unlimited,	
p.	15.
43
Pinnock,	“Responsible	Freedom,”	p.	
95.
44
Ibid.,	p.	
108.
45
Marshall,	“Predestination,”	p.	
132.	Similarly,	he	says,	“When	we	try	to	think	of	a	person	foreordaining	the	course	of	a
relationship	between	himself	and	another	person	.	.	.	
this	concept	is	logically	self-contradictory”	
(p.	135).
46
Ibid.,	p.	
133.
47
Ibid.,	pp.	139–40	(emphasis	in	original	text).
48
Randall	G.	Basinger,	“Exhaustive	Divine	Sovereignty:	A	Practical	Critique,”	in	
The	Grace	of	God,	the	Will	of	Man:	A	Case	for
Arminianism,	
ed.	Clark	H.	Pinnock,	p.	
94.
49
Ibid.,	p.	
196.
50
Ibid.,	p.	
204.
51
Jack	Cottrell,	“The	Nature	of	the	Divine	Sovereignty,”	p.	
113.
52
Jack	Cottrell,	“The	Nature	of	the	Divine	Sovereignty,”	argues	that	the	context	of	Eph.	1:11	shows	that	it	does	not	include	all
things	in	the	universe	but	is	restricted	to	a	specific	focus:	“This	focus	is	‘the	mystery	of	his	will’	(1:9),	which	is	the	uniting	of	Jews
and	Gentiles	together	into	one	body,	the	church	(3:6).”	Thus,	he	says,	the	verse	only	“refers	to	‘all	things’	required	for	uniting
Jews	and	Gentiles	under	one	Head	in	one	body”	(p.	
116).
But	this	argument	is	not	convincing.	Cottrell	must	skip	over	to	Eph.	3:6	to	get	the	contextual	restriction	he	seeks	for	the	“all
things”	in	1:11.	In	doing	this	he	ignores	the	clearly	cosmic	scope	of	the	context	as	defined	in	the	immediately	preceding	verse,	a
verse	that	is	in	the	same	sentence	in	the	Greek	text:	“as	a	plan	for	the	fulness	of	time,	to	unite	
all	things	
[
ta	panta
]	in	him,	
things
in	heaven	and	things	on	earth”	
(Eph.	1:10).	All	things	in	heaven	and	on	earth	includes	the	whole	universe.	Eph.	1:21–22	further
explains	that	God	has	exalted	Christ	“far	above	all	rule	and	authority	and	power	and	dominion	.	.	.	and	he	has	put	
all	things	
under
his	feet	and	has	made	him	the	head	over	
all	things	
for	the	church.”	Once	again	the	scope	is	universal.	The	“mystery”	of	God’s	will
mentioned	in	Eph.	1:9	is	not	limited	to	the	uniting	of	Jews	and	Gentiles	(as	in	3:6)	but	is	defined	by	1:10	as	a	plan	to	unite	all
things	in	Christ.	The	term	
mystery	
(Gk.	
mystērion
)	in	Paul	means	something	previously	hidden	but	now	made	known	by
revelation,	and	it	can	refer	to	different	things	in	different	contexts:	in	Eph.	5:32	it	refers	to	marriage	as	a	symbol	of	the	union
between	Christ	and	the	church;	in	1	Cor.	15:51	it	refers	to	the	resurrection	body;	etc.
53
This	is	the	case	with	Cottrell’s	analogy	of	the	man	who	uses	a	lever	to	move	a	rock.	He	says	the	lever	“is	not	a	true	second
cause,	but	only	an	instrument	of	the	real	cause”	(“The	Nature	of	the	Divine	Sovereignty,”	p.	
104).	But	here	Cottrell	makes	a
common	mistake,	assuming	that	analogies	from	human	experience,	rather	than	the	testimony	of	Scripture	itself,	can	determine
what	is	a	real	cause	and	what	is	not.	The	analogy	of	a	man	using	a	lever	to	move	a	rock	does	not	fit,	because	God	is	far	greater
than	any	man,	and	we	as	real	persons	are	far	greater	than	any	lever.
54
The	lack	of	scriptural	support	for	this	fundamental	Arminian	idea	is	evident	in	Jack	Cottrell’s	discussion	of	free	will.	After
accurately	explaining	that	Calvinists	say	we	are	free	only	in	the	sense	of	making	voluntary,	willing	choices,	Cottrell	says,	“
In	my
judgment,	
however,	the	mere	ability	to	act	in	accord	with	one’s	desires	is	not	a	sufficient	criterion	of	freedom”	(“The	Nature	of	the
Divine	Sovereignty,”	p.	
103,	emphasis	mine).	He	then	gives	no	evidence	from	Scripture	to	show	why	this	is	his	judgment	(pp.
103–4).	I	would	respond	that	Cottrell	has	simply	imported	into	the	discussion	a	nonbiblical	
assumption	
about	the	nature	of	human
freedom	and	then	has	pronounced	Calvinism	incapable	of	meeting	his	(nonbiblical)	criterion.
55
See	
Institutes,	
1:294–96	(2.3.5).
56
Ibid.,	p.	
295	(2.3.5).
57
Jack	Cottrell,	“The	Nature	of	the	Divine	Sovereignty,”	pp.	102–3.	The	quotation	at	the	end	is	from	James	Daane,	
The	Freedom
of	God	
(Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1973),	p.	
160.
58
See	above,	
section	D
,	on	God’s	decrees.
59
I	am	not	sure	if	Cottrell	would	be	able	to	object	that	a	response	planned	by	God	long	ago	is	not	a	real	response,	because	he
himself	talks	about	God	foreknowing	our	actions	and	then	planning	how	he	will	respond	to	them.	He	says,	“Even	before	the
creation	God	foreknew	every	free-will	act.	.	.	.	Nothing	takes	God	by	surprise.	.	.	.	God	knew,	even	before	creation,	when	and	how
he	would	have	to	intervene	in	his	world	to	accomplish	his	purposes.	.	.	.	God’s	foreknowledge	also	enables	him	to	plan	his	own
responses	to	and	uses	of	human	choices	even	before	they	are	made”	(“The	Nature	of	the	Divine	Sovereignty,”	p.	
112).	But	if
Cottrell	is	willing	to	say	that	God	planned	long	ago	how	he	would	respond	to	human	choices,	it	is	hard	to	see	how	he	can	object	to
the	Calvinist	position	that	God	decreed	long	ago	how	he	would	respond	when	we	pray	or	act.
60
Calvin,	
Institutes,	
1:219–25	(1.17.7,	11).
61
Richard	Rice,	“Divine	Foreknowledge	and	Free-Will	Theism,”	in	
The	Grace	of	God,	the	Will	of	Man,	
pp.	121–39,	takes	this
position	(see	esp.	pp.	129,	134–37).	Rice	says,	“God	knows	a	great	deal	about	what	will	happen.	.	.	.	All	that	God	does	not	know	is
the	content	of	future	free	decisions,	and	this	is	because	decisions	are	not	there	to	know	until	they	occur”	(p.	
134).	In	order	to	take
this	position	and	maintain	God’s	omniscience,	Rice	redefines	omniscience:	“An	omniscient	being	knows	everything	logically
knowable”	(p.	
128),	and	then	he	defines	“logically	knowable”	to	exclude	future	human	choices.	On	this	basis,	Rice	argues	that
God	does	not	know	the	results	of	future	free	decisions	of	human	beings,	since	these	are	not	logically	knowable.
Clark	Pinnock	also	explains	how	he	came	to	this	position:	“I	knew	the	Calvinist	argument	that	exhaustive	foreknowledge	was
tantamount	to	predestination	because	it	implies	the	fixity	of	all	things	from	‘eternity	past,’	and	I	could	not	shake	off	its	logical
force”	(“From	Augustine	to	Arminius:	A	Pilgrimage	in	Theology,”	in	
The	Grace	of	God,	the	Will	of	Man,	
p.	25).	He	rejected
exhaustive	foreknowledge	and	decided	that	“
God	knows	everything	that	can	be	known,	
but	that	free	choices	would	not	be
something	that	can	be	known	even	by	God	because	they	are	not	yet	settled	in	reality.	Decisions	not	yet	made	do	not	exist
anywhere	to	be	known	even	by	God.	.	.	.	God	too	moves	into	a	future	not	wholly	known	because	not	yet	fixed”	(ibid.,	pp.	25–26,
emphasis	mine).
62
See	
chapter	11
,	also	
chapter	12
,	on	God’s	knowledge	of	the	future.
63
Jack	Cottrell,	“The	Nature	of	the	Divine	Sovereignty,”	p.	
111.
64
See	William	L.	Craig,	“Middle	Knowledge,	a	Calvinist-Arminian	Rapprochement?”	in	
The	Grace	of	God,	the	Will	of	Man,	
pp.
141–64.	See	also	his	book	
The	Only	Wise	God:	The	Compatibility	of	Divine	Foreknowledge	and	Human	Freedom	
(Grand	Rapids:
Baker,	1987).
65
Craig,	“Middle	Knowledge,”	pp.	150–51.
66
Pinnock,	“Responsible	Freedom,”	p.	
102.
67
Cottrell,	“The	Nature	of	Divine	Sovereignty,”	p.	
109.
68
See	
chapter	12
,	for	scriptural	testimony	to	God’s	goodness,	holiness,	and	righteousness,	and	
chapter	11
,	on	God’s
unchangeableness.
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	17
Miracles
What	are	miracles?	Can	they	happen	today?
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
A	consideration	of	the	subject	of	miracles	is	closely	connected	with	God’s
providence,	which	was	considered	in	the	previous	chapter.	There	we	argued
that	God	exercises	an	extensive,	ongoing,	sovereign	control	over	all	aspects	of
his	creation.	This	chapter	will	assume	an	understanding	of	that	discussion	of
providence	and	will	build	on	it	in	approaching	the	question	of	miracles.
A.	Definition
We	may	define	a	miracle	as	follows:	
A	miracle	is	a	less	common	kind	of	God’s
activity	in	which	he	arouses	people’s	awe	and	wonder	and	bears	witness	to
himself.
1
	This	definition	takes	into	account	our	previous	understanding	of
God’s	providence	whereby	God	preserves,	controls,	and	governs	all	things.	If
we	understand	providence	in	this	way,	we	will	naturally	avoid	some	other
common	explanations	or	definitions	of	miracles.
For	example,	one	definition	of	miracle	is	“a	direct	intervention	of	God	in	the
world.”	But	this	definition	assumes	a	deistic	view	of	God’s	relationship	to	the
world,	in	which	the	world	continues	on	its	own	and	God	only	intervenes	in	it
occasionally.	This	is	certainly	not	the	biblical	view,	according	to	which	God
makes	the	rain	to	fall	(Matt.	5:45),	causes	the	grass	to	grow	(Ps.	104:14),	and
continually	carries	along	all	things	by	his	word	of	power	(Heb.	1:3).	Another
definition	of	miracle	is	“a	more	direct	activity	of	God	in	the	world.”	But	to
talk	about	a	“more	direct”	working	of	God	suggests	that	his	
ordinary
providential	activity	is	somehow	not	“direct”	and	again	hints	at	a	sort	of
deistic	removal	of	God	from	the	world.
Another	definition	is	“God	working	in	the	world	without	using	means	to	bring
about	the	results	he	wishes.”	Yet	to	speak	of	God	working	“without	means”
leaves	us	with	very	few	if	any	miracles	in	the	Bible,	for	it	is	hard	to	think	of	a
miracle	that	came	about	with	no	means	at	all:	in	the	healing	of	people,	for
example,	some	of	the	physical	properties	of	the	sick	person’s	body	were
doubtless	involved	as	part	of	the	healing.	When	Jesus	multiplied	the	loaves
and	fishes,	he	at	least	used	the	original	five	loaves	and	two	fishes	that	were
there.	When	he	changed	water	to	wine,	he	used	water	and	made	it	become
wine.	This	definition	seems	to	be	inadequate.
2
Yet	another	definition	of	miracle	is	“an	exception	to	a	natural	law”	or	“God
acting	contrary	to	the	laws	of	nature.”	But	the	phrase	“laws	of	nature”	in
popular	understanding	implies	that	there	are	certain	qualities	inherent	in	the
things	that	exist,	“laws	of	nature”	that	operate	independently	of	God,	and	that
God	must	intervene	or	“break”	these	laws	for	a	miracle	to	occur.
3
	Once	again
this	definition	does	not	adequately	account	for	the	biblical	teaching	on
providence.
Another	definition	of	miracle	is	“an	event	impossible	to	explain	by	natural
causes.”	This	definition	is	inadequate	because	(1)	it	does	not	include	God	as
the	one	who	brings	about	the	miracle;	(2)	it	assumes	that	God	does	not	use
some	natural	causes	when	he	works	in	an	unusual	or	amazing	way,	and	thus	it
assumes	again	that	God	only	occasionally	intervenes	in	the	world;	and	(3)	it
will	result	in	a	significant	minimizing	of	actual	miracles	and	an	increase	in
skepticism,	since	many	times	when	God	works	in	answer	to	prayer	the	result
is	amazing	to	those	who	prayed	but	it	is	not	absolutely	impossible	to	explain
by	natural	causes,	especially	for	a	skeptic	who	simply	refuses	to	see	God’s
hand	at	work.
Therefore,	the	original	definition	given	above,	where	a	miracle	is	simply	a
less	common	
way	of	God’s	working	in	the	world,	seems	to	be	preferable	and
more	consistent	with	the	biblical	doctrine	of	God’s	providence.	This
definition	does	not	say	that	a	miracle	is	a	different	kind	of	working	by	God,
but	only	that	it	is	a	less	common	way	of	God’s	working	and	that	it	is	done	so
as	to	arouse	people’s	surprise,	awe,	or	amazement	in	such	a	way	that	God
bears	witness	to	himself.
The	biblical	terminology	for	miracles	frequently	points	to	this	idea	of	God’s
power	at	work	to	arouse	people’s	wonder	and	amazement.	Primarily	three	sets
of	terms	are	employed:	(1)	“sign”	(Heb.	
’ôth;	
Gk.	
sēmeion
),	which	means
something	that	points	to	or	indicates	something	else,	especially	(with
reference	to	miracles)	God’s	activity	and	power;	(2)	“wonder”	(Heb.	
môpēth;
Gk.	
teras
),	an	event	that	causes	people	to	be	amazed	or	astonished;
4
	and	(3)
“miracle”	or	“mighty	work”	(Heb.	
g
e
bûrāh;	
Gk.	
dynamis
),	an	act	displaying
great	power,	especially	(with	reference	to	miracles)	divine	power.
5
	Often
“signs	and	wonders”	is	used	as	a	stock	expression	to	refer	to	miracles	(Ex.
7:3;	Deut.	6:22;	Ps.	135:9;	Acts	4:30;	5:12;	Rom.	15:19;	et	al.),	and
sometimes	all	three	terms	are	combined,	“mighty	works	and	wonders	and
signs”	(Acts	2:22)	or	“signs	and	wonders	and	mighty	works”	(2	Cor.	12:12;
Heb.	2:4).
In	addition	to	the	meanings	of	the	terms	used	for	miracles,	another	reason
supporting	our	definition	is	the	fact	that	miracles	in	Scripture	do	arouse
people’s	awe	and	amazement	and	indicate	that	God’s	power	is	at	work.	The
Bible	frequently	tells	us	that	God	himself	is	the	one	who	performs	“miracles”
or	“wondrous	things.”	Psalm	136:4	says	that	God	is	the	one	“who	alone	does
great	wonders”	(cf.	Ps.	72:18).	The	song	of	Moses	declares:
Who	is	like	you,	O	L
ORD
,	among	the	gods?
Who	is	like	you,	majestic	in	holiness,
terrible	in	glorious	deeds,	doing	
wonders?	
(Ex.	15:11)
Thus,	the	miraculous	signs	that	Moses	did	when	his	staff	turned	into	a	snake
and	back	again,	or	when	his	hand	became	leprous	and	then	clean	again	(Ex.
4:2–8),	were	given	that	Moses	might	demonstrate	to	the	people	of	Israel	that
God	had	sent	him.	Similarly,	the	miraculous	signs	God	did	by	the	hand	of
Moses	and	Aaron	through	the	plagues,	far	surpassing	the	false	miracles	or
imitation	signs	done	by	the	magicians	in	Pharaoh’s	court	(Ex.	7:12;	8:18–19;
9:11),	showed	that	the	people	of	Israel	were	those	who	worshiped	the	one	true
God.	When	Elijah	confronted	the	priests	of	Baal	on	Mount	Carmel	(1	Kings
18:17–40),	the	fire	from	heaven	demonstrated	that	the	L
ORD
	was	the	one	true
God.
Now	if	we	accept	the	definition	that	a	miracle	is	“a	less	common	kind	of
God’s	activity	in	which	he	arouses	people’s	awe	and	wonder	and	bears
witness	to	himself,”	then	we	may	ask	what	kinds	of	things	should	be
considered	miracles.	Of	course,	we	are	right	to	consider	the	incarnation	of
Jesus	as	God-man	and	Jesus’	resurrection	from	the	dead	as	the	central	and
most	important	miracles	in	all	history.	The	events	of	the	exodus	such	as	the
parting	of	the	Red	Sea	and	the	fall	of	Jericho	were	remarkable	miracles.
When	Jesus	healed	people	and	cleansed	lepers	and	cast	out	demons,	those
were	certainly	miracles	as	well	(see	Matt.	11:4–5;	Luke	4:36–41;	John	2:23;
4:54;	6:2;	20:30–31).
But	can	we	consider	unusual	answers	to	prayer	to	be	miracles?	Apparently	so,
if	they	are	remarkable	enough	to	arouse	people’s	awe	and	wonder	and	cause
them	to	acknowledge	God’s	power	at	work:	the	answer	to	Elijah’s	prayer	that
God	would	send	fire	from	heaven	was	a	miracle	(1	Kings	18:24,	36–38),	as
were	the	answers	to	his	prayers	that	the	widow’s	dead	son	would	come	back
to	life	(1	Kings	17:21),	or	that	the	rain	would	stop	and	later	start	again	(1
Kings	17:1;	18:41–45	with	James	5:17–18).	In	the	New	Testament,	the	release
of	Peter	from	prison	in	answer	to	the	prayers	of	the	church	was	certainly	a
miracle	(Acts	12:5–17;	note	also	Paul’s	prayer	for	Publius’s	father	in	Acts
28:8).	But	there	must	have	been	many	miracles	not	nearly	as	dramatic	as
those,	because	Jesus	healed	many	hundreds	of	people,	“
any	
that	were	sick
with	
various	diseases”	
(Luke	4:40).	Paul	healed	“the	rest	of	the	people	on	the
island	who	had	diseases”	(Acts	28:9).
On	the	other	hand,	Christians	see	answers	to	prayer	every	day,	and	we	should
not	water	down	our	definition	of	miracle	so	much	that	every	answer	to	prayer
is	called	a	miracle.	But	when	an	answer	to	prayer	is	so	remarkable	that	people
involved	with	it	are	amazed	and	acknowledge	God’s	power	at	work	in	an
unusual	way,	then	it	seems	appropriate	to	call	it	a	miracle.
6
	This	is	consistent
with	our	definition	and	seems	supported	by	the	biblical	evidence	that	works
of	God	that	aroused	people’s	awe	and	wonder	were	called	miracles	(Gk.
dynamis
).
7
But	whether	we	adopt	a	broad	or	narrow	definition	of	miracle,	all	should
agree	that	if	God	really	does	work	in	answer	to	our	prayers,	whether	in
common	or	uncommon	ways,	it	is	important	that	we	recognize	this	and	give
thanks	to	him,	and	that	we	not	ignore	it	or	go	to	great	lengths	to	devise
possible	“natural	causes”	to	explain	away	what	God	has	in	fact	done	in
answer	to	prayer.	While	we	must	be	careful	not	to	exaggerate	in	reporting
details	of	answers	to	prayer,	we	must	also	avoid	the	opposite	error	of	failing
to	glorify	and	thank	God	for	what	he	has	done.
B.	Miracles	as	Characteristic	of	the	New	Covenant	Age
In	the	New	Testament,	Jesus’	miraculous	signs	attested	that	he	had	come	from
God:	Nicodemus	recognized,	“No	one	can	do	these	signs	that	you	do,	unless
God	is	with	him”	(John	3:2).	Jesus’	changing	of	water	into	wine	was	a	“sign”
that	“manifested	his	glory;	and	his	disciples	believed	in	him”	(John	2:11).
According	to	Peter,	Jesus	was	“a	man	attested	to	you	by	God	with	
mighty
works	and	wonders	and	signs	
which	God	did	through	him	in	your	midst”
(Acts	2:22).
Then	in	the	early	church,	the	apostles	and	others	who	preached	the	gospel
performed	miracles	that	amazed	people	and	gave	confirmation	of	the	gospel
that	was	being	preached	(Acts	2:43;	3:6–10;	4:30;	8:6–8,	13;	9:40–42;	et	al.).
Even	in	churches	where	no	apostles	were	present	miracles	occurred.	For
example,	Paul,	in	writing	to	several	churches	in	the	region	of	Galatia	(see	Gal.
1:1),	assumes	this	when	he	asks,	“Does	he	who	supplies	the	Spirit	to	you	and
works	miracles	among	you	do	so	by	works	of	the	law,	or	by	hearing	with
faith?”	(Gal.	3:5).	Similarly,	he	mentions	in	the	church	at	Corinth	“workers	of
miracles”	(1	Cor.	12:28)	and	names	“the	working	of	miracles”	(1	Cor.	12:10)
as	a	gift	distributed	by	the	Holy	Spirit.	These	last	two	verses	are	especially
significant	because	1	Corinthians	12:4–31	is	not	discussing	a	specific
situation	at	Corinth	but	the	nature	of	the	church	in	general	as	the	“body	of
Christ”	with	many	members	yet	one	body.
8
In	fact,	it	seems	to	be	a	characteristic	of	the	New	Testament	church	that
miracles	occur.
9
	In	the	Old	Testament,	miracles	seemed	to	occur	primarily	in
connection	with	one	prominent	leader	at	a	time,	such	as	Moses	or	Elijah	or
Elisha.	In	the	New	Testament,	there	is	a	sudden	and	unprecedented	increase	in
the	miracles	when	Jesus	begins	his	ministry	(Luke	4:36–37,	40–41).
However,	contrary	to	the	pattern	of	the	Old	Testament,	the	authority	to	work
miracles	and	to	cast	out	demons	was	not	confined	to	Jesus	himself,	nor	did
miracles	die	out	when	Jesus	returned	to	heaven.	Even	during	his	ministry,
Jesus	gave	authority	to	heal	the	sick	and	to	cast	out	demons	not	only	to	the
Twelve,	but	also	to	seventy	of	his	disciples	(Luke	10:1,	9,	17–19;	cf.	Matt.
10:8;	Luke	9:49–50).	Moreover,	the	passages	noted	above	from	1	Corinthians
and	Galatians	indicate	that	performing	miracles	was	not	confined	to	the
seventy	disciples,	but	was	characteristic	of	the	churches	of	Galatia	and	the
New	Testament	churches	generally.	This	suggests	that	the	occurrence	of
miracles	is	a	characteristic	of	the	New	Testament	church	and	may	be	seen	as
an	indication	of	the	powerful	new	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	that	began	with
Pentecost	and	may	be	expected	to	continue	through	the	church	age.
10
C.	The	Purposes	of	Miracles
One	purpose	of	miracles	is	certainly	to	authenticate	the	message	of	the	gospel.
This	was	evident	in	Jesus’	own	ministry,	as	people	like	Nicodemus
acknowledged:	“We	know	that	you	are	a	teacher	come	from	God;	for	no	one
can	do	these	
signs	
that	you	do,	unless	God	is	with	him”	(John	3:2).	It	also	was
evident	as	the	gospel	was	proclaimed	by	those	who	heard	Jesus,	for	as	they
preached,	“God	also	bore	witness	by	
signs	and	wonders	and	various	miracles
and	by	gifts	of	the	Holy	Spirit	distributed	according	to	his	own	will”	(Heb.
2:4).	Whether	this	purpose	was	valid	only	when	the	gospel	was	first	preached
(before	the	New	Testament	was	written),	or	whether	it	holds	good	throughout
the	church	age,	depends	on	what	we	think	the	miracles	are	confirming:	are
they	confirming	only	the	absolute	truthfulness	of	the	words	of	Scripture	(as
the	very	words	of	God),	or	are	miracles	given	to	confirm	the	truthfulness	of
the	gospel	generally,	whenever	it	is	preached?	In	other	words,	do	miracles
confirm	Scripture	or	the	gospel?	As	we	shall	see	below,	miracles	were	not
limited	to	those	who	wrote	Scripture	or	spoke	with	absolute	apostolic
authority.
11
	This	suggests	that	miracles	given	in	confirmation	of	the	gospel
might	be	expected	to	continue	throughout	the	church	age.
When	miracles	occur,	they	give	evidence	that	God	is	truly	at	work	and	so
serve	to	advance	the	gospel:	the	Samaritan	woman	proclaimed	to	her	village,
“Come,	see	a	man	who	told	me	all	that	I	ever	did”	(John	4:29),	and	many	of
the	Samaritans	believed	in	Christ.	This	was	frequently	true	in	Jesus’	ministry,
but	it	was	also	true	in	the	early	church:	when	Philip	went	to	a	city	in	Samaria,
the	multitudes	with	one	accord	
gave	heed	to	what	was	said	by	Philip,
when	they	heard	him	and	saw	the	
signs	
which	he	did.	For	unclean
spirits	came	out	of	many	who	were	possessed,	crying	with	a	loud
voice;	and	many	who	were	paralyzed	or	lame	were	healed.	So	there
was	much	joy	in	that	city.	(Acts	8:6–8)
When	Aeneas	the	paralytic	was	healed,	“all	the	residents	of	Lydda	and	Sharon
saw	him,	and	
they	turned	to	the	Lord”	
(Acts	9:35).	When	Tabitha	was	raised
from	the	dead,	“it	became	known	throughout	all	Joppa,	and	
many	believed	in
the	Lord”	
(Acts	9:42).
12
In	the	New	Testament,	a	second	purpose	of	miracles	is	to	bear	witness	to	the
fact	that	the	kingdom	of	God	has	come	and	has	begun	to	expand	its	beneficial
results	into	people’s	lives,	for	the	results	of	Jesus’s	miracles	show	the
characteristics	of	God’s	kingdom:	Jesus	said,	“If	it	is	by	the	Spirit	of	God	that
I	cast	out	demons,	then	the	kingdom	of	God	has	come	upon	you”	(Matt.
12:28).	His	triumph	over	the	destructive	forces	of	Satan	showed	what	God’s
kingdom	was	like.	In	this	way,	every	miracle	of	healing	or	deliverance	from
demonic	oppression	advanced	the	kingdom	and	helped	fulfill	Jesus’	ministry,
for	he	came	with	the	Spirit	of	the	Lord	on	him	“to	preach	good	news	to	the
poor.	.	.	.	to	proclaim	release	to	the	captives	and	recovering	of	sight	to	the
blind,	to	set	at	liberty	those	who	are	oppressed”	(Luke	4:18).
Similarly,	Jesus	gave	his	disciples	“power	and	authority	over	all	demons	and
to	cure	diseases,	and	he	sent	them	out	to	preach	the	kingdom	of	God	and	to
heal”	(Luke	9:1–2).	He	commanded	them,	“Preach	as	you	go,	saying,	‘The
kingdom	of	heaven	is	at	hand.’	Heal	the	sick,	raise	the	dead,	cleanse	lepers,
cast	out	demons”	(Matt.	10:7–8;	cf.	Matt.	4:23;	9:35;	Acts	8:6–7,	13).
A	third	purpose	of	miracles	is	to	help	those	who	are	in	need.	The	two	blind
men	near	Jericho	cried	out,	“Have	mercy	on	us,”	and	Jesus	“in	pity”	healed
them	(Matt.	20:30,	34).	When	Jesus	saw	a	great	crowd	of	people,	“he	had
compassion	on	them,	and	healed	their	sick”	(Matt.	14:14;	see	also	Luke	7:13).
Here	miracles	give	evidence	of	the	compassion	of	Christ	toward	those	in
need.
A	fourth	purpose	of	miracles,	related	to	the	second,	is	to	remove	hindrances	to
people’s	ministries.	As	soon	as	Jesus	had	healed	Peter’s	mother-in-law,	“she
rose	and	served	him”	(Matt.	8:15).	When	God	had	mercy	on	Epaphroditus
and	restored	his	health	(whether	through	miraculous	means	or	not,	Paul
attributes	it	to	God’s	mercy	in	Phil.	2:27),	Epaphroditus	was	then	able	to
minister	to	Paul	and	complete	his	function	as	a	messenger	returning	to	the
Philippian	church	(Phil.	2:25–30).	Although	the	text	does	not	explicitly	say
that	Tabitha	(or	Dorcas)	resumed	her	“good	works	and	acts	of	charity”	(Acts
9:36)	after	the	Lord	through	Peter	raised	her	from	the	dead	(Acts	9:40–41),	by
mentioning	her	good	works	and	those	who	bore	witness	to	her	selfless	care
for	the	needs	of	others	(Acts	9:39),	it	suggests	that	she	would	resume	a	similar
ministry	of	mercy	when	she	was	raised	from	the	dead.	Related	to	this
category	would	be	the	fact	that	Paul	expects	people	to	be	edified	when
miraculous	gifts	are	used	in	the	church	(1	Cor.	12:7;	14:4,	12,	26).
Finally,	a	fifth	purpose	for	miracles	(and	one	to	which	all	the	others
contribute)	is	to	bring	glory	to	God.	After	Jesus	healed	a	paralytic,	the	crowds
“were	afraid,	and	they	glorified	God,	who	had	given	such	authority	to	men”
(Matt.	9:8).	Similarly,	Jesus	said	that	the	man	who	had	been	blind	from	birth
was	blind	“that	the	works	of	God	might	be	made	manifest	in	him”	(John	9:3).
D.	Were	Miracles	Restricted	to	the	Apostles?
1.
	An	Unusual	Concentration	of	Miracles	in	the	Apostles’	Ministry.
	Some
have	argued	that	miracles	were	restricted	to	the	apostles	or	to	the	apostles	and
those	closely	connected	with	them.	Before	considering	their	arguments,	it	is
important	to	note	that	there	are	some	indications	that	a	remarkable
concentration	of	miracles	was	characteristic	of	the	apostles	as	special
representatives	of	Christ.	For	example,	God	was	pleased	to	allow
extraordinary	miracles	to	be	done	through	both	Peter	and	Paul.	In	the	very
early	days	of	the	church,
many	signs	and	wonders	were	done	among	the	people	by	the	hands	of
the	apostles.	.	.	.	And	more	than	ever	believers	were	added	to	the
Lord,	multitudes	both	of	men	and	women,	so	that	they	even	carried
out	the	sick	into	the	streets,	and	laid	them	on	beds	and	pallets,	that	as
Peter	came	by	at	least	his	shadow	might	fall	on	some	of	them.	The
people	also	gathered	from	the	towns	around	Jerusalem,	bringing	the
sick	and	those	afflicted	with	unclean	spirits,	and	they	were	all	healed.
(Acts	5:12–16)
Similarly,	when	Paul	was	in	Ephesus,	“God	did	
extraordinary	miracles	
by	the
hands	of	Paul,	so	that	handkerchiefs	or	aprons	were	carried	away	from	his
body	to	the	sick,	and	diseases	left	them	and	the	evil	spirits	came	out	of	them”
(Acts	19:11–12).
13
	Another	example	is	found	in	the	raising	of	Tabitha:	when
she	had	died,	the	disciples	at	Joppa	sent	for	Peter	to	come	and	pray	for	her	to
be	raised	from	the	dead	(Acts	9:36–42),	apparently	because	they	thought	that
God	had	given	an	unusual	concentration	of	miraculous	power	to	Peter	(or	to
the	apostles	generally).	And	Paul’s	ministry	generally	was	characterized	by
miraculous	events,	because	he	summarizes	his	ministry	by	telling	the	Romans
of	the	things	that	Christ	had	worked	through	him	to	win	obedience	from	the
Gentiles	“by	the	power	of	
signs	and	wonders,	
by	the	power	of	the	Holy
Spirit”	(Rom.	15:19).
Nevertheless,	the	unusual	concentration	of	miracles	in	the	ministries	of	the
apostles	does	not	prove	that	
no	
miracles	were	performed	by	others!	As	we
have	clearly	seen,	the	“working	of	miracles”	(1	Cor.	12:10)	and	other
miraculous	gifts	(1	Cor.	12:4–11	mentions	several)	were	part	of	the	ordinary
functioning	of	the	Corinthian	church,	and	Paul	knows	that	God	“works
miracles”	in	the	churches	of	Galatia	as	well	(Gal.	3:5).
2.	What	Are	the	“Signs	of	an	Apostle”	in	2	Corinthians	12:12?
	Why	then
have	some	argued	that	miracles	were	uniquely	the	signs	that	distinguished	an
apostle?	Their	case	is	largely	based	on	2	Corinthians	12:12,	where	Paul	says,
“The	
signs	of	a	true	apostle	
were	performed	among	you	in	all	patience,	with
signs	and	wonders	and	mighty	works”	(2	Cor.	12:12).
14
	They	say	that	this
implies	that	others	who	were	not	the	apostles	(or	their	close	companions)	did
not	have	that	authority	or	could	not	work	these	miraculous	signs.
15
	They
further	maintain	that	the	working	of	the	miracles	ceased	when	the	apostles
and	their	close	associates	died.	Therefore,	they	conclude,	no	further	miracles
are	to	be	expected	today.	(Those	who	hold	this	position	are	sometimes	known
as	“
cessationists,
”	since	they	hold	to	the	ceasing	or	“cessation”	of	miracles
early	in	the	history	of	the	church.)
In	considering	this	question,	it	should	be	remembered	that	in	the	key	passage
used	to	establish	this	point,	where	Paul	talks	about	“the	signs	of	a	true
apostle”	in	2	Corinthians	12:12,	he	is	
not	
attempting	to	prove	that	he	is	an
apostle	
in	distinction	from	other	Christians	
who	are	not	apostles.	He	is	rather
attempting	to	prove	that	he	is	a	true	representative	of	Christ	in	distinction
from	others	who	are	“false	apostles”	(2	Cor.	11:13),	false	representatives	of
Christ,	servants	of	Satan	who	are	disguising	themselves	as	“servants	of
righteousness”	(2	Cor.	11:14–15).	In	short,	the	contrast	is	not	between
apostles	who	could	work	miracles	and	ordinary	Christians	who	could	not,	but
between	genuine	Christian	apostles	through	whom	the	Holy	Spirit	worked
and	
non-Christian	pretenders	to	the	apostolic	office,	
through	whom	the	Holy
Spirit	did	not	work	at	all.	Therefore,	even	if	we	understand	the	“signs	of	an
apostle”	to	be	miracles,	we	should	recognize	that	those	who	use	this	passage
to	argue	that	miracles	cannot	be	done	through	
Christians	
today	are	taking	the
phrase	“signs	of	an	apostle”	out	of	its	context	and	using	it	in	a	way	that	Paul
never	intended.	Paul	is	distinguishing	himself	from	non-Christians,	whereas
they	use	the	passage	to	distinguish	Paul	from	other	Christians.
Moreover,	a	close	examination	of	2	Corinthians	12:12	shows	it	to	be	very
doubtful	that	the	phrase	“signs	of	an	apostle”	in	this	passage	means
miraculous	signs.	In	this	very	verse,	Paul	distinguishes	the	“signs	of	a	true
apostle”	from	miracles,	which	he	calls	“signs	and	wonders	and	mighty
works,”	noting	that	the	miracles	were	done	along	with	the	signs	of	an	apostle:
“The	
signs	of	a	true	apostle	
were	performed	among	you	in	all	patience,	
with
signs	and	wonders	and	mighty	works.”
16
	The	latter	phrase,	“with	signs	and
wonders	and	mighty	works,”	has	a	piling	up	of	all	three	terms	used	for
miracles	and	therefore	must	refer	to	miracles	(note	“signs	and	wonders”	in
Acts	4:30;	5:12;	14:3;	15:12;	Rom.	15:19;	Heb.	2:4;	et	al.).	Therefore	the
former	phrase,	“signs	of	a	true	apostle,”	must	refer	to	something	different,
something	that	was	
accompanied	by	
(done	“with”)	signs	and	wonders.
In	fact,	although	the	word	
sign	
in	Greek	(
sēmeion
)	often	refers	to	miracles,	it
has	a	much	broader	range	of	meaning	than	just	
miracle:	sēmeion	
simply
means	“something	which	indicates	or	refers	to	something	else.”
17
	In	2
Corinthians	12:12,	the	“signs”	of	an	apostle	are	best	understood	as	everything
that	characterized	Paul’s	apostolic	mission	and	showed	him	to	be	a	true
apostle.
18
	We	need	not	guess	at	what	these	signs	were,	for	elsewhere	in	2
Corinthians	Paul	tells	what	marked	him	as	a	true	apostle:
1.		Spiritual	power	in	conflict	with	evil	(10:3–4,	8–11;	13:2–4,	10)
2.		Jealous	care	for	the	welfare	of	the	churches	(11:1–6)
3.		True	knowledge	of	Jesus	and	his	gospel	plan	(11:6)
4		Self-support	(selflessness)	(11:7–11)
5.		Not	taking	advantage	of	churches;	not	striking	people	physically
(11:20–21)
6.		Suffering	and	hardship	endured	for	Christ	(11:23–29)
7.		Being	caught	up	into	heaven	(12:1–6)
8.		Contentment	and	faith	to	endure	a	thorn	in	the	flesh	(12:7–9)
9.		Gaining	strength	out	of	weakness	(12:10).
The	first	item	may	have	included	miracles,	but	that	is	certainly	not	the
primary	focus	of	his	reference	to	the	“signs	of	a	true	apostle.”
Another	evidence	that	the	“signs	of	a	true	apostle”	in	2	Corinthians	12:12
were	all	these	things	and	not	simply	miracles	is	the	fact	that	Paul	says,	“The
signs	of	a	true	apostle	were	performed	among	you	
in	all	patience.”	
Now	it
would	make	little	sense	to	say	that	miracles	were	performed	“in	all	patience,”
for	many	miracles	happen	quite	quickly,	but	it	would	make	much	sense	to	say
that	Paul’s	Christlike	endurance	of	hardship	for	the	sake	of	the	Corinthians
was	performed	“in	all	patience.”
We	should	note	that	nowhere	in	this	list	does	Paul	claim	miracles	to	prove	his
genuine	apostleship.	In	fact,	most	of	the	things	he	mentions	would	not
distinguish	him	from	other	true	Christians.	But	these	things	do	distinguish
him	from	servants	of	Satan,	false	apostles	who	are	not	Christians	at	all:	their
lives	will	not	be	marked	by	humility,	but	pride;	not	by	selflessness,	but
selfishness;	not	by	generosity,	but	greed;	not	by	seeking	the	advantage	of
others,	but	by	taking	advantage	of	others;	not	by	spiritual	power	in	physical
weakness,	but	by	confidence	in	their	natural	strength;	not	by	enduring
suffering	and	hardship,	but	by	seeking	their	own	comfort	and	ease.
19
	When
Paul	acted	in	a	Christlike	manner	among	them,	his	actions	were	“signs”	that
his	claim	to	be	an	apostle	was	a	true	claim:	thus,	these	things	were	“signs	of	a
true	apostle.”	In	this	context,	the	“signs”	that	mark	a	true	apostle	need	not	be
things	that	showed	an	absolute	difference	between	him	and	other	Christians,
but	rather	things	that	showed	his	ministry	to	be	genuine,	in	distinction	from
false	ministries.	He	is	not	here	telling	the	Corinthians	how	to	tell	who	an
apostle	was	in	distinction	from	other	Christians	(he	did	that	in	1	Cor.	9:1–2;
15:7–11;	Gal.	1:1,	11–24,	mentioning	seeing	the	risen	Christ	and	being
commissioned	by	him	as	an	apostle),	but	here	he	is	telling	how	to	recognize
what	a	genuine,	Christ-approved	ministry	was.
Why	then	does	he	add	that	all	these	signs	of	a	true	apostle	were	done	among
the	Corinthians	“with	signs	and	wonders	and	mighty	works”?	He	is	simply
adding	one	additional	factor	to	all	the	previous	marks	of	his	genuine
apostleship.	Miracles	of	course	had	a	significant	function	in	confirming	the
truth	of	Paul’s	message,	and	Paul	here	makes	explicit	what	the	Corinthians
may	or	may	not	have	assumed	to	be	included	in	the	phrase	“signs	of	a	true
apostle”:	in	addition	to	all	these	other	signs	of	a	true	apostle,	his	ministry
showed	miraculous	demonstrations	of	God’s	power	as	well.
20
There	is	yet	another	very	significant	reason	why	miracles	did	not	prove
someone	to	be	an	apostle.	In	the	larger	context	of	the	New	Testament	it	is
clear	that	miracles	were	worked	by	others	than	apostles,	such	as	Stephen
(Acts	6:8),	Philip	(Acts	8:6–7),	Christians	in	the	several	churches	in	Galatia
(Gal.	3:5),	and	those	with	gifts	of	“miracles”	in	the	body	of	Christ	generally
(1	Cor.	12:10,	28).	Miracles	as	such	cannot	then	be	regarded	as	exclusively
signs	of	an	apostle.	In	fact,	“workers	of	miracles”	and	“healers”	are	actually
distinguished	from	“apostles”	in	1	Corinthians	12:28:	“And	God	has
appointed	in	the	church	first	
apostles,	
second	prophets,	third	teachers,	then
workers	of	miracles,	
then	healers.	.	.	.”
Similar	evidence	is	seen	in	Mark	16:17–18:	Though	there	are	serious
questions	about	the	authenticity	of	this	passage	as	part	of	Mark’s	gospel,
21
	the
text	is	nonetheless	very	early
22
	and	at	least	bears	witness	to	one	strand	of
tradition	within	the	early	church.	This	text	reports	Jesus	as	saying,
And	these	signs	will	accompany	those	who	believe:	in	my	name	they
will	cast	out	demons;	they	will	speak	in	new	tongues;	they	will	pick
up	serpents,	and	if	they	drink	any	deadly	thing,	it	will	not	hurt	them;
they	will	lay	their	hands	on	the	sick,	and	they	will	recover.
Here	also	the	power	to	work	miracles	is	assumed	to	be	the	common
possession	of	Christians.	Those	who	wrote	and	passed	on	this	early	tradition,
and	who	thought	it	represented	the	genuine	teaching	of	Jesus,	were	certainly
not	aware	of	any	idea	that	miracles	were	to	be	limited	to	the	apostles	and	their
close	associates.
23
The	argument	that	many	other	Christians	in	the	New	Testament	worked
miracles	is	sometimes	answered	by	the	claim	that	it	was	only	the	apostles	
and
those	closely	associated	with	them	
or	those	on	whom	the	apostles	laid	their
hands	who	could	work	miracles.
24
	However,	this	really	proves	very	little
because	the	story	of	the	New	Testament	church	is	the	story	of	what	was	done
through	the	apostles	and	those	closely	associated	with	them.	A	similar
argument	might	be	made	about	evangelism	or	the	founding	of	churches:	“In
the	New	Testament,	churches	were	only	founded	by	the	apostles	or	their	close
associates;	therefore,	we	should	not	found	churches	today.”	Or,	“In	the	New
Testament,	missionary	work	in	other	countries	was	only	done	by	the	apostles
or	their	close	associates;	therefore,	we	should	not	do	missionary	work	in	other
countries	today.”	These	analogies	show	the	inadequacy	of	the	argument:	the
New	Testament	primarily	shows	how	the	church	
should	
seek	to	act,	not	how	it
should	not	
seek	to	act.
But	if	many	other	Christians	throughout	the	first-century	church	were
working	miracles	by	the	power	of	the	Holy	Spirit,	then	the	power	to	work
miracles	could	not	be	a	sign	to	distinguish	the	apostles	from	other	Christians.
3.	Norman	Geisler’s	Restrictive	Definition	of	Miracles.
	A	more	recent
attempt	to	deny	that	miracles	occur	today	has	been	made	by	Norman
Geisler.
25
	Geisler	has	a	much	more	restrictive	definition	of	
miracle	
than	that
presented	in	this	chapter,	and	he	uses	that	definition	to	argue	against	the
possibility	of	contemporary	miracles.	Geisler	says	that	“miracles	(1)	are
always	successful,	(2)	are	immediate,	(3)	have	no	relapses,	and	(4)	give
confirmation	of	God’s	messenger”	(
chapter	1
).	He	finds	support	for	this	thesis
largely	in	the	ministry	of	Jesus,	but	when	he	passes	beyond	the	life	of	Jesus
and	attempts	to	show	that	others	who	had	the	power	to	work	miracles	were
never	unsuccessful,	his	thesis	is	much	less	convincing.	With	regard	to	the
demon-possessed	boy	whom	the	disciples	could	not	set	free	from	the	demon
(Matt.	17:14–21),	Geisler	says	that	“the	disciples	simply	forgot	for	the
moment	to	faithfully	exercise	the	power	that	Jesus	had	already	given	them”
(
chapter	7
).	But	this	is	an	unpersuasive	argument:	Geisler	says	that	the	power
to	work	miracles	was	always	successful,	and	when	the	Bible	talks	about	some
who	were	unsuccessful	(and	who	contradict	his	thesis)	he	simply	says	they
“forgot.”	Jesus,	however,	gives	a	different	reason	than	Geisler:	“Because	of
your	little	faith”	(Matt.	17:20).	Lesser	faith	resulted	in	lesser	power	to	work
miracles.
With	regard	to	Paul’s	failure	to	heal	Epaphroditus	(Phil.	2:27),	Geisler	is
forced	to	make	the	dubious	claim	that	perhaps	Paul	never	attempted	to	heal
Epaphroditus	(though	he	had	come	to	him	in	prison	and	was	so	ill	he	almost
died),	or	that	“Paul	no	longer	possessed	the	gift	of	healing	at	this	time”
(
chapter	7
).	He	employs	the	same	claim	to	explain	the	fact	that	Paul	left
Trophimus	ill	at	Miletus	(2	Tim.	4:20).	In	these	instances	Geisler	goes	well
beyond	the	usual	cessationist	claim	that	miracles	ended	with	the	death	of	the
apostles—he	is	claiming	that	miracles	ceased	in	the	life	of	the	greatest	apostle
before	his	first	Roman	imprisonment.	That	is	simply	an	unconvincing
argument	with	respect	to	the	apostle	whose	ministry	was	repeatedly
characterized	“by	the	power	of	signs	and	wonders,	by	the	power	of	the	Holy
Spirit”	(Rom.	15:19),	and	who	could	say	with	triumph	in	his	last	epistle,	“I
have	fought	the	good	fight,	I	have	finished	the	race,	I	have	kept	the	faith”	(2
Tim.	4:7).
Geisler’s	description	of	miracles	does	not	fit	the	case	of	the	blind	man	upon
whom	Jesus	laid	his	hands,	for	at	first	the	man	did	not	see	clearly	but	said	he
saw	men	who	“look	like	trees,	walking.”	After	Jesus	laid	his	hands	on	him	a
second	time,	the	man	“saw	everything	clearly”	(Mark	8:24–25).	Geisler
responds	that	it	was	Jesus’	intention	to	heal	in	two	stages,	to	teach	the
disciples	by	using	an	object	lesson	about	the	gradual	growth	of	their	spiritual
lives	(
chapter	8	section	C
).	Though	the	text	says	nothing	to	this	effect,	it	may
have	been	true,	but	even	so	it	disproves	Geisler’s	thesis,	for	if	it	was	Jesus’
intention	to	heal	in	two	stages	then,	it	may	also	be	his	intention	to	heal	people
in	two	stages	today—or	in	three	or	four	or	more	stages.	Once	Geisler	admits
that	it	may	be	God’s	intention	to	work	a	miracle	in	stages,	in	order	to
accomplish	his	own	purposes,	then	his	entire	claim	that	miracles	must	be
immediate	and	complete	is	lost.
26
Instead	of	accepting	Geisler’s	definition,	it	seems	better	to	conclude	that	even
those	whom	God	gifts	with	the	ability	to	perform	miracles	may	not	be	able	to
perform	them	whenever	they	wish,	for	the	Holy	Spirit	continually	is
distributing	them	to	each	person	“as	he	wills”	(1	Cor.	12:11;	the	word
distributes	
is	a	present	participle	in	Greek,	indicating	a	continuing	activity	of
the	Holy	Spirit).	Moreover,	there	seems	no	reason	to	exclude	(as	Geisler
apparently	wants	to	do)	unusual	or	remarkable	answers	to	prayer	from	the
category	of	“miracle,”	thus	making	the	definition	extremely	restrictive.	If	God
answers	persistent	prayer,	for	instance,	for	a	physical	healing	for	which	there
is	no	known	medical	explanation,	and	does	so	only	after	several	months	or
years	of	prayer,	yet	does	so	in	such	a	way	that	it	seems	quite	clearly	to	be	in
response	to	prayer	so	that	people	are	amazed	and	glorify	God,	there	seems	no
reason	to	deny	that	a	miracle	has	occurred	simply	because	the	earlier	prayers
were	not	answered	immediately.	Finally,	Geisler	fails	to	recognize	that	several
New	Testament	texts	indicate	that	spiritual	gifts,	whether	miraculous	or
nonmiraculous	in	nature,	may	vary	in	strength	or	degree	of	intensity.
27
4.	Hebrews	2:3–4.
	Another	passage	that	is	sometimes	used	to	support	the
idea	that	miracles	were	limited	to	the	apostles	and	their	close	associates	is
Hebrews	2:3–4.	There	the	author	says	that	the	message	of	salvation	“was
declared	at	first	by	the	Lord,	and	it	was	attested	to	us	by	those	who	heard	him,
while	God	also	bore	witness
28
	by	signs	and	wonders	and	various	miracles	and
by	gifts	of	the	Holy	Spirit	distributed	according	to	his	own	will.”
Since	the	miracles	here	are	said	to	come	through	those	who	heard	the	Lord
firsthand	(“those	who	heard	him”),	it	is	argued	that	we	should	not	expect
them	to	be	done	through	others	who	were	not	firsthand	witnesses	to	the
Lord’s	teaching	and	ministry.
29
But	this	argument	also	attempts	to	draw	more	from	the	passage	than	is	there.
First,	the	phrase	“those	who	heard	him”	(Heb.	2:3)	is	certainly	not	limited	to
the	apostles,	for	many	others	heard	Jesus	as	well.	But	more	importantly,	this
position	is	claiming	something	that	the	text	simply	does	not	say:	the	fact	that
(1)	the	gospel	message	was	confirmed	by	miracles	when	it	was	preached	by
those	who	heard	Jesus	says	nothing	at	all	about	(2)	whether	it	would	be
confirmed	by	miracles	when	preached	by	others	who	did	not	hear	Jesus.
Finally,	this	passage	says	the	message	was	confirmed	not	only	by	“signs	and
wonders	and	various	miracles”	but	also	by	
“gifts	of	the	Holy	Spirit.”	
If
someone	argues	that	this	passage	limits	miracles	to	the	apostles	and	their
companions,	then	he	or	she	must	also	argue	that	gifts	of	the	Holy	Spirit	are
likewise	limited	to	the	first-century	church.	But	few	would	argue	that	there
are	no	gifts	of	the	Holy	Spirit	today.
30
5.	Conclusion:	Were	Miracles	Restricted	to	the	Apostles?
	If	ministry	in	the
power	and	glory	of	the	Holy	Spirit	is	characteristic	of	the	new	covenant	age
(2	Cor.	3:1–4:18),	then	our	expectation	would	be	just	the	opposite:	we	would
expect	that	second	and	third	and	fourth	generation	Christians,	who	also	know
Christ	and	the	power	of	his	resurrection	(Phil.	3:10),	who	are	continually
being	filled	with	the	Holy	Spirit	(Eph.	5:17),	who	are	participants	in	a	war
that	is	not	a	worldly	war,	but	one	that	is	carried	on	with	weapons	that	have
divine	power	to	destroy	strongholds	(2	Cor.	10:3–4),	who	have	not	been	given
a	spirit	of	timidity	but	a	“spirit	of	power	and	love	and	self-control”	(2	Tim.
1:7),	who	are	strong	in	the	Lord	and	in	the	strength	of	his	might,	and	who
have	put	on	the	whole	armor	of	God	in	order	to	be	able	to	stand	against
principalities	and	powers	and	spiritual	hosts	of	wickedness	in	the	heavenly
places	(Eph.	6:10–12),	would	
also	
have	the	ability	to	minister	the	gospel	not
only	in	truth	and	love	but	also	with	accompanying	miraculous	demonstrations
of	God’s	power.	It	is	difficult	to	see,	from	the	pages	of	the	New	Testament,
any	reason	why	only	the	preaching	of	the	apostles	should	come	“not	in
plausible	words	of	wisdom,	but	
in	demonstration	of	the	Spirit	and	of	power,
that	your	faith	might	not	rest	in	the	wisdom	of	men	but	in	the	power	of	God”
(1	Cor.	2:4–5).
Though	there	does	seem	to	have	been	an	unusual	concentration	of	miraculous
power	in	the	ministry	of	the	apostles,	this	is	not	a	reason	for	thinking	that
there	would	be	few	or	no	miracles	following	their	deaths.	Rather,	the	apostles
were	the	leaders	in	a	new	covenant	church	whose	life	and	message	were
characterized	by	the	power	of	the	Holy	Spirit	at	work	in	miraculous	ways.
Furthermore,	they	set	a	pattern	that	the	church	throughout	its	history	may	well
seek	to	imitate	in	its	own	life,	insofar	as	God	the	Holy	Spirit	is	pleased	to
work	miracles	for	the	edification	of	the	church.
31
E.	False	Miracles
Pharaoh’s	magicians	were	able	to	work	some	false	miracles	(Ex.	7:11,	22;
8:7),	though	they	soon	had	to	admit	that	God’s	power	was	greater	(Ex.	8:19).
Simon	the	sorcerer	in	the	city	of	Samaria	amazed	people	with	his	magic	(Acts
8:9–11),	even	though	the	miracles	done	through	Philip	were	much	greater
(Acts	8:13).	In	Philippi	Paul	encountered	a	slave	girl	“who	had	a	spirit	of
divination	and	brought	her	owners	much	gain	by	soothsaying”	(Acts	16:16),
but	Paul	rebuked	the	spirit	and	it	came	out	of	her	(Acts	16:18).	Moreover,
Paul	says	that	when	the	man	of	sin	comes	it	“will	be	with	all	power	and	with
pretended	signs	and	wonders,	and	with	all	wicked	deception	for	those	who	are
to	perish”	(2	Thess.	2:9–10),	but	those	who	follow	them	and	are	deceived	do
so	“because	they	refused	to	love	the	truth	and	so	be	saved”	(2	Thess.	2:10).
This	indicates	that	those	who	work	false	miracles	in	the	end	times	by	the
power	of	Satan	will	not	speak	the	truth	but	will	preach	a	false	gospel.	Finally,
Revelation	13	indicates	that	a	second	beast	will	rise	“out	of	the	earth,”	one
that	has	“all	the	authority	of	the	first	beast”	and	“works	great	signs,	even
making	fire	come	down	from	heaven	to	earth	in	the	sight	of	men;	and	by	the
signs	which	it	is	allowed	to	work	in	the	presence	of	the	beast,	it	deceives
those	who	dwell	on	earth”	(Rev.	13:11–14).	But	once	again	a	false	gospel
accompanies	these	miracles:	this	power	is	exercised	in	connection	with	the
first	beast	who	utters	“haughty	and	blasphemous	words	.	.	.	it	opened	its
mouth	to	utter	blasphemies	against	God,	blaspheming	his	name	and	his
dwelling”	(Rev.	13:5–6).
Two	conclusions	become	clear	from	this	brief	survey	of	false	miracles	in
Scripture:	(1)	
The	power	of	God	is	greater	than	the	power	of	Satan	
to	work
miraculous	signs,	and	God’s	people	triumph	in	confrontations	of	power	with
those	who	work	evil.	In	connection	with	this,	John	assures	believers	that	“he
who	is	in	you	is	greater	than	he	who	is	in	the	world”	(1	John	4:4).
32
	(2)	The
identity	of	these	workers	of	false	miracles	
is	always	known	through	their
denial	of	the	gospel.	There	is	no	indication	anywhere	in	Scripture	that
genuine	Christians	with	the	Holy	Spirit	in	them	will	work	false	miracles.	
In
fact,	in	a	city	filled	with	idolatry	and	demon	worship	(see	1	Cor.	10:20),	Paul
could	say	to	the	Corinthian	believers,	many	of	whom	had	come	out	of	that
kind	of	pagan	background,	that	“no	one	can	say	‘Jesus	is	Lord’	except	by	the
Holy	Spirit”	(1	Cor.	12:3).	Here	he	gives	them	reassurance	that	those	who
make	a	genuine	profession	of	faith	in	Jesus	as	Lord	do	in	fact	have	the	Holy
Spirit	in	them.	It	is	significant	that	he	immediately	goes	on	to	a	discussion	of
spiritual	gifts	possessed	by	“each”	true	believer	(1	Cor.	12:7).
This	should	reassure	us	that	if	we	see	miracles	being	worked	by	those	who
make	a	genuine	profession	of	faith	(1	Cor.	12:3),	who	believe	in	the
incarnation	and	deity	of	Christ	(1	John	4:2),	and	who	show	the	fruit	of	the
Holy	Spirit	in	their	lives	and	bear	fruit	in	their	ministry	(Matt.	7:20;	cf.	John
15:5;	Gal.	5:22–23),	we	should	not	be	suspicious	that	they	are	false	miracles
but	should	be	thankful	to	God	that	the	Holy	Spirit	is	working,	even	in	those
who	may	not	hold	exactly	the	same	convictions	that	we	do	on	every	point	of
doctrine.
33
	Indeed,	if	God	waited	to	work	miracles	only	through	those	who
were	perfect	in	both	doctrine	and	conduct	of	life,	no	miracles	would	be
worked	until	Christ	returns.
F.	Should	Christians	Seek	Miracles	Today?
It	is	one	thing	to	say	that	miracles	might	occur	today.	It	is	quite	another	thing
to	ask	God	for	miracles.	Is	it	right	then	for	Christians	to	ask	God	to	perform
miracles?
The	answer	depends	on	the	purpose	for	which	miracles	are	sought.	Certainly
it	is	wrong	to	seek	miraculous	power	to	advance	one’s	own	power	or	fame,	as
Simon	the	magician	did:	Peter	said	to	him,	“your	heart	is	not	right	before
God.	Repent	therefore	of	this	wickedness	of	yours,	and	pray	to	the	Lord	that,
if	possible,	the	intent	of	your	heart	may	be	forgiven	you”	(Acts	8:21–22).
It	is	also	wrong	to	seek	miracles	simply	to	be	entertained,	as	Herod	did:
“When	Herod	saw	Jesus,	he	was	very	glad,	for	he	had	long	desired	to	see	him,
because	he	had	heard	about	him,	and	he	was	hoping	to	see	some	sign	done	by
him”	(Luke	23:8).	But	Jesus	would	not	even	answer	Herod’s	questions.
It	is	also	wrong	for	skeptical	unbelievers	to	seek	miracles	simply	to	find
ground	to	criticize	those	who	preach	the	gospel:
And	the	Pharisees	and	Sadducees	came,	and	
to	test	him	
they	asked
him	to	show	them	a	sign	from	heaven.	He	answered	them,	“.	.	.	An
evil	and	adulterous	generation	seeks	for	a	sign,	but	no	sign	shall	be
given	to	it	except	the	sign	of	Jonah.”	(Matt.	16:1–4)
This	rebuke	against	seeking	signs	is	repeated	elsewhere	in	the	Gospels,	but	it
is	important	to	note	that	rebukes	against	seeking	signs	are	always	directed
against	hostile	unbelievers	who	are	seeking	a	miracle	only	as	an	opportunity
to	criticize	Jesus.
34
	Never	does	Jesus	rebuke	anyone	who	comes	in	faith,	or	in
need,	seeking	healing	or	deliverance	or	any	other	kind	of	miracle,	whether	for
himself	or	herself,	or	for	others.
What	shall	we	say	then	about	1	Corinthians	1:22–24,	where	Paul	says,	“For
Jews	demand	signs	
and	Greeks	seek	wisdom,	but	we	preach	Christ	crucified,
a	stumbling	block	to	Jews	and	folly	to	Gentiles,	but	to	those	who	are	called,
both	Jews	and	Greeks,	Christ	the	power	of	God	and	the	wisdom	of	God”?
Does	Paul	mean	that	he	did	not	work	miracles	(“signs”)	at	Corinth,	or	perhaps
in	his	evangelistic	work	generally?
Here	Paul	cannot	be	denying	that	he	performed	miracles	in	connection	with
the	proclamation	of	the	gospel.	In	fact,	in	Romans	15:18–19,	a	passage	he
wrote	while	in	Corinth,	he	said,
For	I	will	not	venture	to	speak	of	anything	except	what	Christ	has
wrought	through	me	to	win	obedience	from	the	Gentiles,	by	word	and
deed,	
by	the	power	of	signs	and	wonders,	
by	the	power	of	the	Holy
Spirit,	so	that	from	Jerusalem	and	as	far	round	as	Illyricum	I	have
fully	preached	the	gospel	of	Christ.
And	2	Corinthians	12:12	affirms	clearly	that	Paul	did	work	“signs	and
wonders	and	mighty	works”	among	them.
So	1	Corinthians	1:22–24	cannot	mean	that	Paul	was	denying	the	validity	of
wisdom	
or	the	validity	of	
signs,	
for	through	Christ	he	worked	signs	and	he
taught	wisdom.	Rather,	here	he	is	saying	that	signs	and	wisdom	do	not
themselves	save	people,	but	the	gospel	saves	people.	Signs	and	the	wisdom
that	Jews	and	Greeks	were	seeking	were	not	the	signs	and	wisdom	of	Christ
but	simply	signs	to	entertain	or	to	fuel	their	hostility	and	skepticism	and
wisdom	that	was	the	wisdom	of	the	world	rather	than	the	wisdom	of	God.
There	is	nothing	inappropriate	in	seeking	miracles	for	the	proper	purposes	for
which	they	are	given	by	God:	to	confirm	the	truthfulness	of	the	gospel
message,	to	bring	help	to	those	in	need,	to	remove	hindrances	to	people’s
ministries,	and	to	bring	glory	to	God	(see	
Section	C
	above).	In	the	Gospels
many	people	came	to	Jesus	seeking	miracles,	and	he	healed	them	for	these
purposes.	Moreover,	when	he	sent	his	disciples	out	preaching	that	the
kingdom	of	heaven	was	at	hand,	he	told	them,	“Heal	the	sick,	raise	the	dead,
cleanse	lepers,	cast	out	demons”	(Matt.	10:7–8).	How	could	they	do	this
without	seeking	God	for	miracles	everywhere	they	went?	Jesus’	command
required	them	to	seek	for	miracles	to	happen.
After	Pentecost,	the	early	church	prayed	both	for	boldness	to	preach	the
gospel	and	for	God	to	grant	miracles	to	accompany	its	preaching.	They	cried
out	to	God,
And	now,	Lord,	look	upon	their	threats,	and	grant	to	your	servants	to
speak	your	word	with	all	boldness,	
while	you	stretch	out	your	hand	to
heal,	
and	
signs	and	wonders	
are	performed	through	the	name	of	your
holy	servant	Jesus.	(Acts	4:29–30)
Far	from	teaching	that	we	should	not	ask	God	for	miracles,	this	example	of
the	early	church	gives	us	some	encouragement	to	do	so.	Similarly,	the
disciples	in	Lydda	sent	for	Peter	to	come	and	pray	for	Tabitha	after	she	had
died,	thereby	seeking	a	miraculous	intervention	by	God	(Acts	9:38).	And
James	directs	that	the	elders	of	the	church	should	pray	and	seek	healing	for
those	who	are	ill	(James	5:14).	Of	course,	we	should	not	assume	that	an
obviously	miraculous	answer	to	prayer	is	somehow	better	than	one	that	comes
through	ordinary	means	(such	as	medical	help	for	sickness),	and	we	must	also
realize	that	asking	God	for	a	particular	need	does	not	guarantee	that	the	prayer
will	be	answered.	On	the	other	hand,	our	faith	that	God	will	work	in	powerful
and	even	miraculous	ways	may	be	far	too	small.	We	must	beware	of	being
infected	by	a	secular	worldview	that	assumes	that	God	will	answer	prayer
only	very	seldom,	if	ever.	And	we	should	certainly	not	be	embarrassed	to	talk
about	miracles	if	they	occur—or	think	that	a	nonmiraculous	answer	to	prayer
is	better!	Miracles	are	God’s	work,	and	he	works	them	to	bring	glory	to
himself	and	to	strengthen	our	faith.	When	we	encounter	serious	needs	in
people’s	lives	today,	it	is	right	for	us	to	seek	God	for	an	answer,	and	where
miraculous	intervention	seems	to	be	needed,	then	to	ask	God	if	he	would	be
pleased	to	work	in	that	way.
35
	This	would	seem	to	be	especially	appropriate
when	our	motivation	is	a	Christlike	compassion	for	those	in	need	and	a
burning	desire	to	see	Christ’s	kingdom	advance	and	his	name	glorified.
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
When	you	first	came	to	faith	in	Christ,	did	the	stories	of	miracles	in	the
Bible	have	any	influence	(negative	or	positive)	on	your	believing	the
message	of	Scripture?
2
.	
Before	reading	this	chapter,	have	you	thought	of	the	church	at	the	time	of
the	New	Testament	as	a	church	with	frequent	miracles?	Have	you
thought	of	the	contemporary	church	as	one	with	frequent	miracles?	After
reading	this	chapter,	how	has	your	position	changed,	if	at	all?
3
.	
If	you	think	that	miracles	should	be	characteristic	of	the	church	until
Christ	returns,	then	why	have	we	not	seen	very	many	miracles	at	many
points	in	the	history	of	the	church,	and	why	do	we	not	see	many	miracles
in	large	sections	of	the	Christian	church	today?
4
.	
If	you	hold	a	“cessationist”	position,	what	kinds	of	unusual	answers	to
prayer	might	you	still	think	possible	today?	(For	example,	prayer	for
physical	healing,	for	deliverance	from	danger,	victory	over	demonic
attack	through	prayer	and/or	verbal	rebuke	of	an	evil	spirit,	or	sudden
and	unusual	insight	into	a	passage	of	Scripture	or	a	situation	in
someone’s	life.)	How	would	you	distinguish	these	things	that	you	might
think	possible	today	from	“miracles”	according	to	the	definition	given	in
this	chapter?	(You	may	wish	to	argue	for	a	different	definition	of
“miracle”	as	well.)
5
.	
Do	miracles	have	to	be	large	and	“remarkable”	(such	as	raising	the	dead
or	healing	a	man	blind	from	birth)	to	accomplish	useful	purposes	in	the
church	today?	What	kinds	of	“small-scale”	miracles	might	also
accomplish	some	of	the	purposes	for	miracles	listed	in	this	chapter?
Have	you	known	of	any	answers	to	prayer	in	your	own	church	(or	your
own	life)	that	you	would	characterize	as	“miraculous”	according	to	the
definition	given	at	the	beginning	of	the	chapter?
6
.	
Would	you	like	to	see	more	miraculous	power	of	the	Holy	Spirit	(or
more	unusual	answers	to	prayer)	at	work	in	your	own	church	today,	or
not?	If	more	miracles	did	occur,	what	might	be	the	dangers?	What	might
be	the	benefits?
SPECIAL	TERMS
cessationist
	
	
sign
mighty	work
	
	
“signs	of	a	true	apostle”
miracle
	
	
wonder
natural	law
	
	
	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the	
bibliography	to
chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be	found	in	
Appendix	4
.)
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92			Litton	(no	explicit	treatment)
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1875–76			Pope,	1:63–76
1940			Wiley,	1:149,	150,	153,	154
1983–			Cottrell,	2:229–604
3.				Baptist
1907			Strong,	117–33
1917			Mullins,	172,	193
1983–85			Erickson,	406–10
1987–94			Lewis/Demarest,	1:100–109,	115–18
4.			Dispensational
1947			Chafer,	7:239
1949			Thiessen,	11–13
1986			Ryrie,	350–51,	372–73
5.			Lutheran
1917–24			Pieper,	1:459–60
1934			Mueller,	174
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1559			Calvin,	1:14–18,	85–88;	2:1453–1455,	1465–
67	(
PA,	
3;	1.8.5–8;	4.19.6,	18)
1861			Heppe,	263–65
1871–73			Hodge,	1:617–36
1887–1921			Warfield,	
SSW,	
2:167–206
1889			Shedd,	1:533–46
1937–66			Murray,	
CW,	
3:210–14
1938			Berkhof,	176–78
1962			Buswell,	1:176–83
7.			Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988–92			Williams,	1:141–68
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955			Ott	(no	explicit	treatment)
2.			Roman	Catholic:	Post-Vatican	II
1980			McBrien,	1:325–28
Other	Works
Berkouwer,	G.	C.	“Providence	and	Miracles.”	In	
The	Providence	of	God.
Trans.	by	Lewis	B.	Smedes.	Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1952,	pp.	188–
231.
Boice,	James	Montgomery.	“A	Better	Way:	The	Power	of	Word	and
Spirit.”	In	
Power	Religion:	The	Selling	Out	of	the	Evangelical	Church?
Michael	Scott	Horton,	ed.	Chicago:	Moody	Press,	1992.
Bridge,	Donald.	
Signs	and	Wonders	Today.	
Leicester:	Inter-Varsity	Press,
1985.
Brown,	Colin.	“Miracle.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	433–34.
_____.	
That	You	May	Believe:	Miracles	and	Faith—Then	and	Now.
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1985.
Carson,	D.	A.	“The	Purpose	of	Signs	and	Wonders	in	the	New
Testament,”	In	
Power	Religion:	The	Selling	Out	of	the	Evangelical
Church?	
Michael	Scott	Horton,	ed.	Chicago:	Moody	Press,	1992.
Deere,	Jack.	
Surprised	by	the	Power	of	the	Spirit:	A	Former	Dallas
Seminary	Professor	Discovers	That	God	Still	Speaks	and	Heals	Today.
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1993.
Geisler,	Norman.	
Signs	and	Wonders.	
Wheaton:	Tyndale,	1988.
_____.	
Miracles	and	Modern	Thought.	
With	a	response	by	R.	C.	Sproul.
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	and	Dallas:	Probe	Ministries,	1982.
Greig,	Gary	S.,	and	Kevin	N.	Springer,	eds.	
The	Kingdom	and	the	Power.
Ventura,	Calif.:	Regal,	1993.
Gross,	Edward	N.	
Miracles,	Demons,	and	Spiritual	Warfare:	An	Urgent
Call	for	Discernment.	
Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1990.
Grudem,	Wayne.	
Power	and	Truth:	A	Response	to	the	Critiques	of
Vineyard	Teaching	and	Practice	by	D.	A.	Carson,	James	Montgomery
Boice,	and	John	H.	Armstrong	in	Power	Religion.	
Anaheim,	Calif.:
Association	of	Vineyard	Churches,	1993.
_____.	“Should	Christians	Expect	Miracles	Today?	Objections	and
Answers	From	the	Bible.”	In	
The	Kingdom	and	the	Power.	
Gary	Greig
and	Kevin	Springer,	eds.	Ventura,	Calif.:	Regal,	1993,	pp.	55–110.
Horton,	Michael	S.,	ed.	
Power	Religion:	The	Selling	Out	of	the
Evangelical	Church?	
Chicago:	Moody,	1992.
Kirk,	J.	A.	“Power.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	524–25.
Lewis,	C.	S.	
Miracles:	A	Preliminary	Study.	
New	York:	Macmillan,
1947.
Moule,	C.	F.	D.,	ed.	
Miracles.	
London:	Mowbray,	1965.
Spiceland,	J.	D.	“Miracles.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	723–24.
Wenham,	David,	and	Craig	Blomberg,	eds.	
Miracles	of	Jesus.	
Sheffield,
England:	JSOT,	1986.
Williams,	Don.	
Signs,	Wonders,	and	the	Kingdom	of	God:	A	Biblical
Guide	for	the	Skeptic.	
Ann	Arbor,	Mich.:	Servant,	1989.
Wimber,	John,	with	Kevin	Springer.	
Power	Evangelism.	
Revised	edition.
San	Francisco:	Harper	and	Row,	and	London:	Hodder	and	Stoughton,
1992.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
Hebrews	2:3–4:	
How	shall	we	escape	if	we	neglect	such	a	great	salvation?	It
was	declared	at	first	by	the	Lord,	and	it	was	attested	to	us	by	those	who	heard
him,	while	God	also	bore	witness	by	signs	and	wonders	and	various	miracles
and	by	gifts	of	the	Holy	Spirit	distributed	according	to	his	own	will.
HYMN
“A	Mighty	Fortress	Is	Our	God”
A	mighty	fortress	is	our	God,	a	bulwark	never	failing;
Our	helper	he	amid	the	flood	of	mortal	ills	prevailing.
For	still	our	ancient	foe	doth	seek	to	work	us	woe;
His	craft	and	pow’r	are	great;	and,	armed	with	cruel	hate,
On	earth	is	not	his	equal.
Did	we	in	our	own	strength	confide,	our	striving	would	be	losing;
Were	not	the	right	man	on	our	side,	the	man	of	God’s	own	choosing.
Dost	ask	who	that	may	be?	Christ	Jesus,	it	is	he,
Lord	Sabaoth	his	name,	from	age	to	age	the	same,
And	he	must	win	the	battle.
And	though	this	world,	with	devils	filled,	should	threaten	to	undo	us,
We	will	not	fear,	for	God	hath	willed	his	truth	to	triumph	through	us.
The	prince	of	darkness	grim,	we	tremble	not	for	him;
His	rage	we	can	endure,	for	lo!	his	doom	is	sure;
One	little	word	shall	fell	him.
That	word	above	all	earthly	powers,	no	thanks	to	them,	abideth;
The	Spirit	and	the	gifts	are	ours	through	him	who	with	us	sideth;
Let	goods	and	kindred	go,	this	mortal	life	also;
The	body	they	may	kill:	God’s	truth	abideth	still;
His	kingdom	is	forever.
AUTHOR:	MARTIN	LUTHER,	1529
NOTES
1
I	have	adapted	this	definition	from	unpublished	lectures	given	by	John	Frame,	professor	of	systematic	theology	at	Westminster
Theological	Seminary.
2
However,	if	someone	defined	a	miracle	as	“a	work	of	God	apart	from	the	
ordinary	
use	of	means,	to	arouse	people’s	awe	and
wonder,”	this	would	be	similar	in	force	to	the	definition	I	proposed	above	and	would	be	consistent	with	the	Bible’s	teaching	on
God’s	providence	(see	L.	Berkhof,	
Systematic	Theology,	
pp.	176–77).
3
If	the	phrase	“natural	law”	is	understood	by	Christians	simply	to	refer	to	the	predictable	patterns	of	behavior	that	God	gives	to
and	maintains	in	each	created	thing,	then	this	definition	is	less	objectionable	because	it	consciously	takes	into	account	God’s
providence.	But	the	phrase	“natural	law”	is	not	generally	understood	that	way	in	English	today.
4
The	verb	
thaumazō,	
“to	wonder,	be	amazed,”	is	frequently	used	in	the	Gospels	to	describe	people’s	reaction	to	miracles.
5
See	the	extensive	discussion	of	New	Testament	vocabulary	for	miracles	in	W.	Mundle,	O.	Hofius,	and	C.	Brown,	“Miracle,
Wonder,	Sign,”	
NIDNTT	
2:620–35.
6
Others	may	prefer	to	be	more	restrictive	in	their	definition	of	miracles,	reserving	the	term	(for	example)	for	events	that
absolutely	could	not	have	happened	by	ordinary	means	and	that	are	thoroughly	witnessed	and	documented	by	several	impartial
observers.	In	that	case,	they	will	see	far	fewer	miracles,	especially	in	a	skeptical,	anti-supernatural	society.	But	such	a	definition
may	not	encompass	all	the	kinds	of	things	Paul	had	in	mind	when	he	talked	about	miracles	in	the	churches	of	Corinth	(1	Cor.
12:10,	28–29)	and	Galatia	(Gal.	3:5),	and	may	prevent	people	from	recognizing	a	gift	of	miracles	when	it	is	given	to	Christians
today.	(Of	course,	Christians	who	hold	such	a	restrictive	definition	will	still	readily	thank	God	for	many	answers	to	prayer	that
they	would	not	call	miracles.)
7
The	appropriateness	of	such	a	definition	is	not	lost	simply	because	the	same	event	might	be	called	a	miracle	by	some	people	and
an	ordinary	event	by	others,	for	people’s	evaluation	of	an	event	will	vary	depending	on	their	nearness	to	the	event,	the
assumptions	of	their	worldview,	and	whether	they	are	Christians	or	not.
8
Note,	for	example,	that	Paul	says	that	God	has	appointed	in	the	church,	“first	apostles	.	.	.”	(1	Cor.	12:28).	But	there	were	no
apostles	given	specifically	to	the	church	at	Corinth.	Therefore	this	passage	must	be	talking	about	the	church	in	general.
B.	B.	Warfield,	
Counterfeit	Miracles	
(Edinburgh:	Banner	of	Truth,	1972;	first	published	in	1918),	notes	that	in	the	church	at
Corinth	those	who	took	part	in	the	ordinary	church	worship	service	“might	often	have	a	miraculous	gift	to	exercise.”	He	says	that
“there	is	no	reason	to	believe	that	the	infant	congregation	at	Corinth	was	singular	in	this.	The	Apostle	does	not	write	as	if	he	were
describing	a	marvelous	state	of	affairs	peculiar	to	that	church.	.	.	.	The	hints	in	the	rest	of	his	letters	and	in	the	Book	of	Acts
require	us,	accordingly,	to	look	upon	this	beautiful	picture	of	Christian	worship	as	one	which	would	be	true	to	life	for	any	of	the
numerous	congregations	planted	by	the	Apostles	in	the	length	and	breadth	of	the	world	visited	and	preached	to	by	them.	.	.	.	We
are	justified	in	considering	it	characteristic	of	the	Apostolic	churches	that	such	miraculous	gifts	should	be	displayed	in	them.	The
exception	would	be,	not	a	church	with,	but	a	church	without,	such	gifts”	(pp.	4–5).
9
Warfield	continues,	“Everywhere,	the	Apostolic	Church	was	marked	out	as	itself	a	gift	from	God,	by	showing	forth	the
possession	of	the	Spirit	in	appropriate	works	of	the	Spirit—miracles	of	healing	and	miracles	of	power,	miracles	of	knowledge
whether	in	the	form	of	prophecy	or	of	the	discerning	of	spirits,	miracles	of	speech,	whether	of	the	gift	of	tongues	or	of	their
interpretation.	The	Apostolic	Church	was	characteristically	a	miracle-working	church”	(
Counterfeit	Miracles,	
p.	5).
While	I	would	agree	with	Warfield’s	analysis	of	the	New	Testament	evidence	on	this	question,	there	is	certainly	room	to	disagree
with	his	subsequent	point,	and	the	main	contention	of	his	book,	that	the	church	after	the	age	of	the	apostles	experienced	the
cessation	of	miraculous	gifts,	and	that	we	should	not	expect	such	gifts	today	because	God	intended	them	only	to	confirm	the	early
apostolic	message	during	the	time	when	the	apostles	were	still	alive.
10
See	further	discussion	of	this	question	in	
chapter	52
	below,	on	spiritual	gifts	and	the	question	of	the	time	of	cessation	of	some
gifts.
11
See	
Section	D
	below.
12
The	verses	just	quoted	show	the	positive	value	of	miracles	in	bringing	people	to	faith.	Some	may	object	that	when	we	say	that
miracles	have	value	in	bearing	witness	to	the	gospel	this	means	that	we	think	the	gospel	message	by	itself	is	weak	and	unable	to
bring	people	to	faith	(see	especially	James	M.	Boice,	“A	Better	Way:	The	Power	of	Word	and	Spirit,”	in	Michael	Scott	Horton,
ed.,	
Power	Religion	
[Chicago:	Moody,	1992],	pp.	119–36).	But	this	is	not	a	valid	objection,	for	Jesus	and	Paul	did	not	reason	that
way—both	performed	miracles	in	conjunction	with	their	preaching	of	the	gospel,	and	Jesus	commanded	his	disciples	to	do	this	as
well	(Matt.	10:7–8).	We	must	remember	that	it	is	God	himself	who	“bore	witness”	to	the	gospel	“by	signs	and	wonders	and
various	miracles	and	by	gifts	of	the	Holy	Spirit	distributed	according	to	his	own	will”	(Heb.	2:4),	and	we	cannot	say	that	he	has	an
inappropriate	view	of	the	power	of	the	gospel	message.
John’s	gospel	is	especially	instructive	in	showing	the	value	of	miracles	in	encouraging	people	to	believe	in	Christ	(see	John	2:11,
23;	3:2;	4:53–54;	6:2,	14;	7:31;	9:16;	11:48;	12:11;	and,	in	summary,	20:30–31).	This	positive	emphasis	in	John	stands	in	contrast
to	the	view	of	D.	A.	Carson	in	“The	Purpose	of	Signs	and	Wonders	in	the	New	Testament,”	in	Horton,	
Power	Religion,	
pp.	100–
101,	where	he	admits	but	minimizes	the	positive	role	of	miracles	in	bringing	people	to	faith	in	John’s	gospel.	Surprisingly,	he	fails
to	discuss	several	of	the	positive	passages	mentioned	above	and	sees	a	depreciation	of	miracles	in	passages	where	no	such
negative	evaluation	exists,	such	as	John	2:23–25;	4:48;	and	20:29–31.	We	should	not	think	that	when	miracles	accompany	the
gospel	those	who	believe	will	have	inferior	faith	(as	Carson	suggests,	p.	
101),	for	that	would	lead	us	to	say	that	those	who
believed	the	preaching	of	Jesus,	Peter,	and	Paul	had	inferior	faith—a	conclusion	hardly	advanced	by	the	New	Testament!
13
In	neither	case	should	these	events	be	thought	of	as	some	kind	of	“magic”	that	came	automatically	through	Peter’s	shadow	or
handkerchiefs	that	Paul	had	touched,	but	rather	as	an	indication	of	the	fact	that	the	Holy	Spirit	was	pleased	to	give	such	a	full	and
remarkable	empowering	to	the	ministry	of	these	men	that	on	occasion	he	extended	his	work	beyond	their	individual	bodily
presence	even	to	things	that	they	came	near	or	touched.
14
The	word	“true”	is	not	actually	in	the	Greek	text,	which	simply	says,	“the	signs	of	an	apostle.”	The	RSV	(which	is	quoted	here)
and	NASB	have	added	“true”	to	give	the	sense:	Paul	is	contrasting	his	ministry	with	that	of	the	false	apostles.
15
See	Walter	J.	Chantry,	
Signs	of	the	Apostles,	
2d	ed.	(Edinburgh:	Banner	of	Truth,	1976),	esp.	pp.	17–21;	B.	B.	Warfield,
Counterfeit	Miracles;	
Norman	Geisler,	
Signs	and	Wonders	
(Wheaton:	Tyndale	House,	1988).
16
The	grammar	of	the	Greek	text	forces	us	to	this	distinction,	since	“the	signs	of	an	apostle”	is	in	the	nominative	case,	while
“signs	and	wonders	and	mighty	works”	is	in	the	dative,	and	cannot	therefore	be	simply	a	restatement	of	“signs	of	an	apostle”	in
apposition	to	it:	nouns	in	apposition	in	Greek	must	be	in	the	same	case.	(The	NIV	ignores	the	grammar	here	and	translates	the	two
phrases	as	if	they	were	in	apposition;	the	RSV	and	NASB	are	more	precise.)
17
Many	nonmiraculous	things	are	called	“signs.”	For	example,	Paul’s	handwritten	signature	is	his	“sign”	(2	Thess.	3:17;	RSV
“mark”);	circumcision	is	a	“sign”	of	Abraham’s	imputed	righteousness	(Rom.	4:11);	Judas’s	kiss	is	a	“sign”	to	the	Jewish	leaders
(Matt.	26:48);	the	rainbow	is	a	“sign”	of	the	covenant	(Gen.	9:12,	LXX);	eating	unleavened	bread	during	Passover	every	year	is	a
“sign”	of	the	Lord’s	deliverance	(Ex.	13:9,	LXX);	Rahab’s	scarlet	cord	is	a	“sign”	that	the	spies	told	her	to	hang	in	her	window	(1
Clem.	12:7).
18
Among	modern	commentators	on	2	Corinthians,	I	found	only	three	who	understand	the	“signs	of	a	true	apostle”	in	2	Cor.	12:12
to	be	miracles:	Colin	Kruse,	
The	Second	Epistle	of	Paul	to	the	Corinthians,	
TNTC	(Leicester:	Inter-Varsity	Press,	and	Grand
Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1987),	p.	
209;	Jean	Héring,	
The	Second	Epistle	of	Saint	Paul	to	the	Corinthians,	
trans.	A.	W.	Heathcote	and	P.
J.	Allcock	(London:	Epworth,	1967),	pp.	95–96;	and	Murray	Harris,	“2	Corinthians,”	
EBC,	
10:398,	take	it	that	way,	but	none	of
them	gives	any	argument	to	support	this	view,	and	Harris	notes	an	alternative	view	where	the	“signs”	are	the	changed	lives	of	the
Corinthians	and	the	Christlike	character	of	Paul.
The	majority	of	commentators	understand	“signs	of	a	true	apostle”	to	have	a	much	broader	meaning,	including	the	qualities	of
Paul’s	life	and	the	character	and	results	of	his	ministry:	see	Philip	E.	Hughes,	
Paul’s	Second	Epistle	to	the	Corinthians,	
NIC
(Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1962),	pp.	456–58	(following	Chrysostom	and	Calvin);	Ralph	P.	Martin,	
II	Corinthians,	
WBC	(Waco,
Tex.:	Word,	1986),	pp.	434–38	(with	extensive	discussion);	Alfred	Plummer,	
A	Critical	and	Exegetical	Commentary	on	the
Second	Epistle	of	St.	Paul	to	the	Corinthians,	
ICC	(Edinburgh:	T.	&	T.	Clark,	1915),	p.	
359;	R.	V.	G.	Tasker,	
2	Corinthians,	
TNTC
(London:	Tyndale	Press,	1958),	p.	
180;	Charles	Hodge,	
An	Exposition	of	1	and	2	Corinthians	
(Wilmington,	Del.:	Sovereign
Grace,	1972	[reprint]),	pp.	359–60;	John	Calvin,	
The	Second	Epistle	of	Paul	the	Apostle	to	the	Corinthians.	.	.	,	
trans.	T.	A.	Smail,
ed.	by	D.	W.	Torrance	and	T.	F.	Torrance	(Edinburgh:	Oliver	and	Boyd,	and	Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1964),	pp.	163–64;	see	also
J.	B.	Lightfoot,	
The	Epistle	of	St.	Paul	to	the	Galatians	
(Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1957),	p.	
99.	Some	of	these	commentators
understand	the	“signs	of	a	true	apostle”	as	accompanied	by	or	including	miracles,	but	none	understand	the	phrase	to	refer
primarily	or	exclusively	to	miracles.
19
Some	interpreters	assume	that	the	false	apostles	were	working	miracles	and	claiming	revelations	from	God,	so	that	Paul	would
have	to	claim	greater	miracles	and	revelations.	But	nothing	in	2	Corinthians	says	that	the	false	apostles	claimed	miracles	or
revelations.
20
The	following	verse	also	gives	confirmation	to	this	interpretation:	Paul	says,	“For	in	what	were	you	less	favored	than	the	rest	of
the	churches	.	.	.	?”	(2	Cor.	12:13).	The	fact	that	they	were	not	lacking	in	any	of	Paul’s	care	and	attention	would	prove	to	them	that
the	“signs	of	a	true	apostle”	were	performed	among	them	only	if	these	“signs”	included	all	of	Paul’s	ministry	to	them,	but	not	if
the	“signs	of	a	true	apostle”	were	just	miracles.
21
The	manuscript	evidence	and	considerations	of	style	suggest	that	these	verses	were	not	originally	part	of	the	gospel	that	Mark
wrote.	(See	discussion	of	textual	variants	in	
chapter	5
.)
22
It	is	included	in	several	manuscripts	of	Tatian’s	Diatessaron	(A.D.	170)	and	is	quoted	by	Irenaeus	(d.	A.D.	202)	and	Tertullian
(d.	A.D.	220).
23
I	am	grateful	to	Professor	Harold	Hoehner	of	Dallas	Theological	Seminary	for	suggesting	to	me	the	arguments	given	here
regarding	1	Cor.	12:28	and	Mark	16:17–18	(though	he	may	disagree	with	my	conclusion	in	this	section).
24
So	Chantry,	
Signs,	
pp.	19–21.
25
Norman	Geisler,	
Signs	and	Wonders.	
His	definition	of	miracles	is	found	on	pp.	28–32	and	149–55.
26
Geisler	also	has	much	difficulty	explaining	Mark	5:8	(where	Jesus	more	than	once	commanded	some	demons	to	leave)	and
Mark	6:5	(where	the	text	says	that	Jesus	was	not	able	to	do	any	miracles	in	Nazareth	because	of	the	unbelief	of	the	people	there)
(see	pp.	149,	152).
27
See	discussion	in	
chapter	52
	below.
28
The	KJV	translates,	“God	also	bearing	
them	
witness,	both	with	signs	and	wonders.	.	.	.”	This	translation	suggests	that	the
miracles	bore	witness	to	the	people	who	heard	Jesus	and	first	preached.	But	the	word	“them”	is	represented	by	no	word	in	the
Greek	text,	and	this	translation	is	not	followed	by	modern	versions.
29
So	Chantry,	
Signs	of	the	Apostles,	
pp.	18–19:	“New	Testament	miracles	are	viewed	in	Scripture	itself	as	God’s	stamp	of
approval	upon	the	message	of	the	apostles,	which	was	an	inspired	record	of	the	things	they	had	seen	and	heard	while	with	Jesus.
Recalling	these	wonders	should	deepen	our	respect	for	the	authority	of	their	words	and	prompt	us	to	give	the	more	careful	heed.”
30
Another	argument	limiting	miracles	to	the	first	century	is	based	on	the	claim	that	some	miracles,	such	as	the	gift	of	prophecy,
always	give	new	Scripture-quality	revelation.	That	argument	is	considered	in	detail	in	
chapters	52
–
53
	below.
31
However,	Christians	should	be	very	cautious	and	take	extreme	care	to	be	accurate	in	their	reporting	of	miracles	if	they	do	occur.
Much	harm	can	be	done	to	the	gospel	if	Christians	exaggerate	or	distort,	even	in	small	ways,	the	facts	of	a	situation	where	a
miracle	has	occurred.	The	power	of	the	Holy	Spirit	is	great	enough	to	work	however	he	wills,	and	we	should	never	“embellish”
the	actual	facts	of	the	situation	simply	to	make	it	sound	even	more	exciting	than	it	actually	was.	God	does	exactly	what	he	is
pleased	to	do	in	each	situation.
32
Some	may	object	that	one	exception	to	this	may	be	the	vision	of	the	end	times	in	Rev.	13:7,	where	the	beast	“was	allowed	to
make	war	on	the	saints	and	to	conquer	them”	(Rev.	13:7).	But	even	here	there	is	no	indication	that	the	miraculous	powers	of	the
beast	are	greater	than	the	power	of	the	Holy	Spirit.	This	seems	to	be	best	understood	not	as	a	confrontation	of	miraculous	power
but	simply	as	a	persecution	by	military	force,	for	we	read	later	of	“those	who	had	been	beheaded	for	their	testimony	to	Jesus	and
for	the	word	of	God,	and	who	had	not	worshiped	the	beast	or	its	image	and	had	not	received	its	mark	on	their	foreheads	or	their
hands”	(Rev.	20:4).
33
The	fact	that	people	who	name	the	name	of	Christ	are	able	to	prophesy	and	cast	out	demons	and	do	“many	mighty	works”	in	his
name	(Matt.	7:21–23)	does	not	contradict	this,	because	these	are	non-Christians:	Jesus	says	to	them,	“I	never	knew	you;	depart
from	me,	you	evildoers”	(Matt.	7:23).	Although	it	is	possible	that	these	are	false	miracles	worked	by	demonic	power,	it	seems
more	likely	that	they	are	operations	of	common	grace	(see	
chapter	31
)	that	God	worked	through	in	non-Christians,	similar	to	the
effectiveness	of	the	gospel	that	God	sometimes	allows	when	it	is	preached	by	those	who	have	impure	motives	and	do	not	know
Christ	in	their	hearts	(cf.	Phil.	1:15–18).
34
The	fact	that	Jesus	only	rebukes	hostile	unbelievers	who	seek	miracles	is	surprisingly	never	mentioned	by	D.	A.	Carson,	“The
Purpose	of	Signs	and	Wonders	in	the	New	Testament,”	in	M.	Horton,	ed.,	
Power	Religion,	
pp.	89–118,	or	by	James	M.	Boice,	“A
Better	Way:	The	Power	of	Word	and	Spirit,”	in	
Power	Religion,	
pp.	119–36.	Both	articles	use	Jesus’	rebukes	as	a	means	of
discouraging	believers	from	seeking	miracles	today,	but	to	do	this	they	must	apply	Jesus’	statements	in	a	way	not	justified	by	the
New	Testament	contexts.	(See	esp.	Boice,	p.	
126,	who	quotes	with	approval	a	statement	from	John	Woodhouse,	“A	desire	for
further	signs	and	wonders	is	sinful	and	unbelieving.”)
The	explicit	statement	of	intent	“to	test	him”	is	also	found	in	Mark	8:11	and	Luke	11:16,	parallel	contexts	where	Jesus	rebukes	an
evil	generation	for	seeking	a	sign	from	him.	The	only	other	context	where	this	rebuke	occurs,	Matt.	12:38–42,	does	not	include	an
explicit	statement	of	the	intent	to	test,	but	Jesus	is	clearly	responding	to	the	“scribes	and	Pharisees”	(v.	
38),	and	the	incident
follows	just	after	Matt.	12:14,	where	the	Pharisees	“went	out	and	took	counsel	against	him,	how	to	destroy	him,”	and	Matt.	12:24,
where	the	Pharisees	say,	“It	is	only	by	Be-elzebul,	the	prince	of	demons,	that	this	man	casts	out	demons.”
35
John	Walvoord,	the	former	President	of	Dallas	Theological	Seminary,	understands	the	gift	of	miracles	to	be	“the	power	to
perform	miracles	at	will	in	the	name	of	Christ.”	Therefore	he	holds	that	the	gift	of	miracles	has	ceased.	But	he	still	argues	that	we
can	pray	for	miracles	today:	“A	Christian	can	still	appeal	to	God	to	do	wonders,	and	God	does	answer	prayer.	God	can	still	heal
and	even	raise	the	dead	if	he	chooses,	but	these	miracles	are	sovereign	and	individual.	.	.	.	While	therefore	the	gift	of	miracles	is
not	part	of	the	present	program	of	God,	the	power	of	God	to	perform	miracles	must	be	affirmed”	(
The	Holy	Spirit	
[Wheaton,	Ill.:
Van	Kampen,	1954],	pp.	179–80).
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	18
Prayer
Why	does	God	want	us	to	pray?	How	can	we	pray	effectively?
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
The	character	of	God	and	his	relationship	to	the	world,	as	discussed	in	the
previous	chapters,	lead	naturally	to	a	consideration	of	the	doctrine	of	prayer.
Prayer	may	be	defined	as	follows:	
Prayer	is	personal	communication	with
God.
This	definition	is	very	broad.	What	we	call	“prayer”	includes	prayers	of
request	for	ourselves	or	for	others	(sometimes	called	prayers	of	petition	or
intercession),	confession	of	sin,	adoration,	praise	and	thanksgiving,	and	also
God	communicating	to	us	indications	of	his	response.
A.	Why	Does	God	Want	Us	to	Pray?
Prayer	is	not	made	so	that	God	can	find	out	what	we	need,	because	Jesus	tells
us,	“Your	Father	knows	what	you	need	before	you	ask	him”	(Matt.	6:8).	God
wants	us	to	pray	because	prayer	expresses	our	trust	in	God	and	is	a	means
whereby	our	trust	in	him	can	increase.	In	fact,	perhaps	the	primary	emphasis
of	the	Bible’s	teaching	on	prayer	is	that	we	are	to	pray	with	faith,	which
means	trust	or	dependence	on	God.	God	as	our	Creator	delights	in	being
trusted	by	us	as	his	creatures,	for	an	attitude	of	dependence	is	most
appropriate	to	the	Creator/creature	relationship.	Praying	in	humble
dependence	also	indicates	that	we	are	genuinely	convinced	of	God’s	wisdom,
love,	goodness,	and	power—indeed	of	all	of	the	attributes	that	make	up	his
excellent	character.	When	we	truly	pray,	we	as	persons,	in	the	wholeness	of
our	character,	are	relating	to	God	as	a	person,	in	the	wholeness	of	his
character.	Thus,	all	that	we	think	or	feel	about	God	comes	to	expression	in	our
prayer.	It	is	only	natural	that	God	would	delight	in	such	activity	and	place
much	emphasis	on	it	in	his	relationship	with	us.
The	first	words	of	the	Lord’s	Prayer,	“Our	Father	who	art	in	heaven”	(Matt.
6:9),	acknowledge	our	dependence	on	God	as	a	loving	and	wise	Father	and
also	recognize	that	he	rules	over	all	from	his	heavenly	throne.	Scripture	many
times	emphasizes	our	need	to	trust	God	as	we	pray.	For	example,	Jesus
compares	our	praying	to	a	son	asking	his	father	for	a	fish	or	an	egg	(Luke
11:9–12)	and	then	concludes,	“If	you	then,	who	are	evil,	know	how	to	give
good	gifts	to	your	children,	how	much	more	will	the	heavenly	Father	give	the
Holy	Spirit	to	those	who	ask	him!”	(Luke	11:13).	As	children	look	to	their
fathers	to	provide	for	them,	so	God	expects	us	to	look	to	him	in	prayer.	Since
God	is	our	Father,	we	should	ask	in	faith.	Jesus	says,	“Whatever	you	ask	in
prayer,	you	will	receive,	if	you	have	faith”	(Matt.	21:22;	cf.	Mark	11:24;
James	1:6–8;	5:14–15).
But	God	does	not	only	want	us	to	trust	him.	He	also	wants	us	to	love	him	and
have	fellowship	with	him.	This,	then,	is	a	second	reason	why	God	wants	us	to
pray:	Prayer	brings	us	into	deeper	fellowship	with	God,	and	he	loves	us	and
delights	in	our	fellowship	with	him.
A	third	reason	God	wants	us	to	pray	is	that	in	prayer	God	allows	us	as
creatures	to	be	involved	in	activities	that	are	eternally	important.	When	we
pray,	the	work	of	the	kingdom	is	advanced.	In	this	way,	prayer	gives	us
opportunity	to	be	involved	in	a	significant	way	in	the	work	of	the	kingdom
and	thus	gives	expression	to	our	greatness	as	creatures	made	in	God’s	image.
B.	The	Effectiveness	of	Prayer
How	exactly	does	prayer	work?	Does	prayer	not	only	do	us	good	but	also
affect	God	and	the	world?
1.
	Prayer	Changes	the	Way	God	Acts.
	James	tells	us,	“You	do	not	have,
because	you	do	not	ask”	(James	4:2).	He	implies	that	failure	to	ask	deprives
us	of	what	God	would	otherwise	have	given	to	us.	We	pray,	and	God
responds.	Jesus	also	says,	“Ask,	and	it	will	be	given	you;	seek,	and	you	will
find;	knock,	and	it	will	be	opened	to	you.	For	every	one	who	asks	receives,
and	he	who	seeks	finds,	and	to	him	who	knocks	it	will	be	opened”	(Luke
11:9–10).	He	makes	a	clear	connection	between	seeking	things	from	God	and
receiving	them.	When	we	ask,	God	responds.
We	see	this	happening	many	times	in	the	Old	Testament.	The	Lord	declared	to
Moses	that	he	would	destroy	the	people	of	Israel	for	their	sin	(Ex.	32:9–10):
“But	Moses	besought	the	L
ORD
	his	God,	and	said,	‘O	Lord.	.	.	.	Turn	from
your	fierce	wrath,	and	repent	of	this	evil	against	your	people’	”	(Ex.	32:11–
12).	Then	we	read,	“And	the	L
ORD
	repented	of	the	evil	which	he	thought	to	do
to	his	people”	(Ex.	32:14).	When	God	threatens	to	punish	his	people	for	their
sins	he	declares,	“If	my	people	who	are	called	by	my	name	humble
themselves,	
and	pray	and	seek	my	face,	
and	turn	from	their	wicked	ways,	
then
I	will	hear	
from	heaven,	and	will	forgive	their	sin	and	heal	their	land”	(2
Chron.	7:14).	If	and	when	God’s	people	pray	(with	humility	and	repentance),
then	
he	will	hear	and	forgive	them.	The	prayers	of	his	people	clearly	affect
how	God	acts.	Similarly,	“If	we	confess	our	sins,	he	is	faithful	and	just,	and
will	forgive	our	sins	and	cleanse	us	from	all	unrighteousness”	(1	John	1:9).
We	confess,	and	then	he	forgives.
1
If	we	were	really	convinced	that	prayer	changes	the	way	God	acts,	and	that
God	does	bring	about	remarkable	changes	in	the	world	in	response	to	prayer,
as	Scripture	repeatedly	teaches	that	he	does,	then	we	would	pray	much	more
than	we	do.	If	we	pray	little,	it	is	probably	because	we	do	not	really	believe
that	prayer	accomplishes	much	at	all.
2.	Effective	Prayer	Is	Made	Possible	by	Our	Mediator,	Jesus	Christ.
Because	we	are	sinful	and	God	is	holy,	we	have	no	right	on	our	own	to	enter
into	his	presence.	We	need	a	mediator	to	come	between	us	and	God	and	to
bring	us	into	God’s	presence.	Scripture	clearly	teaches,	“There	is	one	God,
and	there	is	one	mediator	between	God	and	men,	the	man	Christ	Jesus”	(1
Tim.	2:5).
But	if	Jesus	is	the	only	mediator	between	God	and	man,	will	God	hear	the
prayers	of	those	who	do	not	trust	in	Jesus?	The	answer	depends	on	what	we
mean	by	“hear.”	Since	God	is	omniscient,	he	always	“hears”	in	the	sense	that
he	is	aware	of	the	prayers	made	by	unbelievers	who	do	not	come	to	him
through	Christ.	God	may	even,	from	time	to	time,	answer	their	prayers	out	of
his	mercy	and	in	a	desire	to	bring	them	to	salvation	through	Christ.	However,
God	has	nowhere	promised	to	respond	to	the	prayers	of	unbelievers.	The	only
prayers	that	he	has	promised	to	“hear”	in	the	sense	of	listening	with	a
sympathetic	ear	and	undertaking	to	answer	when	they	are	made	according	to
his	will,	are	the	prayers	of	Christians	offered	through	the	one	mediator,	Jesus
Christ	(cf.	John	14:6).
Then	what	about	believers	in	the	Old	Testament?	How	could	they	come	to
God	through	Jesus	the	mediator?	The	answer	is	that	the	work	of	Jesus	as	our
mediator	was	foreshadowed	by	the	sacrificial	system	and	the	offerings	made
by	the	priests	in	the	temple	(Heb.	7:23–28;	8:1–6;	9:1–14;	et	al.).	There	was
no	saving	merit	inherent	in	that	system	of	sacrifices	(Heb.	10:1–4),	however.
Through	the	sacrificial	system	believers	were	accepted	by	God	only	on	the
basis	of	the	future	work	of	Christ	foreshadowed	by	that	system	(Rom.	3:23–
26).
Jesus’	activity	as	a	mediator	is	especially	seen	in	his	work	as	a	priest:	he	is	our
“great	high	priest	who	has	passed	through	the	heavens,”	one	who	“in	every
respect	has	been	tempted	as	we	are,	yet	without	sin”	(Heb.	4:14–15).
As	recipients	of	the	new	covenant,	we	do	not	need	to	stay	“outside	the
temple,”	as	all	believers	except	the	priests	were	required	to	do	under	the	old
covenant.	Nor	do	we	need	to	stay	outside	of	the	“Holy	of	Holies”	(Heb.	9:3),
the	inner	room	of	the	temple	where	God	himself	was	enthroned	above	the	ark
of	the	covenant	and	where	only	the	high	priest	could	go,	and	he	but	once	a
year.	But	now,	since	Christ	has	died	as	our	mediational	High	Priest	(Heb.
7:26–27),	he	has	gained	for	us	boldness	and	access	to	the	very	presence	of
God.	Therefore	“we	have	confidence	to	enter	
into	the	holy	places	
by	the
blood	of	Jesus”	(Heb.	10:19,	author’s	literal	translation),	that	is,	into	the	holy
place	and	into	the	holy	of	holies,	the	very	presence	of	God	himself!	We	enter
“by	the	new	and	living	way”	(Heb.	10:20)	that	Christ	opened	for	us.	The
author	of	Hebrews	concludes	that	since	these	things	are	true,	“and	since	we
have	a	great	priest	over	the	house	of	God,	let	us	draw	near	with	a	true	heart	in
full	assurance	of	faith”	(Heb.	10:22).	In	this	way,	Christ’s	mediational	work
gives	us	confidence	to	approach	God	in	prayer.
We	do	not	just	come	into	God’s	presence	as	strangers,	or	as	visitors,	or	as
laypersons,	but	as	priests—as	people	who	belong	in	the	temple	and	have	a
right	and	even	a	duty	to	be	in	the	most	sacred	places	in	the	temple.	Using
imagery	from	the	ceremony	for	ordination	of	priests	(see	Ex.	29:4,	21),	the
author	of	Hebrews	pictures	all	believers	as	having	been	ordained	as	priests	to
God	and	thus	able	to	enter	into	his	presence,	for	he	says	that	we	draw	near
“with	our	hearts	sprinkled	clean	from	an	evil	conscience	and	our	bodies
washed	with	pure	water”	(Heb.	10:22;	cf.	1	Peter	2:9).	Does	all	this	make
sense	to	a	modern	Christian?	No	one	today	goes	to	Jerusalem	to	enter	the
temple	and	there	“draw	near”	to	God.	Even	if	we	did	go	to	Jerusalem,	we
would	find	no	temple	standing,	since	it	was	destroyed	in	A.D.	70.	What	then
does	the	author	of	Hebrews	mean	when	he	says	we	enter	into	the	“holy
places”?	He	is	talking	about	a	reality	in	the	unseen	spiritual	realm:	With
Christ	as	our	Mediator	we	enter	not	into	the	earthly	temple	in	Jerusalem,	but
into	the	true	sanctuary,	into	“heaven	itself,”	where	Christ	has	gone	“to	appear
in	the	presence	of	God	on	our	behalf	”	(Heb.	9:24).
3.	What	Is	Praying	“in	Jesus’	Name”?
	Jesus	says,	“Whatever	you	ask	
in	my
name,	
I	will	do	it,	that	the	Father	may	be	glorified	in	the	Son;	if	you	ask
anything	in	my	name,	I	will	do	it”	(John	14:13–14).	He	also	says	that	he
chose	his	disciples	“so	that	whatever	you	ask	the	Father	
in	my	name,	
he	may
give	it	to	you”	(John	15:16).	Similarly,	he	says,	“Truly,	truly,	I	say	to	you,	if
you	ask	anything	of	the	Father,	he	will	give	it	to	you	in	my	name.	Hitherto
you	have	asked	nothing	
in	my	name;	
ask,	and	you	will	receive,	that	your	joy
may	be	full”	(John	16:23–24;	cf.	Eph.	5:20).	But	what	does	this	mean?
Clearly	it	does	not	simply	mean	adding	the	phrase	“in	Jesus’	name”	after
every	prayer,	because	Jesus	did	not	say,	“If	you	ask	anything	and	add	the
words	‘in	Jesus’	name’	after	your	prayer,	I	will	do	it.”	Jesus	is	not	merely
speaking	about	adding	certain	words	as	if	these	were	a	kind	of	magical
formula	that	would	give	power	to	our	prayers.	In	fact,	none	of	the	prayers
recorded	in	Scripture	have	the	phrase	“in	Jesus’	name”	at	the	end	of	them	(see
Matt.	6:9–13;	Acts	1:24–25;	4:24–30;
2
	7:59;	9:13–14;	10:14;	Rev.	6:10;
22:20).
To	come	in	the	name	of	someone	means	that	another	person	has	authorized	us
to	come	on	his	authority,	not	on	our	own.	When	Peter	commands	the	lame
man,	“in	the	name	of	Jesus	Christ	of	Nazareth,	walk”	(Acts	3:6),	he	is
speaking	on	the	authority	of	Jesus,	not	on	his	own	authority.	When	the
Sanhedrin	asks	the	disciples,	“By	what	power	or	
by	what	name	
did	you	do
this?”	(Acts	4:7),	they	are	asking,	“By	whose	authority	did	you	do	this?”
When	Paul	rebukes	an	unclean	spirit	“in	the	name	of	Jesus	Christ”	(Acts
16:18),	he	makes	it	clear	that	he	is	doing	so	on	Jesus’	authority,	not	his	own.
When	Paul	pronounces	judgment	“in	the	name	of	the	Lord	Jesus”	(1	Cor.	5:4)
on	a	church	member	who	is	guilty	of	immorality,	he	is	acting	with	the
authority	of	the	Lord	Jesus.	
Praying	in	Jesus’	name	is	therefore	prayer	made
on	his	authorization.
In	a	broader	sense	the	“name”	of	a	person	in	the	ancient	world	represented	the
person	himself	and	therefore	all	of	his	character.	To	have	a	“good	name”
(Prov.	22:1;	Eccl.	7:1)	was	to	have	a	good	reputation.	Thus,	the	name	of	Jesus
represents	all	that	he	is,	his	entire	character.	This	means	that	praying	“in
Jesus’	name”	is	not	only	praying	in	his	authority,	but	
also	praying	in	a	way
that	is	consistent	with	his	character,	
that	truly	represents	him	and	reflects	his
manner	of	life	and	his	own	holy	will.
3
	In	this	sense,	to	pray	in	Jesus’	name
comes	close	to	the	idea	of	praying	“according	to	his	will”	(1	John	5:14–15).
4
Does	this	mean	that	it	is	wrong	to	add	“in	Jesus’	name”	to	the	end	of	our
prayers?	It	is	certainly	not	wrong,	as	long	as	we	understand	what	is	meant	by
it,	and	that	it	is	not	necessary	to	do	so.	There	may	be	some	danger,	however,	if
we	add	this	phrase	to	every	public	or	private	prayer	we	make,	for	very	soon	it
will	become	to	people	simply	a	formula	to	which	they	attach	very	little
meaning	and	say	without	thinking	about	it.	It	may	even	begin	to	be	viewed,	at
least	by	younger	believers,	as	a	sort	of	magic	formula	that	makes	prayer	more
effective.	To	prevent	such	misunderstanding,	it	would	probably	be	wise	to
decide	not	to	use	the	formula	frequently	and	to	express	the	same	thought	in
other	words,	or	simply	in	the	overall	attitude	and	approach	we	take	toward
prayer.	For	example,	prayers	could	begin,	“Father,	we	come	to	you	in	the
authority	of	our	Lord	Jesus,	your	Son	.	.	.”	or,	“Father,	we	do	not	come	on	our
own	merits	but	on	the	merits	of	Jesus	Christ,	who	has	invited	us	to	come
before	you	.	.	.”	or,	“Father,	we	thank	you	for	forgiving	our	sins	and	giving	us
access	to	your	throne	by	the	work	of	Jesus	your	Son.	.	.	.”	At	other	times	even
these	formal	acknowledgments	should	not	be	thought	necessary,	so	long	as
our	hearts	continually	realize	that	it	is	our	Savior	who	enables	us	to	pray	to
the	Father	at	all.	Genuine	prayer	is	conversation	with	a	Person	whom	we
know	well,	and	who	knows	us.	Such	genuine	conversation	between	persons
who	know	each	other	never	depends	on	the	use	of	certain	formulas	or
required	words,	but	is	a	matter	of	sincerity	in	our	speech	and	in	our	heart,	a
matter	of	right	attitudes,	and	a	matter	of	the	condition	of	our	spirit.
4.	Should	We	Pray	to	Jesus	and	to	the	Holy	Spirit?
	A	survey	of	the	prayers
of	the	New	Testament	indicates	that	they	are	usually	addressed	neither	to	God
the	Son	nor	to	the	Holy	Spirit,	but	to	God	the	Father.	Yet	a	mere	count	of	such
prayers	may	be	misleading,	for	the	majority	of	the	prayers	we	have	recorded
in	the	New	Testament	are	those	of	Jesus	himself,	who	constantly	prayed	to
God	the	Father,	but	of	course	did	not	pray	to	himself	as	God	the	Son.
Moreover,	in	the	Old	Testament,	the	trinitarian	nature	of	God	was	not	so
clearly	revealed,	and	it	is	not	surprising	that	we	do	not	find	much	evidence	of
prayer	addressed	directly	to	God	the	Son	or	God	the	Holy	Spirit	before	the
time	of	Christ.
Though	there	is	a	clear	pattern	of	prayer	directly	to	God	the	Father	through
the	Son	(Matt.	6:9;	John	16:23;	Eph.	5:20)	there	are	indications	that	prayer
spoken	directly	to	Jesus	is	also	appropriate.	The	fact	that	it	was	Jesus	himself
who	appointed	all	of	the	other	apostles,	suggests	that	the	prayer	in	Acts	1:24
is	addressed	to	him:	“Lord,	who	knows	the	hearts	of	all	men,	show	which	one
of	these	two	you	have	chosen.	.	.	.”	The	dying	Stephen	prays,	“Lord	Jesus,
receive	my	spirit”	(Acts	7:59).	The	conversation	between	Ananias	and	“the
Lord”	in	Acts	9:10–16	is	with	Jesus,	because	in	verse	17	Ananias	tells	Saul,
“The	Lord	Jesus	.	.	.	has	sent	me	that	you	may	regain	your	sight.”	The	prayer,
“Our	Lord,	come!”	(1	Cor.	16:22)	is	addressed	to	Jesus,	as	is	the	prayer	in
Revelation	22:20,	“Come,	Lord	Jesus!”	And	Paul	also	prayed	to	“the	Lord”	in
2	Corinthians	12:8	concerning	his	thorn	in	the	flesh.
5
Moreover,	the	fact	that	Jesus	is	“a	merciful	and	faithful	high	priest”	(Heb.
2:17)	who	is	able	to	“sympathize	with	our	weaknesses”	(Heb.	4:15),	is	viewed
as	an	encouragement	to	us	to	come	boldly	before	the	“throne	of	grace”	in
prayer	“that	we	may	receive	mercy	and	find	grace	to	help	in	time	of	need”
(Heb.	4:16).	These	verses	must	give	us	encouragement	to	come	directly	to
Jesus	in	prayer,	expecting	that	he	will	sympathize	with	our	weaknesses	as	we
pray.
There	is	therefore	clear	enough	scriptural	warrant	to	encourage	us	to	pray	not
only	to	God	the	Father	(which	seems	to	be	the	primary	pattern,	and	certainly
follows	the	example	that	Jesus	taught	us	in	the	Lord’s	Prayer),	but	also	to	pray
directly	to	God	the	Son,	our	Lord	Jesus	Christ.	Both	are	correct,	and	we	may
pray	either	to	the	Father	or	to	the	Son.
But	should	we	pray	to	the	Holy	Spirit?	Though	no	prayers	directly	addressed
to	the	Holy	Spirit	are	recorded	in	the	New	Testament,	there	is	nothing	that
would	forbid	such	prayer,	for	the	Holy	Spirit,	like	the	Father	and	the	Son,	is
fully	God	and	is	worthy	of	prayer	and	is	powerful	to	answer	our	prayers.
(Note	also	Ezekiel’s	invitation	to	the	“breath”	or	“spirit”	in	Ezek.	37:9.)	To
say	that	we	cannot	pray	to	the	Holy	Spirit	is	really	saying	that	we	cannot	talk
to	him	or	relate	to	him	personally,	which	hardly	seems	right.	He	also	relates	to
us	in	a	personal	way	since	he	is	a	“Comforter”	or	“Counselor”	(John	14:16,
26),	believers	“know	him”	(John	14:17),	and	he	teaches	us	(cf.	John	14:26),
bears	witness	to	us	that	we	are	children	of	God	(Rom.	8:16),	and	can	be
grieved	by	our	sin	(Eph.	4:30).	Moreover,	the	Holy	Spirit	exercises	personal
volition	in	the	distribution	of	spiritual	gifts,	for	he	“continually	distributes	to
each	one	individually	to	each	one	as	he	wills”	(1	Cor.	12:11,	author’s
translation).	Therefore,	it	does	not	seem	wrong	to	pray	directly	to	the	Holy
Spirit	at	times,	particularly	when	we	are	asking	him	to	do	something	that
relates	to	his	special	areas	of	ministry	or	responsibility.
6
	In	fact,	through	the
history	of	the	church	several	well-used	hymns	have	been	prayers	to	the	Holy
Spirit	(see	two	at	the	end	of	
chapter	30
,	one	at	
chapter	52
,	and	one	at	
chapter
53
).	But	this	is	not	the	New	Testament	pattern,	and	it	should	not	become	the
dominant	emphasis	in	our	prayer	life.
5.	The	Role	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in	Our	Praying.
	In	Romans	8:26–27	Paul
says:
Likewise	the	Spirit	helps	us	in	our	weakness;	for	we	do	not	know	how
to	pray	as	we	ought,	but	the	Spirit	himself	intercedes	for	us	with	sighs
too	deep	for	words.	And	he	who	searches	the	hearts	of	men	knows
what	is	the	mind	of	the	Spirit,	because	the	Spirit	intercedes	for	the
saints	according	to	the	will	of	God.
Interpreters	differ	on	whether	the	“sighs	too	deep	for	words”	are	the	sighs	the
Holy	Spirit	himself	makes	or	our	own	sighs	and	groans	in	prayer,	which	the
Holy	Spirit	makes	into	effective	prayer	before	God.	It	seems	more	likely	that
the	“sighs”	or	“groans”	here	are	our	groans.	When	Paul	says,	“The	Spirit
helps	us	in	our	weakness”	(v.	
26),	the	word	translated	“helps”	(Gk.
sunantilambanomai
)	is	the	same	word	used	in	Luke	10:40,	where	Martha
wants	Mary	to	come	and	
help	
her.	The	word	does	not	indicate	that	the	Holy
Spirit	prays	instead	of	us,	but	that	the	Holy	Spirit	takes	part	with	us	and
makes	our	weak	prayers	effective.
7
	Thus,	such	sighing	or	groaning	in	prayer
is	best	understood	to	be	sighs	or	groans	which	we	utter,	expressing	the	desires
of	our	heart	and	spirit,	which	the	Holy	Spirit	then	makes	into	effective
prayer.
8
Related	to	this	is	the	question	of	what	it	means	to	pray	“in	the	Spirit.”	Paul
says,	“Pray	at	all	times	in	the	Spirit,	with	all	prayer	and	supplication”	(Eph.
6:18),	and	Jude	says,	“pray	in	the	Holy	Spirit”	(Jude	20).
9
	In	order	to
understand	this	phrase,	we	should	realize	that	the	New	Testament	tells	us	that
many	different	activities	can	be	done	“in	the	Holy	Spirit.”	It	is	possible	just	to
be	“in	the	Spirit”	as	John	was	on	the	Lord’s	day	(Rev.	1:10;	cf.	4:2).	And	it	is
possible	to	rejoice	in	the	Holy	Spirit	(Luke	10:21),	to	resolve	or	decide
something	in	the	Holy	Spirit	(Acts	19:21),	to	have	one’s	conscience	bear
witness	in	the	Holy	Spirit	(Rom.	9:1),	to	have	access	to	God	in	the	Holy	Spirit
(Eph.	2:18),	and	to	love	in	the	Holy	Spirit	(Col.	1:8).	As	we	will	explain	more
fully	in	
chapter	30
	below,	these	expressions	seem	to	refer	to	dwelling
consciously	in	the	presence	of	the	Holy	Spirit	himself,	a	presence
characterized	by	the	Godlike	qualities	of	power,	love,	joy,	truth,	holiness,
righteousness,	and	peace.	To	pray	“in	the	Holy	Spirit,”	then,	is	to	pray	with
the	conscious	awareness	of	God’s	presence	surrounding	us	and	sanctifying
both	us	and	our	prayers.
C.	Some	Important	Considerations	in	Effective	Prayer
Scripture	indicates	a	number	of	considerations	that	need	to	be	taken	into
account	if	we	would	offer	the	kind	of	prayer	that	God	desires	from	us.
1.
	Praying	According	to	God’s	Will.
	John	tells	us,	“This	is	the	confidence
which	we	have	in	him,	that	if	we	ask	anything	according	to	his	will	he	hears
us.	And	if	we	know	that	he	hears	us	in	whatever	we	ask,	we	know	that	we
have	obtained	the	requests	made	of	him”	(1	John	5:14–15).	Jesus	teaches	us
to	pray,	“Your	will	be	done”	(Matt.	6:10),	and	he	himself	gives	us	an	example,
by	praying	in	the	garden	of	Gethsemane,	“Nevertheless,	not	as	I	will,	but	as
you	will”	(Matt.	26:39).
But	how	do	we	know	what	God’s	will	is	when	we	pray?	If	the	matter	we	are
praying	about	is	covered	in	a	passage	of	Scripture	in	which	God	gives	us	a
command	or	a	direct	declaration	of	his	will,	then	the	answer	to	this	question	is
easy:	His	will	is	that	his	Word	be	obeyed	and	that	his	commands	be	kept.	We
are	to	seek	for	perfect	obedience	to	God’s	moral	will	on	earth	so	that	God’s
will	may	be	done	“on	earth	as	it	is	in	heaven”	(Matt.	6:10).	For	this	reason
knowledge	of	Scripture	is	a	tremendous	help	in	prayer,	enabling	us	to	follow
the	pattern	of	the	first	Christians	who	quoted	Scripture	when	they	prayed	(see
Acts	4:25–26).	The	regular	reading	and	memorization	of	Scripture,	cultivated
over	many	years	of	a	Christian’s	life,	will	increase	the	depth,	power,	and
wisdom	of	his	or	her	prayers.	Jesus	encourages	us	to	have	his	words	within	us
as	we	pray,	for	he	says,	“If	you	abide	in	me,	
and	my	words	abide	in	you,	
ask
whatever	you	will,	and	it	shall	be	done	for	you”	(John	15:7).
This	means,	for	example,	that	if	we	are	seeking	wisdom	in	the	making	of	an
important	decision,	we	do	not	have	to	wonder	whether	it	is	God’s	will	that	we
receive	wisdom	to	act	rightly.	Scripture	has	already	settled	that	question	for
us,	because	there	is	a	promise	of	Scripture	that	applies:
If	any	of	you	lacks	wisdom,	let	him	ask	God,	who	gives	to	all	men
generously	and	without	reproaching,	and	it	will	be	given	him.	But	let
him	ask	in	faith,	with	no	doubting,	for	he	who	doubts	is	like	a	wave	of
the	sea	that	is	driven	and	tossed	by	the	wind.	For	that	person	must	not
suppose	that	a	double-minded	man,	unstable	in	all	his	ways,	will
receive	anything	from	the	Lord.	(James	1:5–8)
We	should	have	great	confidence	that	God	will	answer	our	prayer	when	we
ask	him	for	something	that	accords	with	a	specific	promise	or	command	of
Scripture	like	this.	In	such	cases,	we	know	what	God’s	will	is,	because	he	has
told	us,	and	we	simply	need	to	pray	believing	that	he	will	answer.
However,	there	are	many	other	situations	in	life	where	we	do	not	know	what
God’s	will	is.	We	may	not	be	sure,	because	no	promise	or	command	of
Scripture	applies,	whether	it	is	God’s	will	that	we	get	the	job	we	have	applied
for,	or	win	an	athletic	contest	in	which	we	are	participating	(a	common	prayer
among	children,	especially),	or	be	chosen	to	hold	office	in	the	church,	and	so
on.	In	all	of	these	cases,	we	should	bring	to	bear	as	much	of	Scripture	as	we
understand,	perhaps	to	give	us	some	general	principles	within	which	our
prayer	can	be	made.	But	beyond	this,	we	often	must	admit	that	we	simply	do
not	know	what	God’s	will	is.	In	such	cases,	we	should	ask	him	for	deeper
understanding	and	then	pray	for	what	seems	best	to	us,	giving	reasons	to	the
Lord	why,	in	our	present	understanding	of	the	situation,	what	we	are	praying
for	seems	to	be	best.	But	it	is	always	right	to	add,	either	explicitly	or	at	least
in	the	attitude	of	our	heart,	“Nevertheless,	if	I	am	wrong	in	asking	this,	and	if
this	is	not	pleasing	to	you,	then	do	as	seems	best	in	your	sight,”	or,	more
simply,	“If	it	is	your	will.”	Sometimes	God	will	grant	what	we	have	asked.
Sometimes	he	will	give	us	deeper	understanding	or	change	our	hearts	so	that
we	are	led	to	ask	something	differently.	Sometimes	he	will	not	grant	our
request	at	all	but	will	simply	indicate	to	us	that	we	must	submit	to	his	will
(see	2	Cor.	12:9–10).
Some	Christians	object	that	to	add	the	phrase	“if	it	is	your	will”	to	our	prayers
“destroys	our	faith.”	What	it	actually	does	is	express	uncertainty	about
whether	what	we	pray	for	is	God’s	will	or	not.	And	it	is	appropriate	when	we
do	not	really	know	what	God’s	will	is.	But	at	other	times	this	would	not	be
appropriate:	to	ask	God	to	give	us	wisdom	to	make	a	decision	and	then	say,
“If	it	is	your	will	to	give	me	wisdom	here”	would	be	inappropriate,	for	it
would	be	saying	that	we	do	not	believe	God	meant	what	he	said	in	James	1:5–
8	when	he	told	us	to	ask	in	faith	and	he	would	grant	this	request.
10
Even	when	a	command	or	promise	of	Scripture	applies,	there	may	be	nuances
of	application	that	we	do	not	at	first	fully	understand.	Therefore	it	is
important	in	our	prayer	that	we	not	only	talk	to	God	but	also	listen	to	him.	We
should	frequently	bring	a	request	to	God	and	then	wait	silently	before	him.	In
those	times	of	waiting	on	the	Lord	(Pss.	27:14;	38:15;	130:5–6),	God	may
change	the	desires	of	our	heart,	give	us	additional	insight	into	the	situation	we
are	praying	about,	grant	us	additional	insight	into	his	Word,	bring	a	passage	of
Scripture	to	mind	that	would	enable	us	to	pray	more	effectively,	impart	a
sense	of	assurance	of	what	his	will	is,	or	greatly	increase	our	faith	so	that	we
are	able	to	pray	with	much	more	confidence.
2.	Praying	With	Faith.
	Jesus	says,	“Therefore	I	tell	you,	whatever	you	ask	in
prayer,	believe	that	you	have	received	it,	and	it	will	be	yours”	(Mark	11:24).
Some	translations	vary,	but	the	Greek	text	actually	says,	“believe	that	you
have	received	it.”	
Later	scribes	who	copied	the	Greek	manuscripts	and	some
later	commentators	have	taken	it	to	mean	“believe	that	you	
will	
receive	it.”
However,	if	we	accept	the	text	as	it	is	in	the	earliest	and	best	manuscripts
(“believe	that	you	have	received	it”),	Jesus	is	apparently	saying	that	when	we
ask	for	something,	the	kind	of	faith	that	will	bring	results	is	a	settled
assurance	that	when	we	prayed	for	something	(or	perhaps	after	we	had	been
praying	over	a	period	of	time),	God	agreed	to	grant	our	specific	request.	In
the	personal	communion	with	God	that	occurs	in	genuine	prayer,	this	kind	of
faith	on	our	part	could	only	come	
as	God	gives	us	a	sense	of	assurance	that
he	has	agreed	to	grant	our	request.	
Of	course,	we	cannot	“work	up”	this	kind
of	genuine	faith	by	any	sort	of	frenzied	prayer	or	great	emotional	effort	to	try
to	make	ourselves	believe,	nor	can	we	force	it	upon	ourselves	by	saying
words	we	don’t	think	to	be	true.	This	is	something	that	only	God	can	give	us,
and	that	he	may	or	may	not	give	us	each	time	we	pray.	This	assured	faith	will
often	come	when	we	ask	God	for	something	and	then	quietly	wait	before	him
for	an	answer.
In	fact,	Hebrews	11:1	tells	us	that	“faith	is	the	
assurance	
of	things	hoped	for,
the	conviction	of	things	not	seen.”	Biblical	faith	is	never	a	kind	of	wishful
thinking	or	a	vague	hope	that	does	not	have	any	secure	foundation	to	rest
upon.	It	is	rather	trust	in	a	person,	God	himself,	based	on	the	fact	that	we	take
him	at	his	word	and	believe	what	he	has	said.	This	trust	or	dependence	on
God,	when	it	has	an	element	of	assurance	or	confidence,	is	genuine	biblical
faith.
Several	other	passages	encourage	us	to	exercise	faith	when	we	pray.
“Whatever	you	ask	in	prayer,	you	will	receive,	if	you	have	faith,”	Jesus
teaches	his	disciples	(Matt.	21:22).	And	James	tells	us	we	are	to	“ask	in	faith,
with	no	doubting”	(James	1:6).	Prayer	is	never	wishful	thinking,	for	it	springs
from	trust	in	a	personal	God	who	wants	us	to	take	him	at	his	word.
3.	Obedience.
	Since	prayer	is	a	relationship	with	God	as	a	person,	anything	in
our	lives	that	displeases	him	will	be	a	hindrance	to	prayer.	The	psalmist	says,
“If	I	had	cherished	iniquity	in	my	heart,	the	Lord	would	not	have	listened”
(Ps.	66:18).	Though	“The	sacrifice	of	the	wicked	is	an	abomination	to	the
L
ORD
,”	by	contrast,	“the	prayer	of	the	upright	is	his	delight”	(Prov.	15:8).
Again	we	read	that	“the	L
ORD
	.	.	.	hears	the	prayer	of	the	righteous”	(Prov.
15:29).	But	God	is	not	favorably	disposed	to	those	who	reject	his	laws:	“If
one	turns	away	his	ear	from	hearing	the	law,	even	his	prayer	is	an
abomination”	(Prov.	28:9).
The	apostle	Peter	quotes	Psalm	34	to	affirm	that	“the	eyes	of	the	Lord	are
upon	the	righteous,	and	his	ears	are	open	to	their	prayer”	(1	Peter	3:12).	Since
the	previous	verses	encourage	good	conduct	in	everyday	life,	in	speaking	and
turning	away	from	evil	and	doing	right,	Peter	is	saying	that	God	readily	hears
the	prayers	of	those	who	live	lives	of	obedience	to	him.	Similarly,	Peter	warns
husbands	to	“live	considerately”	with	their	wives,	“in	order	that	your	prayers
may	not	be	hindered”	(1	Peter	3:7).	Likewise,	John	reminds	us	of	the	need	for
a	clear	conscience	before	God	when	we	pray,	for	he	says,	“If	our	hearts	do	not
condemn	us,	we	have	confidence	before	God;	and	we	receive	from	him
whatever	we	ask,	because	we	keep	his	commandments	and	do	what	pleases
him”	(1	John	3:21–22).
Now	this	teaching	must	not	be	misunderstood.	We	do	not	need	to	be	freed
from	sin	completely	before	God	can	be	expected	to	answer	our	prayers.	If
God	only	answered	the	prayers	of	sinless	people,	then	no	one	in	the	whole
Bible	except	Jesus	would	have	had	his	or	her	prayers	answered.	When	we
come	before	God	through	his	grace,	we	come	cleansed	by	the	blood	of	Christ
(Rom.	3:25;	5:9;	Eph.	2:13;	Heb.	9:14;	1	Peter	1:2).	Yet	we	must	not	neglect
the	biblical	emphasis	on	personal	holiness	of	life.	Prayer	and	holy	living	go
together.	There	is	much	grace	in	the	Christian	life,	but	growth	in	personal
holiness	is	also	a	route	to	much	greater	blessing,	and	that	is	true	with	respect
to	prayer	as	well.	The	passages	quoted	teach	that,	all	other	things	being	equal,
more	exact	obedience	will	lead	to	increased	effectiveness	in	prayer	(cf.	Heb.
12:14;	James	4:3–4).
4.	Confession	of	Sins.
	Because	our	obedience	to	God	is	never	perfect	in	this
life,	we	continually	depend	on	his	forgiveness	for	our	sins.	Confession	of	sins
is	necessary	in	order	for	God	to	“forgive	us”	in	the	sense	of	restoring	his	day-
by-day	relationship	with	us	(see	Matt.	6:12;	1	John	1:9).	It	is	good	when	we
pray	to	confess	all	known	sin	to	the	Lord	and	to	ask	for	his	forgiveness.
Sometimes	when	we	wait	on	him,	he	will	bring	other	sins	to	mind	that	we
need	to	confess.	With	respect	to	those	sins	that	we	do	not	remember	or	are
unaware	of,	it	is	appropriate	to	pray	the	general	prayer	of	David,	“Clear	me
from	hidden	faults”	(Ps.	19:12).
Sometimes	confessing	our	sins	to	other	trusted	Christians	will	bring	an
assurance	of	forgiveness	and	encouragement	to	overcome	sin	as	well.	James
relates	mutual	confession	to	prayer,	for	in	a	passage	discussing	powerful
prayer,	James	encourages	us,	“Therefore	
confess	your	sins	to	one	another,	
and
pray	for	one	another,	that	you	may	be	healed”	(James	5:16).
5.	Forgiving	Others.
	Jesus	says,	“If	you	forgive	men	their	trespasses,	your
heavenly	Father	also	will	forgive	you;	but	if	you	do	not	forgive	men	their
trespasses,	neither	will	your	Father	forgive	your	trespasses”	(Matt.	6:14–15).
Similarly,	Jesus	says,	“Whenever	you	stand	praying,	forgive,	if	you	have
anything	against	any	one;	so	that	your	Father	also	who	is	in	heaven	may
forgive	you	your	trespasses”	(Mark	11:25).	Our	Lord	does	not	have	in	mind
the	initial	experience	of	forgiveness	we	know	when	we	are	justified	by	faith,
for	that	would	not	belong	in	a	prayer	that	we	pray	every	day	(see	Matt.	6:12
with	vv.	14–15).	He	refers	rather	to	the	
day-by-day	relationship	with	God	
that
we	need	to	have	restored	when	we	have	sinned	and	displeased	him.	In	fact,
Jesus	commands	us	to	build	into	our	prayers	a	request	that	God	forgive	us	in
the	same	way	that	we	have	forgiven	others	who	have	harmed	us	(in	the	same
“personal	relationship”	sense	of	“forgive”—that	is,	not	holding	a	grudge	or
cherishing	bitterness	against	another	person	or	harboring	any	desire	to	harm
them):	“Forgive	us	our	sins,	
as	we	also	have	forgiven	those	who	sin	against
us”	
(Matt.	6:12,	author’s	translation).	If	there	are	those	whom	we	have	not
forgiven	when	we	pray	this	prayer,	then	we	are	asking	God	not	to	restore	a
right	relationship	with	us	after	we	sin,	in	just	the	same	way	as	we	have
refused	to	do	so	with	others.
Since	prayer	presumes	a	relationship	with	God	as	a	person,	this	is	not
surprising.	If	we	have	sinned	against	him	and	grieved	the	Holy	Spirit	(cf.	Eph.
4:30),	and	the	sin	has	not	been	forgiven,	it	interrupts	our	relationship	with
God	(cf.	Isa.	59:1–2).	Until	sin	is	forgiven	and	the	relationship	is	restored
prayer	will,	of	course,	be	difficult.	Moreover,	if	we	have	unforgiveness	in	our
hearts	against	someone	else,	then	we	are	not	acting	in	a	way	that	is	pleasing	to
God	or	helpful	to	us.	So	God	declares	(Matt.	6:12,	14–15)	that	he	will
distance	himself	from	us	until	we	forgive	others.
6.	Humility.
	James	tells	us	that	“God	opposes	the	proud,	but	gives	grace	to
the	humble”	(James	4:6;	also	1	Peter	5:5).	Therefore	he	says,	“Humble
yourselves	before	the	Lord	and	he	will	exalt	you”	(James	4:10).	Humility	is
thus	the	right	attitude	to	have	in	praying	to	God,	whereas	pride	is	altogether
inappropriate.
Jesus’	parable	about	the	Pharisee	and	the	tax	collector	illustrates	this.	When
the	Pharisee	stood	to	pray,	he	was	boastful:	“God,	I	thank	you	that	I	am	not
like	other	men,	extortioners,	unjust,	adulterers,	or	even	like	this	tax	collector.	I
fast	twice	a	week,	I	give	tithes	of	all	that	I	get”	(Luke	18:11–12).	By	contrast,
the	humble	tax	collector	“would	not	even	lift	up	his	eyes	to	heaven,	but	beat
his	breast,	saying,	‘God,	be	merciful	to	me	a	sinner!’	”	(Luke	18:13).	Jesus
said	that	he	“went	down	to	his	house	justified,”	rather	than	the	Pharisee,	“for
every	one	who	exalts	himself	will	be	humbled,	but	he	who	humbles	himself
will	be	exalted”	(Luke	18:14).	This	is	why	Jesus	condemned	those	who	“for	a
pretense	make	long	prayers”	(Luke	20:47)	and	those	hypocrites	who	“love	to
stand	and	pray	in	the	synagogues	and	at	the	street	corners,	that	they	may	be
seen	by	men”	(Matt.	6:5).
God	is	rightly	jealous	for	his	own	honor.
11
	Therefore	he	is	not	pleased	to
answer	the	prayers	of	the	proud	who	take	honor	to	themselves	rather	than
giving	it	to	him.	True	humility	before	God,	which	will	also	be	reflected	in
genuine	humility	before	others,	is	necessary	for	effective	prayer.
7.	Continuing	in	Prayer	Over	Time.
	Just	as	Moses	twice	stayed	on	the
mountain	forty	days	before	God	for	the	people	of	Israel	(Deut.	9:25–26;
10:10–11),	and	just	as	Jacob	said	to	God,	“I	will	not	let	you	go,	unless	you
bless	me”	(Gen.	32:26),	so	we	see	in	Jesus’	life	a	pattern	of	much	time	given
to	prayer.	When	great	multitudes	were	following	him,	“he	himself	was	often
withdrawing	into	the	wilderness	regions	and	praying”	(Luke	5:16,	author’s
translation).
12
	At	another	time,	“
all	night	
he	continued	in	prayer	to	God”
(Luke	6:12).
Sometimes,	as	in	the	case	of	Moses	and	Jacob,	prayer	over	a	long	period	of
time	may	be	prayer	for	one	specific	item	(cf.	Luke	18:1–8).	When	we	are
earnestly	seeking	God	for	an	answer	to	a	specific	prayer,	we	may	in	fact
repeat	the	same	request	several	times.	Paul	asked	the	Lord	“three	times”	(2
Cor.	12:8)	that	his	thorn	in	the	flesh	would	be	taken	from	him.	Jesus	himself,
when	he	was	in	the	garden	of	Gethsemane,	asked	the	Father,	“Remove	this
cup	from	me;	yet	not	what	I	will,	but	what	you	will”	(Mark	14:36).	Then	after
he	came	and	found	the	disciples	sleeping,	Jesus	prayed	again,	making	the
same	request	in	the	same	words:	“And	again	he	went	away	and	prayed,	
saying
the	same	words”	
(Mark	14:39).	These	are	instances	of	earnest	repetition	in
prayer	for	a	deeply	felt	need.	They	are	not	examples	of	what	Jesus	forbids—
the	heaping	up	of	“empty	phrases”	in	the	mistaken	belief	that	“many	words”
will	earn	a	hearing	(Matt.	6:7).
There	is	also	an	element	of	a	continual	fellowship	with	God	in	praying	over
time.	Paul	calls	on	us	to	“pray	constantly”	(1	Thess.	5:17),	and	he	encourages
the	Colossians	to	“continue	steadfastly	in	prayer,	being	watchful	in	it	with
thanksgiving”	(Col.	4:2).	Such	continual	devotion	to	prayer	even	while	about
daily	duties	should	characterize	the	life	of	every	believer.	The	apostles	are	a
telling	example.	They	freed	themselves	from	other	responsibilities	in	order	to
give	more	time	to	prayer:	“But	
we	will	devote	ourselves	to	prayer	
and	to	the
ministry	of	the	word”	(Acts	6:4).
8.	Praying	Earnestly.
	Jesus	himself,	who	is	our	model	for	prayer,	prayed
earnestly.	“In	the	days	of	his	flesh,	Jesus	offered	up	prayers	and	supplications,
with	loud	cries	and	tears,	to	him	who	was	able	to	save	him	from	death,	and	he
was	heard	for	his	godly	fear”	(Heb.	5:7).	In	some	of	the	prayers	of	Scripture,
we	can	almost	hear	the	great	intensity	with	which	the	saints	pour	out	their
hearts	before	God.	Daniel	cries	out,	“O	L
ORD
,	hear!	O	L
ORD
,	forgive!	O
L
ORD
,	listen	and	take	action!	For	Thine	own	sake,	O	my	God,	do	not	delay,
because	Thy	city	and	Thy	people	are	called	by	Thy	name”	(Dan.	9:19	NASB).
When	God	shows	Amos	the	judgment	that	he	is	going	to	bring	on	his	people,
Amos	pleads,	“O	Lord	GOD,	forgive,	I	beseech	you!	How	can	Jacob	stand?
He	is	so	small!”	(Amos	7:2).
In	personal	relationships,	if	we	attempt	to	fake	emotional	intensity	and	put	on
an	outward	show	of	emotion	that	is	not	consistent	with	the	feelings	of	our
hearts,	others	involved	will	usually	sense	our	hypocrisy	at	once	and	be	put	off
by	it.	How	much	more	is	this	true	of	God,	who	fully	knows	our	hearts.
Therefore,	intensity	and	depth	of	emotional	involvement	in	prayer	should
never	be	faked:	we	cannot	fool	God.	Yet,	if	we	truly	begin	to	see	situations	as
God	sees	them,	if	we	begin	to	see	the	needs	of	a	hurting	and	dying	world	as
they	really	are,	then	it	will	be	natural	to	pray	with	intense	emotional
involvement	and	to	expect	God,	as	a	merciful	Father,	to	respond	to	heartfelt
prayer.	And	where	such	intensely	felt	prayer	finds	expression	in	group	prayer
meetings,	Christians	should	certainly	accept	and	be	thankful	for	it,	for	it	often
indicates	a	deep	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in	the	heart	of	the	person	praying.
9.	Waiting	on	the	Lord.
	After	crying	out	to	God	for	help	in	distress,	David
says,	“Wait	for	the	L
ORD
;	be	strong,	and	let	your	heart	take	courage;	yea,	wait
for	the	L
ORD
!”	(Ps.	27:14).	Similarly,	he	says,	“But	for	you,	O	L
ORD
,	do	I
wait;	it	is	you,	O	L
ORD
	my	God,	who	will	answer”	(Ps.	38:15).	The	psalmist
likewise	says,
I	wait	for	the	L
ORD
,	my	soul	waits,
and	in	his	word	I	hope;
my	soul	waits	for	the	L
ORD
more	than	watchmen	for	the	morning,
more	than	watchmen	for	the	morning.	(Ps.	130:5–6)
An	analogy	from	human	experience	may	help	us	to	appreciate	the	benefit	of
waiting	before	the	Lord	for	a	response	to	prayer.	If	I	wish	to	invite	someone
home	for	dinner,	there	are	various	ways	I	can	do	so.	First,	I	can	issue	a	vague,
general	invitation:	“It	would	be	nice	to	have	you	come	to	dinner	sometime.”
Almost	no	one	will	come	to	dinner	based	on	that	kind	of	invitation	alone.	This
is	rather	like	the	vague,	general	prayer,	“God	bless	all	my	aunts	and	uncles
and	all	the	missionaries.	Amen.”	Second,	I	could	make	a	specific	but	hurried
and	impersonal	kind	of	invitation:	“Fred,	can	you	come	to	dinner	Friday	night
at	6:00?”—but	as	soon	as	the	words	are	out	of	my	mouth,	I	rush	away	leaving
Fred	with	a	puzzled	expression	on	his	face	because	I	didn’t	allow	him	time	to
respond.	This	is	like	many	of	our	prayer	requests.	We	simply	speak	words	to
God	as	if	the	very	act	of	voicing	them,	without	any	heart	involvement	in	what
we	are	saying,	will	itself	bring	an	answer	from	God.	But	this	kind	of	request
forgets	that	prayer	is	a	relationship	between	two	persons,	myself	and	God.
There	is	a	third	kind	of	invitation,	one	that	is	heartfelt,	personal,	and	specific.
After	waiting	until	I’m	sure	I	have	Fred’s	full	attention,	I	can	look	him
directly	in	the	eye	and	say,	“Fred,	Margaret	and	I	would	really	love	to	have
you	come	to	dinner	at	our	home	this	Friday	at	6:00	p.m.	Could	you	come?”—
and	then,	continuing	to	look	him	in	the	eye,	I	wait	silently	and	patiently	while
he	decides	what	to	answer.	He	knows	from	my	facial	expression,	my	tone	of
voice,	my	timing,	and	the	setting	in	which	I	chose	to	talk	to	him	that	I	am
putting	my	whole	self	into	this	request,	and	that	I	am	relating	to	him	as	a
person	and	as	a	friend.	Waiting	patiently	for	an	answer	shows	my	earnestness,
my	sense	of	expectancy,	and	my	respect	for	him	as	a	person.	This	third	kind
of	request	is	like	that	of	the	earnest	Christian	who	comes	before	God,	gains	a
sense	of	being	in	his	presence,	earnestly	pours	out	a	request	to	him,	and	then
waits	quietly	for	some	sense	of	assurance	of	God’s	answer.
This	is	not	to	say	that	all	our	requests	must	be	of	this	nature,	or	even	that	the
first	two	kinds	of	requests	are	wrong.	Indeed,	in	some	situations	we	pray
quickly	because	we	have	little	time	before	we	need	an	answer	(see	Neh.	2:4).
And	sometimes	we	do	pray	generally	because	we	do	not	have	more	specific
information	about	a	situation,	or	because	it	is	far	removed	from	us	or	because
of	shortness	of	time.	But	the	material	in	Scripture	on	earnest	prayer	and	on
waiting	for	the	Lord,	and	the	fact	that	prayer	is	personal	communication
between	ourselves	and	God,	do	indicate	that	prayers	such	as	the	third	kind	of
request	are	much	deeper	and	will	undoubtedly	bring	many	more	answers	from
God.
1
0.	Praying	in	Private.
	Daniel	went	to	his	upper	chamber	and	“got	down
upon	his	knees	three	times	a	day	and	prayed	and	gave	thanks	before	his	God”
(Dan.	6:10).
13
	Jesus	frequently	went	out	into	solitary	places	to	be	alone	to
pray	(Luke	5:16	et	al.).	And	he	also	teaches	us,	“When	you	pray,	go	into	your
room	and	shut	the	door	and	pray	to	your	Father	who	is	in	secret;	and	your
Father	who	sees	in	secret	will	reward	you”	(Matt.	6:6).	This	statement	is	in
the	context	of	avoiding	the	error	of	the	hypocrites	who	loved	to	pray	at	the
street	corners	“that	they	may	be	seen	by	men”	(Matt.	6:5).	There	is	wisdom	in
Jesus’	encouragement	to	pray	in	secret,	not	only	that	we	might	avoid
hypocrisy,	but	also	that	we	might	not	be	distracted	by	the	presence	of	other
people	and	therefore	modify	our	prayers	to	suit	what	we	think	they	will
expect	to	hear.	When	we	are	truly	alone	with	God,	in	the	privacy	of	a	room	to
which	we	have	“shut	the	door”	(Matt.	6:6),	then	we	can	pour	out	our	hearts	to
him.
14
The	need	to	pray	in	private	may	also	have	implications	for	small-group	or
church	prayer	meetings:	when	believers	come	together	to	seek	the	Lord
earnestly	about	a	specific	matter,	it	is	often	helpful	if	they	can	be	in	the
privacy	of	a	home	where	the	door	is	shut	and	they	can	collectively	cry	out	to
God.	Apparently	this	was	the	way	the	early	Christians	prayed	when	they	were
making	earnest	supplication	to	God	for	the	release	of	Peter	from	prison	(see
Acts	12:5,	12–16).
11.
	Praying	With	Others.
	Believers	find	strength	in	praying	together	with
others.	In	fact,	Jesus	teaches	us,	“Again,	I	say	to	you,	if	two	of	you	agree	on
earth	about	anything	they	ask,	it	will	be	done	for	them	by	my	Father	in
heaven.	For	where	two	or	three	are	gathered	in	my	name,	there	am	I	in	the
midst	of	them”	(Matt.	18:19–20).
15
There	are	many	other	examples	in	Scripture	where	groups	of	believers	prayed
together	or	where	one	person	led	the	entire	congregation	in	prayer	(note
Solomon’s	prayer	“in	the	presence	of	all	the	assembly	of	Israel”	at	the
dedication	of	the	temple	in	1	Kings	8:22–53	or	the	prayer	of	the	early	church
in	Jerusalem	when	“they	lifted	their	voices	together	to	God”	in	Acts	4:24).
Even	the	Lord’s	Prayer	is	put	in	the	plural:	It	does	not	say,	“Give	me	this	day
my	daily	bread”	but	“Give	
us	
this	day	
our	
daily	bread”	and	“Forgive	
us	our
sins”	and	“Lead	
us	
not	into	temptation	but	deliver	
us	
from	evil”	(Matt.	6:11–
13,	author’s	translation).	Praying	with	others,	then,	is	also	right	and	often
increases	our	faith	and	the	effectiveness	of	our	prayers.
1
2.	Fasting.
	Prayer	is	often	connected	with	fasting	in	Scripture.	Sometimes
these	are	occasions	of	intense	supplication	before	God,	as	when	Nehemiah,	on
hearing	of	the	ruin	of	Jerusalem,	“continued	
fasting	
and	praying	before	the
God	of	Heaven”	(Neh.	1:4),	or	when	the	Jews	learned	of	the	decree	of
Ahasuerus	that	they	would	all	be	killed,	and	“there	was	great	mourning
among	the	Jews,	with	
fasting	
and	weeping	and	lamenting”	(Esth.	4:3),	or
when	Daniel	sought	the	L
ORD
	“by	prayer	and	supplications	with	
fasting	
and
sackcloth	and	ashes”	(Dan.	9:3).	At	other	times	fasting	is	connected	with
repentance,	for	God	says	to	the	people	who	have	sinned	against	him,	“	‘Yet
even	now,’	says	the	L
ORD
,	‘return	to	me	with	all	your	heart,	with	fasting,	with
weeping,	and	with	mourning’	”	(Joel	2:12).
In	the	New	Testament,	Anna	was	“worshiping	with	
fasting	
and	prayer	night
and	day”	(Luke	2:37)	in	the	temple,	and	the	church	at	Antioch	was
“worshiping	the	Lord	and	
fasting”	
when	the	Holy	Spirit	said,	“Set	apart	for
me	Barnabas	and	Saul	for	the	work	to	which	I	have	called	them”	(Acts	13:2).
The	church	responded	with	further	fasting	and	prayer	before	sending
Barnabas	and	Saul	on	their	first	missionary	journey:	“Then	after	fasting	and
praying	they	laid	their	hands	on	them	and	sent	them	off	”	(Acts	13:3).	In	fact,
fasting	was	a	routine	part	of	seeking	the	Lord’s	guidance	with	regard	to
church	officers,	for	on	Paul’s	first	missionary	journey,	we	read	that	he	and
Barnabas,	as	they	traveled	back	through	the	churches	they	had	founded,
“appointed	elders	for	them	in	every	church,	with	prayer	and	fasting”	(Acts
14:23).
So	fasting	appropriately	accompanied	prayer	in	many	situations:	in	times	of
intensive	intercession,	repentance,	worship,	and	seeking	of	guidance.	In	each
of	these	situations,	several	benefits	come	from	fasting,	all	of	which	affect	our
relationship	to	God:	(1)	Fasting	increases	our	sense	of	humility	and
dependence	on	the	Lord	(for	our	hunger	and	physical	weakness	continually
remind	us	how	we	are	not	really	strong	in	ourselves	but	need	the	Lord).	(2)
Fasting	allows	us	to	give	more	attention	to	prayer	(for	we	are	not	spending
time	on	eating),	and	(3)	it	is	a	continual	reminder	that,	just	as	we	sacrifice
some	personal	comfort	to	the	Lord	by	not	eating,	so	we	must	continually
sacrifice	all	of	ourselves	to	him.
16
	Moreover,	(4)	fasting	is	a	good	exercise	in
self-discipline,	for	as	we	refrain	from	eating	food,	which	we	would	ordinarily
desire,	it	also	strengthens	our	ability	to	refrain	from	sin,	to	which	we	might
otherwise	be	tempted	to	yield.	If	we	train	ourselves	to	accept	the	small
“suffering”	of	fasting	willingly,	we	will	be	better	able	to	accept	other
suffering	for	the	sake	of	righteousness	(cf.	Heb.	5:8;	1	Peter	4:1–2).	(5)
Fasting	also	heightens	spiritual	and	mental	alertness	and	a	sense	of	God’s
presence	as	we	focus	less	on	the	material	things	of	this	world	(such	as	food)
and	as	the	energies	of	our	body	are	freed	from	digesting	and	processing	food.
This	enables	us	to	focus	on	eternal	spiritual	realities	that	are	much	more
important.
17
	Finally,	(6)	fasting	expresses	earnestness	and	urgency	in	our
prayers:	if	we	continued	to	fast,	eventually	we	would	die.	Therefore,	in	a
symbolic	way,	fasting	says	to	God	that	we	are	prepared	to	lay	down	our	lives
that	the	situation	be	changed	rather	than	that	it	continue.	In	this	sense	fasting
is	especially	appropriate	when	the	spiritual	state	of	the	church	is	low.
“Yet	even	now,”	says	the	L
ORD
,
“return	to	me	with	all	your	heart,
with	fasting,	with	weeping,	and	with	mourning;
and	rend	your	hearts	and	not	your	garments.”	(Joel	2:12–13a)
Though	the	New	Testament	does	not	specifically	require	that	we	fast,	or	set
special	times	when	we	must	fast,	Jesus	certainly	assumes	that	we	will	fast,	for
he	says	to	his	disciples,	“And	
when	
you	fast”	(Matt.	6:16).	Moreover,	Jesus
also	says,	“The	days	will	come,	when	the	bridegroom	is	taken	away	from
them,	and	then	they	will	fast”	(Matt.	9:15).	He	is	the	Bridegroom,	we	are	his
disciples,	and	during	this	present	church	age	he	has	been	“taken”	away	from
us	until	the	day	he	returns.	Most	western	Christians	do	not	fast,	but,	if	we
were	willing	to	fast	more	regularly—even	for	one	or	two	meals—we	might	be
surprised	how	much	more	spiritual	power	and	strength	we	would	have	in	our
lives	and	in	our	churches.
1
3.	What	About	Unanswered	Prayer?
	We	must	begin	by	recognizing	that	as
long	as	God	is	God	and	we	are	his	creatures,	there	must	be	some	unanswered
prayers.	This	is	because	God	keeps	hidden	his	own	wise	plans	for	the	future,
and	even	though	people	pray,	many	events	will	not	come	about	until	the	time
that	God	has	decreed.	The	Jews	prayed	for	centuries	for	the	Messiah	to	come,
and	rightly	so,	but	it	was	not	until	“the	time	had	fully	come”	that	“God	sent
forth	his	Son”	(Gal.	4:4).	The	souls	of	martyrs	in	heaven,	free	from	sin,	cry
out	for	God	to	judge	the	earth	(Rev.	6:10),	but	God	does	not	immediately
answer;	rather	he	tells	them	to	rest	a	little	longer	(Rev.	6:11).	It	is	clear	that
there	can	be	long	periods	of	delay	during	which	prayers	go	unanswered,
because	the	people	praying	do	not	know	God’s	wise	timing.
Prayer	will	also	be	unanswered	because	we	do	not	always	know	how	to	pray
as	we	ought	(Rom.	8:26),	we	do	not	always	pray	according	to	God’s	will
(James	4:3),	and	we	do	not	always	ask	in	faith	(James	1:6–8).	And	sometimes
we	think	that	one	solution	is	best,	but	God	has	a	better	plan,	even	to	fulfill	his
purpose	through	suffering	and	hardship.	Joseph	no	doubt	prayed	earnestly	to
be	rescued	from	the	pit	and	from	being	carried	off	into	slavery	in	Egypt	(Gen.
37:23–36),	but	many	years	later	he	found	how	in	all	of	these	events	“God
meant	it	for	good”	(Gen.	50:20).
When	we	face	unanswered	prayer,	we	join	the	company	of	Jesus,	who	prayed,
“Father,	if	you	are	willing,	remove	this	cup	from	me;	nevertheless	not	my
will,	but	yours,	be	done”	(Luke	22:42).	We	join	also	the	company	of	Paul,
who	asked	the	Lord	“three	times”	that	his	thorn	in	the	flesh	be	removed,	but	it
was	not;	rather,	the	Lord	told	him,	“My	grace	is	sufficient	for	you,	for	my
power	is	made	perfect	in	weakness”	(2	Cor.	12:8–9).	We	join	the	company	of
David,	who	prayed	for	his	son’s	life	to	be	saved,	but	it	was	not,	so	he	“went
into	the	house	of	the	L
ORD
,	and	worshiped”	and	said	of	his	son,	“I	shall	go	to
him,	but	he	will	not	return	to	me”	(2	Sam.	12:20,	23).	We	join	the	company	of
the	martyrs	throughout	history	who	prayed	for	deliverance	that	did	not	come,
for	they	“loved	not	their	lives	even	unto	death”	(Rev.	12:11).
When	prayer	remains	unanswered	we	must	continue	to	trust	God,	who
“causes	all	things	to	work	together	for	good”	(Rom.	8:28	NASB),	and	to	cast
our	cares	on	him,	knowing	that	he	continually	cares	for	us	(1	Peter	5:7).	We
must	keep	remembering	that	he	will	give	strength	sufficient	for	each	day
(Deut.	33:25)	and	that	he	has	promised,	“I	will	never	fail	you	nor	forsake
you”	(Heb.	13:5;	cf.	Rom.	8:35–39).
We	also	must	continue	to	pray.	Sometimes	an	answer,	long	awaited,	will
suddenly	be	given,	as	it	was	when	Hannah	after	many	years	bore	a	child	(1
Sam.	1:19–20),	or	when	Simeon	saw	with	his	own	eyes	the	long-expected
Messiah	come	to	the	temple	(Luke	2:25–35).
But	sometimes	prayers	will	remain	unanswered	in	this	life.	At	times	God	will
answer	those	prayers	after	the	believer	dies.	At	other	times	he	will	not,	but
even	then	the	faith	expressed	in	those	prayers	and	their	heartfelt	expressions
of	love	for	God	and	the	people	he	has	made	will	still	ascend	as	a	pleasing
incense	before	God’s	throne	(Rev.	5:8;	8:3–4)	and	will	result	in	“praise	and
glory	and	honor	at	the	revelation	of	Jesus	Christ”	(1	Peter	1:7).
D.	Praise	and	Thanksgiving
Praise	and	thanksgiving	to	God,	which	will	be	treated	more	fully	in	chapter
51,	are	an	essential	element	of	prayer.	The	model	prayer	that	Jesus	left	us
begins	with	a	word	of	praise:	“Hallowed	be	your	name”	(Matt.	6:9).	And	Paul
tells	the	Philippians,	“in	everything	by	prayer	and	supplication	
with
thanksgiving	
let	your	requests	be	made	known	to	God”	(Phil.	4:6),	and	the
Colossians,	“Continue	steadfastly	in	prayer,	being	watchful	in	it	
with
thanksgiving”	
(Col.	4:2).	Thanksgiving,	like	every	other	aspect	of	prayer,
should	not	be	a	mechanical	mouthing	of	a	“thank	you”	to	God,	but	the
expression	of	words	that	reflect	the	thankfulness	of	our	hearts.	Moreover,	we
should	never	think	that	thanking	God	for	the	answer	to	something	we	ask	for
can	somehow	force	God	to	give	it	to	us,	for	that	changes	the	prayer	from	a
genuine,	sincere	request	to	a	demand	that	assumes	we	can	make	God	do	what
we	want	him	to	do.	Such	a	spirit	in	our	prayers	really	denies	the	essential
nature	of	prayer	as	dependence	on	God.
By	contrast,	the	kind	of	thanksgiving	that	appropriately	accompanies	prayer
must	express	thankfulness	to	God	for	all	circumstances,	for	every	event	of	life
that	he	allows	to	come	to	us.	When	we	join	our	prayers	with	humble,	childlike
thanksgiving	to	God	“in	all	circumstances”	(1	Thess.	5:18),	they	will	be
acceptable	to	God.
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
Do	you	often	have	difficulty	with	prayer?	What	things	in	this	chapter
have	been	helpful	to	you	in	this	regard?
2
.	
When	have	you	known	the	most	effective	times	of	prayer	in	your	own
life?	What	factors	contributed	to	making	those	times	more	effective?
Which	other	factors	need	most	attention	in	your	prayer	life?	What	can
you	do	to	strengthen	each	of	these	areas?
3
.	
How	does	it	help	and	encourage	you	(if	it	does)	when	you	pray	together
with	other	Christians?
4
.	
Have	you	ever	tried	waiting	quietly	before	the	Lord	after	making	an
earnest	prayer	request?	If	so,	what	has	been	the	result?
5
.	
Do	you	have	a	regular	time	each	day	for	private	Bible	reading	and
prayer?	Are	you	sometimes	easily	distracted	and	turned	aside	to	other
activities?	If	so,	how	can	distractions	be	overcome?
6
.	
Do	you	enjoy	praying?	Why	or	why	not?
SPECIAL	TERMS
faith
	
	
	
	
	
	
prayer
“in	Jesus’	name”
	
	
	
	
	
	
waiting	for	the	Lord
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the	
bibliography	to
chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be	found	in	
Appendix	4
.)
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92			Litton,	431–32
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1940			Wiley,	3:40–44,	153
1960			Purkiser,	421–24
1983–			Cottrell,	2:353–708
3.			Baptist
1907			Strong,	433–39
1917			Mullins,	119,	192,	224,	274,	348
1983–85			Erickson,	405–6
4.			Dispensational
1947			Chafer,	5:220–31;	7:252–54
1949			Thiessen,	298–301
1986			Ryrie,	381–82
5.			Lutheran
1917–24			Pieper,	3:215–19
1934			Mueller,	428–34,	467–69
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1559			Calvin,	2:850–920	(3.20)
1724–58			Edwards,	2:74–88,	113–18
1871–73			Hodge,	3:692–709
1878			Dabney,	713–25
1937–66			Murray,	
CW,	
3:168–71
7.			Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988–92			Williams,	2:295–98,	3:95–98
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955			Ott,	91
2.			Roman	Catholic:	Post-Vatican	II
1980			McBrien,	1:331–32;	2:1057–99
Other	Works
Bennett,	Arthur,	ed.	
The	Valley	of	Vision:	A	Collection	of	Puritan	Prayer
and	Devotions.	
Edinburgh	and	Carlisle,	Pa.:	Banner	of	Truth,	1975.
Bounds,	E.	M.	
Power	Through	Prayer.	
Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1963.
Brother	Lawrence.	
The	Practice	of	the	Presence	of	God.	
New	York:
Revell,	1895.
Carson,	D.	A.,	ed.	
Teach	Us	To	Pray:	Prayer	in	the	Bible	and	the	World.
Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	and	Exeter:	Paternoster,	1990.
Clowney,	Edmund.	
Christian	Meditation.	
Philadelphia:	Presbyterian	and
Reformed,	1979.
_____.	“Prayer,	Theology	of.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	526–27.
Forsyth,	P.	T.	
The	Soul	of	Prayer.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1967
(reprint).
Foster,	Richard	J.	
Celebration	of	Discipline:	The	Path	to	Spiritual
Growth.	
San	Francisco:	Harper	and	Row,	1988.
Hallesby,	O.	
Prayer.	
Trans.	by	Clarence	J.	Carlsen.	Minneapolis:
Augsburg,	1959	(reprint).
Houston,	James.	
The	Transforming	Friendship.	
Oxford	and	Batavia,	Ill.:
Lion,	1989.
Hunter,	W.	Bingham.	
The	God	Who	Hears.	
Downers	Grove,	Ill.:
InterVarsity	Press,	1986.
Kelly,	Thomas	R.	
A	Testament	of	Devotion.	
New	York:	Harper,	1941.
Law,	William.	
A	Serious	Call	to	a	Devout	and	Holy	Life.	
Philadelphia:
Westminster,	1948	(reprint).
M’Intyre,	D.	M.	
The	Hidden	Life	of	Prayer.	
Minneapolis:	Bethany
Fellowship	Press,	1962	(reprint).	(The	author’s	name	is	sometimes
spelled	MacIntyre	in	other	editions	of	this	book.)
Murray,	Andrew.	
The	Ministry	of	Intercessory	Prayer.	
Minneapolis:
Bethany	House,	1981	(reprint;	originally	published	in	1897	as	
The
Ministry	of	Intercession
).
Ortlund,	Raymond	C.,	Jr.	
A	Passion	for	God:	Prayers	and	Meditations
on	the	Book	of	Romans.	
Wheaton,	Ill.:	Crossway,	1994.
Prince,	Derek.	
Shaping	History	Through	Prayer	and	Fasting.	
Old
Tappan,	N.J.:	Fleming	H.	Revell,	1973.
Smith,	David	R.	
Fasting:	A	Neglected	Discipline.	
Fort	Washington,	Pa.:
Christian	Literature	Crusade,	1969.
Spear,	Wayne.	
The	Theology	of	Prayer.	
Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1979.
Thomas	à	Kempis.	
The	Imitation	of	Christ.	
Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1973
(reprint).
Unknown	Christian.	
The	Kneeling	Christian.	
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,
1945.
Wallis,	Arthur.	
God’s	Chosen	Fast:	A	Spiritual	and	Practical	Guide	to
Fasting.	
Fort	Washington,	Pa.:	Christian	Literature	Crusade,	1987.
White,	John.	
Daring	to	Draw	Near.	
Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity
Press,	1977.
Willard,	Dallas.	
The	Spirit	of	the	Disciplines.	
San	Francisco:	Harper	and
Row,	1988.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
Hebrews	4:14–16:	
Since	then	we	have	a	great	high	priest	who	has	passed
through	the	heavens,	Jesus,	the	Son	of	God,	let	us	hold	fast	our	confession.
For	we	have	not	a	high	priest	who	is	unable	to	sympathize	with	our
weaknesses,	but	one	who	in	every	respect	has	been	tempted	as	we	are,	yet
without	sin.	Let	us	then	with	confidence	draw	near	to	the	throne	of	grace,	that
we	may	receive	mercy	and	find	grace	to	help	in	time	of	need.
HYMN
“From	Every	Stormy	Wind”
From	ev’ry	stormy	wind	that	blows,
from	ev’ry	swelling	tide	of	woes,
There	is	a	calm,	a	sure	retreat;
’tis	found	beneath	the	Mercy	Seat.
There	is	a	place	where	Jesus	sheds
the	oil	of	gladness	on	our	heads,
A	place	than	all	besides	more	sweet;
it	is	the	blood-stained	Mercy	Seat.
There	is	a	spot	where	spirits	blend,
where	friend	holds	fellowship	with	friend,
Tho’	sundered	far;	by	faith	they	meet
around	the	common	Mercy	Seat.
Ah,	whither	could	we	flee	for	aid,
when	tempted,	desolate,	dismayed,
Or	how	the	hosts	of	hell	defeat,
had	suff’ring	saints	no	Mercy	Seat?
There,	there	on	eagle	wings	we	soar,
and	time	and	sense	seem	all	no	more,
And	heav’n	comes	down	our	souls	to	greet,
and	glory	crowns	the	Mercy	Seat.
O	may	my	hand	forget	her	skill,
my	tongue	be	silent,	cold,	and	still,
This	bounding	heart	forget	to	beat,
if	I	forget	the	Mercy	Seat.
AUTHOR:	HUGH	STOWELL,	1828,	1831
NOTES
1
Other	examples	of	God	answering	prayer	in	Scripture	are	too	numerous	to	comment	on	(Gen.	18:22–33;	32:26;	Dan.	10:12;
Amos	7:1–6;	Acts	4:29–31;	10:31;	12:5–11;	et	al.).
2
In	Acts	4:30	the	phrase,	“through	the	name	of	your	holy	servant	Jesus,”	which	appears	at	the	end	of	a	prayer,	modifies	the	main
clause	immediately	preceding	it,	“and	signs	and	wonders	are	performed.”	It	is	not	a	general	statement	about	the	way	in	which	the
whole	prayer	is	made.
3
In	fact,	Paul	says	that	not	just	our	prayers	but	everything	we	do	is	to	be	done	in	Jesus’	name:	“And	whatever	you	do,	in	word	or
deed,	
do	everything	in	the	name	of	the	Lord	Jesus,	
giving	thanks	to	God	the	Father	through	him”	(Col.	3:17).
4
Leon	Morris	says	of	John	14:13,	“This	does	not	mean	simply	using	the	name	as	a	formula.	It	means	that	prayer	is	to	be	in
accordance	with	all	that	the	name	stands	for.	It	is	prayer	proceeding	from	faith	in	Christ,	prayer	that	gives	expression	to	a	unity
with	all	that	Christ	stands	for,	prayer	which	seeks	to	set	forward	Christ	himself.	And	the	purpose	of	it	all	is	the	glory	of	God”	(
The
Gospel	According	to	John,	
p.	646).
5
The	name	
Lord	
(Gk.	
kyrios
)	is	used	in	Acts	and	the	Epistles	primarily	to	refer	to	the	Lord	Jesus	Christ.
6
J.	I.	Packer	says,	“Is	it	proper	to	pray	to	the	Spirit?	There	is	no	example	of	doing	this	anywhere	in	Scripture,	but	since	the	Spirit
is	God,	it	cannot	be	wrong	to	invoke	and	address	him	if	there	is	good	reason	to	do	so”	(
Keep	in	Step	With	the	Spirit	
[Old	Tappan,
N.J.:	Revell,	1984],	p.	
261).
7
Other	reasons	why	these	sighs	or	groans	are	best	understood	to	be	our	“groanings”	in	prayer	are	(1)	v.	
23	says	that	“we	ourselves
.	.	.	groan,”	using	a	verb	(
stenazō
)	that	is	cognate	to	the	noun	translated	“sighs”	(
stenagmos
)	in	v.	
26;	(2)	such	“groanings,”	which
seem	to	imply	a	degree	of	distress	or	anguish,	are	appropriate	for	creatures	(vv.	22,	23)	but	not	for	the	Creator;	and	(3)	v.	
26b,
which	mentions	“sighs	too	deep	for	words,”	explains	the	first	clause	in	v.	
26,	which	says	that	the	Spirit	“helps”	us,	not	that	the
Spirit	replaces	our	prayers.	The	phrase	“too	deep	for	words”	does	not	necessarily	mean	“silent	or	noiseless,”	but	can	rather	mean
“not	able	to	be	put	into	words.”
8
For	a	further	discussion	of	Rom.	8:26–27,	see	
chapter	53
.
9
Some	have	thought	this	refers	to	speaking	in	tongues,	since	Paul	calls	speaking	in	tongues	praying	“with	the	spirit”	(1	Cor.
14:15).	But	that	is	not	a	correct	understanding,	since	in	1	Cor.	14:15	“the	spirit”	refers	not	to	the	Holy	Spirit	but	to	Paul’s	own
human	spirit:	note	the	contrast	between	“my	spirit”	and	“my	mind”	in	v.	
14.
10
To	add,	“If	it	is	your	will”	to	a	prayer	is	still	very	different	from	not	asking	at	all.	If	my	children	come	and	ask	if	I	will	take
them	to	get	ice	cream,	but	then	(feeling	in	a	cooperative	mood)	add,	“but	only	if	you	think	it’s	right,	Dad,”	that	is	still	far	removed
from	not	asking	me	at	all.	If	they	had	not	asked,	I	would	not	have	considered	going	to	get	ice	cream.	Once	they	ask,	even	with	the
qualification,	I	will	often	decide	to	take	them.
11
See	discussion	of	God’s	attribute	of	jealousy,	
chapter	12
	above.
12
The	periphrastic	imperfect	tense	here	(Gk.	
ēn	hypochōrōn
)	emphasizes,	even	more	than	a	simple	imperfect	would,	the	repeated
or	habitual	nature	of	the	activity	of	withdrawing	into	the	wilderness	(see	
BDF,	
353[1]).
13
Though	Daniel’s	enemies	saw	him	praying,	it	was	only	because	they	“came	by	agreement”	and	apparently	spied	on	him.
14
At	this	point	we	may	also	mention	that	Paul	discusses	a	use	of	the	gift	of	speaking	in	tongues	during	private	prayer:	“If	I	pray	in
a	tongue,	my	spirit	prays	but	my	mind	is	unfruitful.	What	am	I	to	do?	I	will	pray	with	the	spirit	and	I	will	pray	with	the	mind	also;
I	will	sing	with	the	spirit	and	I	will	sing	with	the	mind	also”	(1	Cor.	14:14–15).	When	Paul	says	“my	spirit	prays,”	he	is	not
referring	to	the	Holy	Spirit	but	to	his	own	human	spirit,	for	the	contrast	is	with	“my	mind.”	His	own	spirit	is	pouring	out	requests
before	God,	and	those	requests	are	understood	by	God	and	result	in	personal	edification:	“He	who	speaks	in	a	tongue	edifies
himself	“	(1	Cor.	14:4).	This	gift	will	be	discussed	more	fully	in	chapter	53,	below.
15
Although	the	previous	four	verses	(vv.15–18)	have	to	do	with	church	discipline,	the	word	“again”	at	the	beginning	of	v.	
19
signals	a	slight	change	in	subject,	and	it	is	not	inappropriate	to	take	vv.	19–20	as	a	broader	statement	about	prayer	in	general	in	the
context	of	the	church.
16
Similar	reasons	(devoting	more	time	to	prayer	and	giving	up	some	personal	pleasure)	probably	explain	Paul’s	permission	to
married	couples	to	give	up	sexual	relations	“by	mutual	consent	and	for	a	time,	so	that	you	may	devote	yourselves	to	prayer”	(1
Cor.	7:5	NIV).
17
In	Mark	9:29,	when	the	disciples	asked	why	they	could	not	drive	out	a	certain	demon,	Jesus	replied,	“This	kind	cannot	be
driven	out	by	anything	but	prayer.”	Many	early	and	quite	reliable	Greek	manuscripts	and	several	early	manuscripts	in	other
languages	read	“by	prayer	
and	fasting.”	
In	either	case,	it	cannot	mean	prayer	that	is	spoken	at	the	time	the	demon	is	being	cast
out,	for	Jesus	simply	cast	out	the	demon	with	a	word	and	did	not	engage	in	an	extended	time	of	prayer.	It	must	mean	rather	that
the	disciples	had	not	previously	been	spending	enough	time	in	prayer	and	that	their	spiritual	strength	was	weak.	Therefore	the
“fasting”	that	is	mentioned	in	many	ancient	manuscripts	fits	the	pattern	of	an	activity	that	increases	one’s	spiritual	strength	and
power.
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	19
Angels
What	are	angels?	Why	did	God	create	them?
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
A.	What	Are	Angels?
We	may	define	angels	as	follows:	
Angels	are	created,	spiritual	beings	with
moral	judgment	and	high	intelligence,	but	without	physical	bodies.
1.
	Created	Spiritual	Beings.
	Angels	have	not	always	existed;	they	are	part	of
the	universe	that	God	created.	In	a	passage	that	refers	to	angels	as	the	“host”
of	heaven	(or	“armies	of	heaven”),	Ezra	says,	“You	are	the	L
ORD
,	you	alone;
you	have	made	heaven,	the	heaven	of	heavens,	
with	all	their	host	
.	.	.	and	the
host	of	heaven	worships	you”	(Neh.	9:6;	cf.	Ps.	148:2,	5).	Paul	tells	us	that
God	created	all	things	“visible	and	invisible”	through	Christ	and	for	him,	and
then	specifically	includes	the	angelic	world	with	the	phrase	“whether	thrones
or	dominions	or	principalities	or	authorities”	(Col.	1:16).
That	angels	exercise	moral	judgement	is	seen	in	the	fact	that	some	of	them
sinned	and	fell	from	their	positions	(2	Peter	2:4;	Jude	6;	see	
chapter	20
).	Their
high	intelligence	is	seen	throughout	Scripture	as	they	speak	to	people	(Matt.
28:5;	Acts	12:6–11;	et	al.)	and	sing	praise	to	God	(Rev.	4:11;	5:11).
Since	angels	are	“spirits”	(Heb.	1:14)	or	spiritual	creatures,	they	do	not
ordinarily	have	physical	bodies	(Luke	24:39).	Therefore	they	cannot	usually
be	seen	by	us	unless	God	gives	us	a	special	ability	to	see	them	(Num.	22:31;	2
Kings	6:17;	Luke	2:13).	In	their	ordinary	activities	of	guarding	and	protecting
us	(Ps.	34:7;	91:11;	Heb.	1:14),	and	joining	with	us	in	worship	to	God	(Heb.
12:22),	they	are	invisible.	However,	from	time	to	time	angels	took	on	a	bodily
form	to	appear	to	various	people	in	Scripture	(Matt.	28:5;	Heb.	13:2).
2.	Other	Names	for	Angels.
	Scripture	sometimes	uses	other	terms	for	angels,
such	as	“sons	of	God”	(Job	1:6;	2:1),	“holy	ones”	(Ps.	89:5,	7),	“spirits”	(Heb.
1:14),	“watchers”	(Dan.	4:13,	17,	23),	“thrones,”	“dominions,”
“principalities,”	“authorities”	(Col.	1:16),	and	“powers”	(Eph.	1:21).
3.	Other	Kinds	of	Heavenly	Beings.
	There	are	three	other	specific	types	of
heavenly	beings	named	in	Scripture.	Whether	we	think	of	these	as	special
types	of	“angels”	(in	a	broad	sense	of	the	term),	or	whether	we	think	of	them
as	heavenly	beings	distinct	from	angels,	they	are	nonetheless	created	spiritual
beings	who	serve	and	worship	God.
a.	The	“Cherubim”:
1
	The	cherubim	were	given	the	task	of	guarding	the
entrance	to	the	Garden	of	Eden	(Gen.	3:24),	and	God	himself	is	frequently
said	to	be	enthroned	on	the	cherubim	or	to	travel	with	the	cherubim	as	his
chariot	(Ps.	18:10;	Ezek.	10:1–22).	Over	the	ark	of	the	covenant	in	the	Old
Testament	were	two	golden	figures	of	cherubim	with	their	wings	stretched	out
above	the	ark,	and	it	was	there	that	God	promised	to	come	to	dwell	among	his
people:	“There	I	will	meet	with	you,	and	from	above	the	mercy	seat,	from
between	the	two	cherubim	that	are	upon	the	ark	of	testimony,	I	will	speak
with	you	of	all	that	I	will	give	you	in	commandment	for	the	people	of	Israel”
(Ex.	25:22;	cf.	vv.	18–21).
b.	The	“Seraphim”:
2
	Another	group	of	heavenly	beings,	the	seraphim,	are
mentioned	only	in	Isaiah	6:2–7,	where	they	continually	worship	the	Lord	and
call	to	one	another,	“Holy,	holy,	holy	is	the	L
ORD
	of	hosts;	the	whole	earth	is
full	of	his	glory”	(Isa.	6:3).
c.	The	Living	Creatures:
	Both	Ezekiel	and	Revelation	tell	us	of	yet	other
kinds	of	heavenly	beings	known	as	“living	creatures”	around	God’s	throne
(Ezek.	1:5–14;	Rev.	4:6–8).
3
	With	their	appearances	like	a	lion,	an	ox,	a	man,
and	an	eagle,	they	are	the	mightiest	representatives	of	various	parts	of	God’s
entire	creation	(wild	beasts,	domesticated	animals,	human	beings,	and	birds),
and	they	worship	God	continually:	“Day	and	night	they	never	cease	to	sing,
‘Holy,	holy,	holy,	is	the	Lord	God	Almighty,	who	was	and	is	and	is	to
come!’	”	(Rev.	4:8)
4.	Rank	and	Order	Among	the	Angels.
	Scripture	indicates	that	there	is	rank
and	order	among	the	angels.	One	angel,	Michael,	is	called	an	“archangel”	in
Jude	9,	a	title	that	indicates	rule	or	authority	over	other	angels.	He	is	called
“one	of	the	chief	princes”	in	Daniel	10:13.	Michael	also	appears	to	be	a	leader
in	the	angelic	army:	“Now	war	arose	in	heaven,	Michael	and	his	angels
fighting	against	the	dragon;	and	the	dragon	and	his	angels	fought,	but	they
were	defeated”	(Rev.	12:7–8).	And	Paul	tells	us	that	the	Lord	will	return	from
heaven	“with	the	archangel’s	call”	(1	Thess.	4:16).	Whether	this	refers	to
Michael	as	the	only	archangel,	or	whether	there	are	other	archangels,
Scripture	does	not	tell	us.
5.	Names	of	Specific	Angels.
	Only	two	angels	are	specifically	named	in
Scripture.
4
	Michael	is	mentioned	in	Jude	9	and	Revelation	12:7–8	as	well	as
in	Daniel	10:13,	21,	where	he	is	called	“Michael,	one	of	the	chief	princes”	(v.
13).	The	angel	Gabriel	is	mentioned	in	Daniel	8:16	and	9:21	as	a	messenger
who	comes	from	God	to	speak	to	Daniel.	Gabriel	is	also	identified	as	God’s
messenger	to	Zechariah	and	Mary	in	Luke	1:	the	angel	answers	Zechariah,	“I
am	Gabriel,	who	stand	in	the	presence	of	God”	(Luke	1:19).	Then	we	read,
“In	the	sixth	month	the	angel	Gabriel	was	sent	from	God	to	a	city	of	Galilee
named	Nazareth,	to	a	virgin	.	.	.	and	the	virgin’s	name	was	Mary”	(Luke	1:26–
27).
6.	Only	One	Place	at	One	Time.
	Scripture	frequently	represents	angels	as
traveling	from	one	place	to	another,	as	in	the	verse	mentioned	above	where
Gabriel	“was	sent	from	God	to	a	city	of	Galilee	named	Nazareth”	(Luke
1:26).	This	is	made	explicit	when	an	angel	comes	to	Daniel	and	says:
I	have	come	because	of	your	words.	The	prince	of	the	kingdom	of
Persia	withstood	me	twenty-one	days;	but	Michael,	one	of	the	chief
princes,	came	to	help	me,	so	I	left	him	there	with	the	prince	of	the
kingdom	of	Persia	and	came	to	make	you	understand	what	is	to	befall
your	people	in	the	latter	days.	(Dan.	10:12–14)
The	idea	that	an	angel	can	be	in	only	one	place	at	one	time	is	consistent	with
the	fact	that	angels	are	created	beings.	Unlike	God,	who	is	omnipresent,	they
are	finite	creatures	and	therefore	limited	to	being	in	one	place	at	one	time,	as
is	everything	else	that	God	has	created.
5
7.	How	Many	Angels	Are	There?
	Though	Scripture	does	not	give	us	a	figure
for	the	number	of	angels	God	created,	it	is	apparently	a	very	great	number.
We	read	that	God	on	Mount	Sinai	“came	from	the	
ten	thousands	of	holy	ones,
with	flaming	fire	at	his	right	hand”	(Deut.	33:2).	We	also	learn	that,	“the
chariots	of	God	are	tens	of	thousands	and	thousands	of	thousands”	(Ps.	68:17
NIV).	When	we	come	to	worship	we	come	into	the	presence	of	“
innumerable
angels”	(Heb.	12:22).
6
	Their	number	is	even	more	strikingly	emphasized	in
Revelation	5:11,	where	John	says,	“I	heard	around	the	throne	and	the	living
creatures	and	the	elders	the	voice	of	many	angels,	numbering	
myriads	of
myriads	
and	thousands	of	thousands.”	This	expression	indicates	an	amazingly
large	number	(from	a	human	standpoint)—an	innumerable	assembly	of
angelic	beings	praising	God.
8.	Do	People	Have	Individual	Guardian	Angels?
	Scripture	clearly	tells	us
that	God	sends	angels	for	our	protection:	“He	will	give	his	angels	charge	of
you	to	guard	you	in	all	your	ways.	On	their	hands	they	will	bear	you	up,	lest
you	dash	your	foot	against	a	stone”	(Ps.	91:11–12).	But	some	people	have
gone	beyond	this	idea	of	general	protection	and	wondered	if	God	gives	a
specific	“guardian	angel”	for	each	individual	in	the	world,	or	at	least	for	each
Christian.	Support	for	this	idea	has	been	found	in	Jesus’	words	about	little
children,	“in	heaven	
their	angels	
always	behold	the	face	of	my	Father	who	is
in	heaven”	(Matt.	18:10).	However,	our	Lord	may	simply	be	saying	that
angels	who	are	assigned	the	task	of	protecting	little	children	have	ready
access	to	God’s	presence.	(To	use	an	athletic	analogy,	the	angels	may	be
playing	“zone”	rather	than	“man-on-man”	defense.)
7
	When	the	disciples	in
Acts	12:15	say	that	Peter’s	“angel”	must	be	knocking	at	the	door,	this	does
not	necessarily	imply	belief	in	an	individual	guardian	angel.	It	could	be	that
an	angel	was	guarding	or	caring	for	Peter	just	at	that	time.	There	seems	to	be,
therefore,	no	convincing	support	for	the	idea	of	individual	“guardian	angels”
in	the	text	of	Scripture.
9.	Angels	Do	Not	Marry.
	Jesus	taught	that	in	the	resurrection	people	“neither
marry	nor	are	given	in	marriage,	but	are	like	angels	in	heaven”	(Matt.	22:30;
cf.	Luke	20:34–36).	This	would	suggest	that	angels	do	not	have	the	kind	of
family	relationships	that	exist	among	human	beings.	Scripture	is	otherwise
silent	on	this	point,	so	it	is	wise	not	to	attempt	to	engage	in	speculation.
8
1
0.	The	Power	of	Angels.
	Angels	apparently	have	very	great	power.	They	are
called	“you	mighty	ones	who	do	his	word”	(Ps.	103:20)	and	“powers”	(cf.
Eph.	1:21)	and	“dominions”	and	“authorities”	(Col.	1:16).	Angels	are
seemingly	“greater	in	might	and	power”	than	rebellious	human	beings	(2
Peter	2:11;	cf.	Matt.	28:2).	At	least	for	the	time	of	their	earthly	existence,
human	beings	are	made	“lower	than	the	angels”	(Heb.	2:7).	Though	the	power
of	angels	is	great,	it	is	certainly	not	infinite,	but	it	is	used	to	battle	against	the
evil	demonic	powers	under	the	control	of	Satan	(Dan.	10:13;	Rev.	12:7–8;
20:1–3).
9
	Nonetheless,	when	the	Lord	returns,	we	will	be	raised	to	a	position
higher	than	that	of	angels	(1	Cor.	6:3;	see	
section	C.1
,	below).
11.
	Who	Is	the	Angel	of	the	Lord?
	Several	passages	of	Scripture,	especially
in	the	Old	Testament,	speak	of	the	angel	of	the	Lord	in	a	way	that	suggests
that	he	is	God	himself	taking	on	a	human	form	to	appear	briefly	to	various
people	in	the	Old	Testament.
In	some	passages	“
the	
angel	of	the	L
ORD
”	(not	“
an	
angel	of	the	L
ORD
”)	is
spoken	of	as	the	Lord	himself.	So	“the	angel	of	the	L
ORD
”	who	found	Hagar
in	the	wilderness	promises	her,	“I	will	so	greatly	multiply	your	descendants
that	they	cannot	be	numbered	for	multitude”	(Gen.	16:10),	and	Hagar
responds	by	calling	“the	name	of	
the	L
ORD
	who	spoke	to	her,	
‘You	are	a	God
of	seeing’	”	(Gen.	16:13).	Similarly,	when	Abraham	is	about	to	sacrifice	his
son	Isaac,	“the	angel	of	the	L
ORD
”	calls	to	him	from	heaven	and	says,	“Now	I
know	that	you	fear	God,	seeing	you	have	not	withheld	your	son,	your	only
son,	
from	me”	
(Gen.	22:12).	When	“the	angel	of	God”	appeared	to	Jacob	in	a
dream,	he	said,	“I	am	the	God	of	Bethel,	where	you	anointed	a	pillar	and
made	a	vow	to	me”	(Gen.	31:11,	13).	Again,	when	“the	angel	of	the	L
ORD
”
appeared	to	Moses	in	a	flame	of	fire	out	of	the	midst	of	a	bush,	he	then	said,
“
I	am	the	God	of	your	father,	
the	God	of	Abraham,	the	God	of	Isaac,	and	the
God	of	Jacob”	(Ex.	3:2,	6).	These	are	clear	instances	of	the	angel	of	the	Lord
or	the	angel	of	God	appearing	as	God	himself,	perhaps	more	specifically	as
God	the	Son	taking	on	a	human	body	for	a	short	time	in	order	to	appear	to
human	beings.
At	other	times	the	angel	of	the	Lord	seems	to	be	distinguished	from	God	(see
2	Sam.	24:16;	Ps.	34:7;	Zech.	1:11–13),	and	passages	that	mention	“
an	
angel
of	the	Lord”	(e.g.,	Luke	1:11)	usually	indicate	an	angel	sent	by	God.
B.	When	Were	Angels	Created?
All	the	angels	must	have	been	created	before	the	seventh	day	of	creation,	for
we	read,	“Thus	the	heavens	and	the	earth	were	finished,	and	all	the	host	of
them”	(Gen.	2:1,	understanding	“host”	to	be	the	heavenly	creatures	that
inhabit	God’s	universe).	Even	more	explicit	than	this	is	the	statement,	“In	six
days	the	L
ORD
	made	heaven	and	earth,	the	sea,	
and	all	that	is	in	them,	
and
rested	the	seventh	day”	(Ex.	20:11).	Therefore	all	the	angels	were	created	at
least	by	the	sixth	day	of	creation.
But	can	we	be	any	more	specific?	There	may	be	a	hint	at	the	creation	of
angelic	beings	on	the	first	day	of	creation	when	we	read	that	“in	the	beginning
God	created	the	heavens	and	the	earth”	(Gen.	1:1),	and	then	immediately	after
we	read	that	“the	
earth	
was	without	form	and	void”	(Gen.	1:2),	but	with	no
mention	of	the	heavens	in	this	second	verse.	This	may	suggest	that	the
uninhabitable	state	of	the	earth	is	contrasted	with	the	heavens	where,	perhaps,
God	had	already	created	angelic	beings	and	assigned	them	various	roles	and
orders.	This	idea	is	made	more	plausible	when	we	read	that	“the	morning
stars	sang	together,	and	all	the	sons	of	God	shouted	for	joy”	at	the	time	when
God	laid	the	“cornerstone”	of	the	earth	and	sunk	its	“bases”	in	the	process	of
forming	or	founding	it	(Job	38:6–7).	If	the	angels	(“the	sons	of	God”)	shouted
for	joy	when	God	was	making	the	earth	inhabitable,	this	could	imply	that	God
created	the	angelic	beings	early	on	the	first	day.
However,	since	we	have	only	hints	in	Scripture,	we	must	remain	content	with
the	fact	that	God	has	not	given	us	much	information	about	the	time	of	the
creation	of	the	angels.	Further	speculation,	apart	from	clear	scriptural	data,
would	seem	to	be	useless.	“The	secret	things	belong	to	the	L
ORD
	our	God;	but
the	things	that	are	revealed	belong	to	us	and	to	our	children	for	ever,	that	we
may	do	all	the	words	of	this	law”	(Deut.	29:29).
Some	time	before	Satan	tempted	Eve	in	the	garden	(Gen.	3:1),	a	number	of
angels	sinned	and	rebelled	against	God	(2	Peter	2:4;	Jude	6).	This	event
occurred	apparently	after	the	sixth	day	of	creation	when	“God	saw	everything
that	he	had	made,	and	behold,	it	was	very	good”	(Gen.	1:31),	but	beyond	this,
Scripture	gives	us	no	further	information.
C.	The	Place	of	Angels	in	God’s	Purpose
1.
	Angels	Show	the	Greatness	of	God’s	Love	and	Plan	for	Us.
	Human
beings	and	angels	(using	the	term	broadly)	are	the	only	moral,	highly
intelligent	creatures	that	God	has	made.	Therefore	we	can	understand	much
about	God’s	plan	and	love	for	us	when	we	compare	ourselves	with	angels.
The	first	distinction	to	be	noted	is	that	angels	are	never	said	to	be	made	“in
the	image	of	God,”	while	human	beings	are	several	times	said	to	be	in	God’s
image	(Gen.	1:26–27;	9:6).	Since	being	in	the	image	of	God	means	to	be	like
God,
10
	it	seems	fair	to	conclude	that	we	are	more	like	God	even	than	the
angels	are.
This	is	supported	by	the	fact	that	God	will	someday	give	us	authority	over
angels,	to	judge	them:	“Do	you	not	know	that	
we	are	to	judge	angels?”	
(1
Cor.	6:3).	Though	we	are	“for	a	little	while	lower	than	the	angels”	(Heb.	2:7),
when	our	salvation	is	complete	we	will	be	exalted	above	angels	and	rule	over
them.	In	fact,	even	now,	angels	already	serve	us:	“Are	they	not	all	ministering
spirits	sent	forth	
to	serve,	
for	the	sake	of	those	who	are	to	obtain	salvation?”
(Heb.	1:14).
The	ability	of	human	beings	to	bear	children	like	themselves	(Adam	“became
the	father	of	a	son	in	his	own	likeness,	after	his	image,”	Gen.	5:3)	is	another
element	of	our	superiority	to	angels,	who	apparently	cannot	bear	children	(cf.
Matt.	22:30;	Luke	20:34–36).
Angels	also	demonstrate	the	greatness	of	God’s	love	for	us	in	that,	though
many	angels	sinned,	none	were	saved.	Peter	tells	us	that	“
God	did	not	spare
the	angels	when	they	sinned,	
but	cast	them	into	hell	and	committed	them	to
pits	of	nether	gloom	to	be	kept	until	the	judgment”	(2	Peter	2:4).	Jude	says
that	“the	angels	that	did	not	keep	their	own	position	but	left	their	proper
dwelling	have	been	kept	by	him	in	eternal	chains	in	the	nether	gloom	until	the
judgment	of	the	great	day”	(Jude	6).	And	we	read	in	Hebrews,	“For	surely	it
is	not	with	angels	that	he	is	concerned	but	with	the	descendants	of	Abraham”
(Heb.	2:16).
We	see,	therefore,	that	God	created	two	groups	of	intelligent,	moral	creatures.
Among	the	angels,	many	sinned,	but	God	decided	to	redeem	none	of	them.
This	was	perfectly	just	for	God	to	do,	and	no	angel	can	ever	complain	that	he
has	been	treated	unfairly	by	God.
Now	among	the	other	group	of	moral	creatures,	human	beings,	we	also	find
that	a	large	number	(indeed,	all)	have	sinned	and	turned	away	from	God.	As
with	the	angels	that	sinned:	God	could	have	let	all	of	us	go	on	our	self-chosen
path	toward	eternal	condemnation.	Had	God	decided	to	save	no	one	out	of	the
entire	sinful	human	race,	he	would	be	perfectly	just	to	do	so,	and	no	one	could
complain	of	unfairness	on	his	part.
But	God	decided	to	do	much	more	than	merely	meet	the	demands	of	justice.
He	decided	to	save	some	sinful	human	beings.	If	he	had	decided	to	save	only
five	human	beings	out	of	the	entire	human	race,	that	would	have	been	much
more	than	justice:	it	would	have	been	a	great	demonstration	of	mercy	and
grace.	If	he	had	decided	to	save	only	one	hundred	out	of	the	whole	human
race,	it	would	have	been	an	amazing	demonstration	of	mercy	and	love.	But
God	in	fact	has	chosen	to	do	much	more	than	that.	He	has	decided	to	redeem
out	of	sinful	mankind	a	great	multitude,	whom	no	man	can	number,	“from
every	tribe	and	tongue	and	people	and	nation”	(Rev.	5:9).	This	is	incalculable
mercy	and	love,	far	beyond	our	comprehension.	It	is	all	undeserved	favor:	it	is
all	of	grace.	The	striking	contrast	with	the	fate	of	angels	brings	this	truth
home	to	us.
The	fact	that	we	have	been	saved	from	a	life	of	rebellion	against	God	means
that	we	are	able	to	sing	songs	that	angels	will	never	be	able	to	sing	for	all
eternity.
Redeemed—how	I	love	to	proclaim	it!
Redeemed	by	the	blood	of	the	lamb;
Redeemed	through	his	infinite	mercy—
His	child,	and	forever,	I	am.
This	song,	and	all	the	great	songs	proclaiming	our	redemption	in	Christ,	are
ours	alone	to	sing.	Unfallen	angels	see	us	sing	these	songs	and	they	rejoice
(Luke	15:10),	but	they	will	never	be	able	to	make	them	their	own.
2.	Angels	Remind	Us	That	the	Unseen	World	Is	Real.
	Just	as	the
Sadducees	in	Jesus’	day	said	that	“there	is	no	resurrection,	nor	angel,	nor
spirit”	(Acts	23:8),	so	many	in	our	day	deny	the	reality	of	anything	they
cannot	see.	But	the	biblical	teaching	on	the	existence	of	angels	is	a	constant
reminder	to	us	that	there	is	an	unseen	world	that	is	very	real.	It	was	only	when
the	Lord	opened	the	eyes	of	Elisha’s	servant	to	the	reality	of	this	invisible
world	that	the	servant	saw	that	“the	mountain	was	full	of	horses	and	chariots
of	fire	round	about	Elisha”	(2	Kings	6:17;	this	was	a	great	angelic	army	sent
to	Dothan	to	protect	Elisha	from	the	Syrians).	The	psalmist,	too,	shows	an
awareness	of	the	unseen	world	when	he	encourages	the	angels,	“Praise	him,
all	his	angels,	praise	him,	all	his	host!”	(Ps.	148:2).	The	author	of	Hebrews
reminds	us	that	when	we	worship	we	come	into	the	heavenly	Jerusalem	to
gather	with	“innumerable	angels	in	festal	gathering”	(Heb.	12:22),	whom	we
do	not	see,	but	whose	presence	should	fill	us	with	both	awe	and	joy.	An
unbelieving	world	may	dismiss	talk	of	angels	as	mere	superstition,	but
Scripture	offers	it	as	insight	into	the	state	of	affairs	as	they	really	are.
3.	Angels	Are	Examples	for	Us.
	In	both	their	obedience	and	their	worship
angels	provide	helpful	examples	for	us	to	imitate.	Jesus	teaches	us	to	pray,
“Your	will	be	done,	on	earth	as	it	is	in	heaven”	(Matt.	6:10).	In	heaven	God’s
will	is	done	by	angels,	immediately,	joyfully,	and	without	question.	We	are	to
pray	daily	that	our	obedience	and	the	obedience	of	others	would	be	like	that
of	the	angels	in	heaven.	Their	delight	is	to	be	God’s	humble	servants,	each
faithfully	and	joyfully	performing	their	assigned	tasks,	whether	great	or	small.
Our	desire	and	prayer	should	be	that	we	ourselves	and	all	others	on	earth
would	do	the	same.
Angels	also	serve	as	our	examples	in	their	worship	of	God.	The	seraphim
before	God’s	throne	see	God	in	his	holiness	and	continue	to	cry	out,	“Holy,
holy,	holy	is	the	L
ORD
	of	hosts;	the	whole	earth	is	full	of	his	glory”	(Isa.	6:3).
And	John	sees	around	God’s	throne	a	great	angelic	army,	“numbering	myriads
of	myriads	and	thousands	of	thousands,	saying	with	a	loud	voice,	‘Worthy	is
the	Lamb	who	was	slain,	to	receive	power	and	wealth	and	wisdom	and	might
and	honor	and	glory	and	blessing!’	”	(Rev.	5:11–12).	As	angels	find	it	their
highest	joy	to	praise	God	continuously,	should	we	not	also	delight	each	day	to
sing	God’s	praise,	counting	this	as	the	highest	and	most	worthy	use	of	our
time	and	our	greatest	joy?
4.	Angels	Carry	Out	Some	of	God’s	Plans.
	Scripture	sees	angels	as	God’s
servants	who	carry	out	some	of	his	plans	in	the	earth.	They	bring	God’s
messages	to	people	(Luke	1:11–19;	Acts	8:26;	10:3–8,	22;	27:23–24).	They
carry	out	some	of	God’s	judgments,	bringing	a	plague	upon	Israel	(2	Sam.
24:16–17),	smiting	the	leaders	of	the	Assyrian	army	(2	Chron.	32:21),	striking
King	Herod	dead	because	he	did	not	give	God	glory	(Acts	12:23),	or	pouring
out	bowls	of	God’s	wrath	on	the	earth	(Rev.	16:1).	When	Christ	returns,
angels	will	come	with	him	as	a	great	army	accompanying	their	King	and	Lord
(Matt.	16:27;	Luke	9:26;	2	Thess.	1:7).
Angels	also	patrol	the	earth	as	God’s	representatives	(Zech.	1:10–11)	and
carry	out	war	against	demonic	forces	(Dan.	10:13;	Rev.	12:7–8).	John	in	his
vision	saw	an	angel	coming	down	from	heaven,	and	he	records	that	the	angel
“seized	the	dragon,	that	ancient	serpent,	who	is	the	Devil	and	Satan,	and
bound	him	for	a	thousand	years,	and	threw	him	into	the	pit	.	.	.”	(Rev.	20:1–
3).	When	Christ	returns,	an	archangel	will	proclaim	his	coming	(1	Thess.
4:16;	cf.	Rev.	18:1–2,	21;	19:17–18;	et	al.).
5.	Angels	Directly	Glorify	God.
	Angels	also	serve	another	function:	they
minister	directly	to	God	by	glorifying	him.	Thus,	in	addition	to	human	beings,
there	are	other	intelligent,	moral	creatures	who	glorify	God	in	the	universe.
Angels	glorify	God	for	who	he	is	in	himself,	for	his	excellence.
Bless	the	L
ORD
,	O	you	his	angels,
you	mighty	ones	who	do	his	word,
hearkening	to	the	voice	of	his	word!
(Ps.	103:20;	cf.	148:2)
The	seraphim	continually	praise	God	for	his	holiness	(Isa.	6:2–3),	as	do	the
four	living	creatures	(Rev.	4:8).
Angels	also	glorify	God	for	his	great	plan	of	salvation	as	they	see	it	unfold.
When	Christ	was	born	in	Bethlehem,	a	multitude	of	angels	praised	God	and
said,	“Glory	to	God	in	the	highest,	and	on	earth	peace	among	men	with	whom
he	is	pleased!”	(Luke	2:14;	cf.	Heb.	1:6).	Jesus	tells	us,	“There	is	joy	before
the	angels	of	God	over	one	sinner	who	repents”	(Luke	15:10),	indicating	that
angels	rejoice	every	time	someone	turns	from	his	or	her	sins	and	trusts	in
Christ	as	Savior.
When	Paul	proclaims	the	gospel	so	that	people	from	diverse	racial
backgrounds,	both	Jews	and	Greeks,	are	brought	into	the	church,	he	sees
God’s	wise	plan	for	the	church	as	being	displayed	before	the	angels	(and
demons),	for	he	says	that	he	was	called	to	preach	to	the	Gentiles	“that	through
the	church	the	manifold	wisdom	of	God	might	now	be	
made	known	to	the
principalities	and	powers	in	the	heavenly	places”	
(Eph.	3:10).	And	Peter	tells
us	that	“angels	long	to	look”	(1	Peter	1:12)	into	the	glories	of	the	plan	of
salvation	as	it	works	out	in	the	lives	of	individual	believers	each	day.
11
	Paul
also	notes	that	Christ	was	“seen	by	angels”	(1	Tim.	3:16),	suggesting	that	they
glorified	God	for	Christ’s	life	of	obedience.	Moreover,	the	fact	that	women
were	to	have	clothing	that	appropriately	signaled	that	they	were	women,
“because	of	the	angels”	(1	Cor.	11:10),	when	the	church	assembled	for
worship,	indicates	that	angels	witness	the	lives	of	Christians	and	glorify	God
for	our	worship	and	obedience.	Indeed,	Paul	reminds	Timothy,	when	he	wants
to	emphasize	the	seriousness	of	a	command,	that	our	actions	are	carried	out	in
the	presence	of	angelic	witnesses:	“In	the	presence	of	God	and	of	Christ	Jesus
and	of	the	elect	angels	
I	charge	you	to	keep	these	rules	without	favor,	doing
nothing	from	partiality”	(1	Tim.	5:21;	cf.	1	Cor.	4:9).	If	Timothy	follows
Paul’s	instructions,	angels	will	witness	his	obedience	and	glorify	God;	if	he
neglects	to	obey,	angels	will	also	see	and	be	grieved.
D.	Our	Relationship	to	Angels
1.
	We	Should	Be	Aware	of	Angels	in	Our	Daily	Lives.
	Scripture	makes	it
clear	that	God	wants	us	to	be	aware	of	the	existence	of	angels	and	of	the
nature	of	their	activity.	We	should	not	therefore	assume	that	its	teaching	about
angels	has	nothing	whatsoever	to	do	with	our	lives	today.	Rather,	there	are
several	ways	in	which	our	Christian	lives	will	be	enriched	by	an	awareness	of
the	existence	and	ministry	of	angels	in	the	world	even	today.
When	we	come	before	God	in	worship,	we	are	joining	not	only	with	the	great
company	of	believers	who	have	died	and	come	into	God’s	presence	in	heaven,
“the	spirits	of	just	men	made	perfect,”	but	also	with	a	great	throng	of	angels,
“innumerable	angels	in	festal	gathering”	(Heb.	12:22–23).	Though	we	do	not
ordinarily	see	or	hear	evidence	of	this	heavenly	worship,	it	certainly	enriches
our	sense	of	reverence	and	joy	in	God’s	presence	if	we	appreciate	the	fact	that
angels	join	us	in	the	worship	of	God.
Moreover,	we	should	be	aware	that	angels	are	watching	our	obedience	or
disobedience	to	God	through	the	day.	Even	if	we	think	our	sins	are	done	in
secret	and	bring	grief	to	no	one	else,	we	should	be	sobered	by	the	thought	that
perhaps	even	hundreds	of	angels	witness	our	disobedience	and	are	grieved.
12
On	the	other	hand,	when	we	are	discouraged	and	think	that	our	faithful
obedience	to	God	is	witnessed	by	no	one	and	is	an	encouragement	to	no	one,
we	can	be	comforted	by	the	realization	that	perhaps	hundreds	of	angels
witness	our	lonely	struggle,	daily	“longing	to	look”	at	the	way	Christ’s	great
salvation	finds	expression	in	our	lives.
As	if	to	make	the	reality	of	angelic	observation	of	our	service	to	God	more
vivid,	the	author	of	Hebrews	suggests	that	angels	can	sometimes	take	human
form,	apparently	to	make	“inspection	visits,”	something	like	the	newspaper’s
restaurant	critic	who	disguises	himself	and	visits	a	new	restaurant.	We	read,
“Do	not	neglect	to	show	hospitality	to	strangers,	for	thereby	some	have
entertained	angels	unawares”	(Heb.	13:2;	cf.	Gen.	18:2–5;	19:1–3).	This
should	make	us	eager	to	minister	to	the	needs	of	others	whom	we	do	not
know,	all	the	while	wondering	if	someday	we	will	reach	heaven	and	meet	the
angel	whom	we	helped	when	he	appeared	temporarily	as	a	human	being	in
distress	here	on	earth.
When	we	are	suddenly	delivered	from	a	danger	or	distress,	we	might	suspect
that	angels	have	been	sent	by	God	to	help	us,	and	we	should	be	thankful.	An
angel	shut	the	mouths	of	the	lions	so	they	would	not	hurt	Daniel	(Dan.	6:22),
delivered	the	apostles	from	prison	(Acts	5:19–20),	later	delivered	Peter	from
prison	(Acts	12:7–11),	and	ministered	to	Jesus	in	the	wilderness	at	a	time	of
great	weakness,	immediately	after	his	temptations	had	ended	(Matt.	4:11).
13
When	a	car	suddenly	swerves	from	hitting	us,	when	we	suddenly	find	footing
to	keep	from	being	swept	along	in	a	raging	river,	when	we	walk	unscathed	in
a	dangerous	neighborhood,	should	we	not	suspect	that	God	has	sent	his	angels
to	protect	us?	Does	not	Scripture	promise,	“For	he	will	give	his	angels	charge
of	you	to	guard	you	in	all	your	ways.	On	their	hands	they	will	bear	you	up,
lest	you	dash	your	foot	against	a	stone”	(Ps.	91:11–12)?	Should	we	not
therefore	thank	God	for	sending	angels	to	protect	us	at	such	times?	It	seems
right	that	we	should	do	so.
2.	Cautions	Regarding	Our	Relationship	to	Angels.
a.	Beware	of	Receiving	False	Doctrine	From	Angels:
	The	Bible	warns
against	receiving	false	doctrine	from	supposed	angels:	“But	even	if	we,	or	an
angel	from	heaven,	should	preach	to	you	a	gospel	contrary	to	that	which	we
preached	to	you,	let	him	be	accursed”	(Gal.	1:8).	Paul	makes	this	warning
because	he	knows	that	there	is	a	possibility	of	deception.	He	says,	“Even
Satan	disguises	himself	as	an	angel	of	light”	(2	Cor.	11:14).	Similarly,	the
lying	prophet	who	deceived	the	man	of	God	in	1	Kings	13	claimed,	“
An	angel
spoke	to	me	
by	the	word	of	the	L
ORD
,	saying,	‘Bring	him	back	with	you	into
your	house	that	he	may	eat	bread	and	drink	water’	”	(1	Kings	13:18).	Yet	the
text	of	Scripture	immediately	adds	in	the	same	verse,	“But	he	lied	to	him.”
These	are	all	instances	of	
false	
doctrine	or	guidance	being	conveyed	by
angels.	It	is	interesting	that	these	examples	show	the	clear	possibility	of
satanic	deception	tempting	us	to	disobey	the	clear	teachings	of	Scripture	or
the	clear	commands	of	God	(cf.	1	Kings	13:9).	These	warnings	should	keep
any	Christians	from	being	fooled	by	the	claims	of	Mormons,	for	example,	that
an	angel	(Moroni)	spoke	to	Joseph	Smith	and	revealed	to	him	the	basis	of	the
Mormon	religion.	Such	“revelation”	is	contrary	to	the	teachings	of	Scripture
at	many	points	(with	respect	to	such	doctrines	as	the	Trinity,	the	person	of
Christ,	justification	by	faith	alone,	and	many	others),	and	Christians	should	be
warned	against	accepting	these	claims.
14
	The	closing	of	the	canon	of
Scripture	(see	
chapter	3
)	should	also	warn	us	that	no	further	revelation	of
doctrine	is	to	be	given	by	God	today,	and	any	claims	to	have	received
additional	revelation	of	doctrine	from	angels	today	should	be	immediately
rejected	as	false.
b.	Do	Not	Worship	Angels,	Pray	to	Them,	or	Seek	Them:
	“Worship	of
angels”	(Col.	2:18)	was	one	of	the	false	doctrines	being	taught	at	Colossae.
Moreover,	an	angel	speaking	to	John	in	the	book	of	Revelation	warns	John
not	to	worship	him:	“You	must	not	do	that!	I	am	a	fellow	servant	with	you
and	your	brethren	who	hold	the	testimony	of	Jesus.	Worship	God”	(Rev.
19:10).
Nor	should	we	pray	to	angels.	We	are	to	pray	only	to	God,	who	alone	is
omnipotent	and	thus	able	to	answer	prayer	and	who	alone	is	omniscient	and
therefore	able	to	hear	the	prayers	of	all	his	people	at	once.	By	virtue	of
omnipotence	and	omniscience,	God	the	Son	and	God	the	Holy	Spirit	are	also
worthy	of	being	prayed	to,	but	this	is	not	true	of	any	other	being.	Paul	warns
us	against	thinking	that	any	other	“mediator”	can	come	between	us	and	God,
“for	there	is	one	God,	and	there	is	
one	mediator	
between	God	and	men,	the
man	Christ	Jesus”	(1	Tim.	2:5).	If	we	were	to	pray	to	angels,	it	would	be
implicitly	attributing	to	them	a	status	equal	to	God,	which	we	must	not	do.
There	is	no	example	in	Scripture	of	anyone	praying	to	any	specific	angel	or
asking	angels	for	help.
Moreover,	Scripture	gives	us	no	warrant	to	seek	for	appearances	of	angels	to
us.	They	manifest	themselves	unsought.	To	seek	such	appearances	would
seem	to	indicate	an	unhealthy	curiosity	or	a	desire	for	some	kind	of
spectacular	event	rather	than	a	love	for	God	and	devotion	to	him	and	his
work.	Though	angels	did	appear	to	people	at	various	times	in	Scripture,	the
people	apparently	never	sought	those	appearances.	Our	role	is	rather	to	talk	to
the	Lord,	who	is	himself	the	commander	of	all	angelic	forces.	However,	it
would	not	seem	wrong	to	ask	God	to	fulfill	his	promise	in	Psalm	91:11	to
send	angels	to	protect	us	in	times	of	need.
c.	Do	Angels	Appear	to	People	Today?
	In	the	earliest	period	of	the	church’s
history	angels	were	active.	An	angel	told	Philip	to	travel	south	on	a	road	that
goes	from	Jerusalem	to	Gaza	(Acts	8:26),	instructed	Cornelius	to	send	a
messenger	to	get	Peter	to	come	from	Joppa	(Acts	10:3–6),	urged	Peter	to	get
up	and	walk	out	of	the	prison	(Acts	12:6–11),	and	promised	Paul	that	no	one
on	his	ship	would	be	lost	and	that	he	himself	would	stand	before	Caesar	(Acts
27:23–24).	Moreover,	the	author	of	Hebrews	encourages	his	readers,	none	of
whom	are	apostles	or	even	first-generation	believers	associated	with	the
apostles	(see	Heb.	2:3),	that	
they	
should	continue	to	show	hospitality	to
strangers,	apparently	with	the	expectation	that	they	too	might	sometime
entertain	angels	without	realizing	it	(Heb.	13:2).
There	seems,	therefore,	no	compelling	reason	to	rule	out	the	possibility	of
angelic	appearances	today.	Some	would	dispute	this	on	the	grounds	that	the
sufficiency	of	Scripture	(see	
chapter	8
)	and	the	closing	of	its	canon	(see
chapter	3
)	rule	out	the	possibility	of	angelic	manifestations	now.
15
	They
would	say	that	we	are	not	to	expect	God	to	communicate	to	us	through	angels.
However,	this	conclusion	does	not	follow.	Though	angels	would	not	add	to
the	doctrinal	and	moral	content	of	Scripture,	God	
could	
communicate
information	to	us	through	angels	as	he	also	does	through	prophecy
16
	or
through	ordinary	communication	from	other	persons,	or	through	our
observation	of	the	world.	If	God	can	send	another	human	being	to	warn	us	of
danger	or	encourage	us	when	we	are	downcast,	there	seems	no	inherent
reason	why	he	could	not	occasionally	send	an	angel	to	do	this	as	well.
However,	we	should	use	
extreme	caution	
in	receiving	guidance	from	an	angel
should	such	an	unusual	event	happen.	(It	is	perhaps	noteworthy	that	very	few
instances	of	such	events	are	recorded	today,	and	many	of	these	involve	the
communication	of	antiscriptural	doctrine,	indicating	that	they	are	actually
demonic	appearances.)	The	fact	that	demons	can	appear	as	angels	of	light	(see
2	Cor.	11:14)	should	warn	us	that	the	appearance	of	any	angel-like	creature
does	not	guarantee	that	this	being	speaks	truthfully:	
Scripture	
is	our	guide,
and	no	angelic	creature	can	give	authoritative	teaching	that	is	contrary	to
Scripture	(see	Gal.	1:8).
An	angelic	appearance	today	would	be	unusual.	If	one	should	(apparently)
occur,	we	should	evaluate	it	with	caution.	But	there	is	no	convincing	reason
for	saying	that	such	an	event	absolutely	could	not	happen,	particularly	in	a
time	of	extreme	danger	or	intense	conflict	with	the	forces	of	evil.
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
How	might	this	chapter	affect	how	you	think	about	angels	from	now	on?
What	difference	would	it	make	in	your	attitude	in	worship	if	you
consciously	thought	about	being	in	the	presence	of	angels	when	you
were	singing	praises	to	God?
2
.	
Do	you	think	there	are	angels	watching	you	right	now?	What	attitude	or
attitudes	do	you	think	they	have	as	they	watch	you?	Have	you	ever
experienced	a	remarkably	elevated	sense	of	joy	just	after	praying	with
someone	to	receive	Christ	as	personal	Savior?	Do	you	think	one	aspect
contributing	to	that	joy	might	be	that	angels	are	also	rejoicing	with	you
because	a	sinner	has	repented	(Luke	15:10)?
3
.	
Have	you	had	a	remarkable	rescue	from	physical	or	other	kinds	of
danger	and	wondered	if	angels	were	involved	in	helping	you	at	the	time?
4
.	
How	can	the	example	of	angels	who	joyfully	and	faithfully	perform	their
assigned	tasks,	whether	great	or	small,	be	of	help	to	you	in	the
responsibilities	that	you	face	today,	whether	at	work	or	at	home	or	in	the
church?
5
.	
How	do	you	think	you	will	feel	when	God	asks	you	to	judge	angels	(1
Cor.	6:3)?	Explain	what	that	fact	tells	you	about	the	greatness	of	your
humanity	as	created	in	the	image	of	God.
SPECIAL	TERMS
angel
	
	
	
	
	
Michael
angel	of	the	Lord
	
	
	
	
	
principalities	and	powers
archangel
	
	
	
	
	
seraphim
cherubim
	
	
	
	
	
sons	of	God
living	creature
	
	
	
	
	
watchers
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the	
bibliography	to
chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be	found	in	
Appendix	4
.)
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92			Litton,	125–29
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1892–94			Miley,	2:490–96
1940			Wiley,	1:472–76
1983			Carter,	2:1047–69
3.			Baptist
1767			Gill,	1:375–84,	434–35
1887			Boyce,	174–81
1907			Strong,	443–64
1917			Mullins,	276–80
1976–83			Henry,	6:229–50
1983–85			Erickson,	433–51
4.			Dispensational
1947			Chafer,	2:3–32
1949			Thiessen,	133–50
1986			Ryrie,	121–34
5.			Lutheran
1917–24			Pieper,	1:498–508
1934			Mueller,	196–202
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1559			Calvin,	1:163–72	(1.14.3–12)
1724–58			Edwards,	2:604–7,	612–17
1861			Heppe,	201–19
1871–73			Hodge,	1:637–43
1878			Dabney,	264–75
1938			Berkhof,	141–48
1962			Buswell,	1:130–34
7.			Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988–92			Williams,	1:169–96
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955			Ott,	114–21
2.			Roman	Catholic:	Post-Vatican	II
1980			McBrien	(no	explicit	treatment)
Other	Works
Bromiley,	G.	W.	“Angel.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	46–47.
Dickason,	C.	Fred.	
Angels,	Elect	and	Evil.	
Chicago:	Moody,	1975.
Graham,	Billy.	
Angels:	God’s	Secret	Agents.	
Revised	and	expanded
edition.	Waco,	Tex.:	Word,	1986.
Joppie,	A.	S.	
The	Ministry	of	Angels.	
Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1953.
McComiskey,	T.	E.	“Angel	of	the	Lord.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	47–48.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
Revelation	5:11–12:	
Then	I	looked,	and	I	heard	around	the	throne	and	the
living	creatures	and	the	elders	the	voice	of	many	angels,	numbering	myriads
of	myriads	and	thousands	of	thousands,	saying	with	a	loud	voice,	“Worthy	is
the	Lamb	who	was	slain,	to	receive	power	and	wealth	and	wisdom	and	might
and	honor	and	glory	and	blessing!”
HYMN
“Angels	From	the	Realms	of	Glory”
Angels,	from	the	realms	of	glory,
wing	your	flight	o’er	all	the	earth
Ye	who	sang	creation’s	story,
now	proclaim	Messiah’s	birth:
Come	and	worship,	come	and	worship,
worship	Christ	the	newborn	King.
Shepherds,	in	the	fields	abiding,
watching	o’er	your	flocks	by	night;
God	with	man	is	now	residing,
yonder	shines	the	infant	light:
Come	and	worship,	come	and	worship,
worship	Christ	the	newborn	King.
Sages,	leave	your	contemplations,
brighter	visions	beam	afar;
Seek	the	great	desire	of	nations;
ye	have	seen	his	natal	star:
Come	and	worship,	come	and	worship,
worship	Christ	the	newborn	King.
Saints,	before	the	altar	bending,
watching	long	in	hope	and	fear,
Suddenly	the	Lord,	descending,
in	his	temple	shall	appear:
Come	and	worship,	come	and	worship,
worship	Christ	the	newborn	King.
All	creation,	join	in	praising
God	the	Father,	Spirit,	Son;
Evermore	your	voices	raising
to	th’	eternal	Three	in	One:
Come	and	worship,	come	and	worship,
worship	Christ	the	newborn	King.
AUTHOR:	JAMES	MONTGOMERY,	1816
NOTES
1
In	Hebrew,	the	word	
cherub	
is	singular,	while	the	plural	form	is	
cherubim.
2
The	Hebrew	word	
seraph	
is	singular,	while	
seraphim	
is	the	plural	form.
3
The	descriptions	differ	somewhat	between	Ezekiel	and	Revelation	but	also	have	many	similarities.	It	is	difficult	to	tell	whether
these	are	different	groups	of	creatures	or	whether	those	in	Revelation	have	been	transformed	from	the	form	they	took	in	Ezekiel’s
vision.
4
I	have	not	counted	Satan	here,	who	is	a	fallen	angel,	and	who	is	sometimes	called	by	other	names	as	well.	(See	
chapter	20
,	on
Satan	and	demons.)
5
Nevertheless,	it	seems	that	a	very	large	number	of	angels	can	be	in	one	place	at	the	same	time,	at	least	if	the	example	of	evil
angels	or	demons	is	a	good	indication	of	this	fact.	When	Jesus	asked	the	demonic	forces	in	the	Gadarene	demoniac,	“What	is	your
name?”	he	said,	“Legion”;	for	“many	demons	had	entered	him”	(Luke	8:30).	Even	if	we	do	not	understand	this	literally	to	mean	a
number	equal	to	a	legion	of	the	Roman	army	(3,000–6,000	men),	and	even	if	we	allow	that	since	Satan	is	the	father	of	lies,	the
demons	in	the	man	could	be	greatly	exaggerating,	Luke	still	says	that	“many	demons	had	entered	him.”
6
The	Greek	term	
myrias	
(“myriad”)	is	an	expression	referring	to	“a	very	large	number,	not	exactly	defined”	(BAGD,	p.	
529).
7
Another	possibility	is	that	“angel”	in	Matt.	18:10	and	in	Acts	12:15	(where	the	disciples	think	that	Peter’s	“angel”	is	knocking	at
the	gate)	means	not	an	angelic	being	but	the	“spirit”	of	the	person	who	has	died:	for	a	defense	of	this	view	see	B.	B.	Warfield,
“The	Angels	of	Christ’s	‘Little	Ones,’	”	in	
Selected	Shorter	Writings,	
ed.	John	E.	Meeter	(Nutley,	N.J.:	Presbyterian	and
Reformed,	1970),	1:253–66;	also	D.	A.	Carson,	“Matthew,”	
EBC,	
8:400–401.
The	problem	with	this	interpretation	is	that	not	one	clear	example	has	been	found	where	the	word	
angel	
(Gk.	
angelos
)	means
“spirit	of	a	person	who	has	died.”	Warfield	(pp.	265–66),	followed	by	Carson,	quotes	two	supposed	examples	from	extrabiblical
Jewish	literature,	1	Enoch	51:4	and	2	Baruch	51:5,	12.	But	these	texts	are	not	convincing:	1	Enoch	51:4	simply	says,	“And	the
faces	of	[all]	the	angels	in	heaven	shall	be	lighted	up	with	joy”	(R.	H.	Charles,	
The	Apocrypha	and	Pseudepigrapha	of	the	Old
Testament,	
2	vols.	[Oxford:	Clarendon	Press,	1913],	2:219),	but	does	not	say	that	people	will	become	angels.	2	Baruch	51:5	states
that	the	righteous	will	be	transformed	“into	the	splendor	of	angels”	(Charles,	2:508),	but	this	simply	means	that	they	will	have
brightness	like	the	angels,	not	that	they	will	become	angels.
In	two	related	passages,	2	Baruch	51:12	states	that	the	righteous	will	have	excellency	“surpassing	that	in	the	angels,”	and	2
Baruch	51:10	says	that	“they	shall	be	made	like	unto	the	angels”	(Charles,	2:509),	but	these	texts	do	not	say	that	people	will
become	angels,	either.	Moreover,	since	no	extant	Greek	text	is	available	for	any	of	these	three	passages	(1	Enoch	is	an	Ethiopic
text	with	some	Greek	fragments	and	2	Baruch	is	a	Syriac	text),	they	are	not	useful	for	determining	the	meaning	of	the	Greek	word
angelos.
Warfield	also	cites	
Acts	of	Paul	and	Thecla,	
ed.	Tischendorf,	p.	
42,	para.	5,	ad	finem,	as	saying,	“Blessed	are	they	that	fear	God,
for	they	shall	become	angels	of	God,”	but	the	text	dates	from	the	late	second	century	A.D.	(
ODCC,	
p.	1049)	and	is	an	unreliable
source	of	information	about	what	the	early	church	believed	or	what	the	New	Testament	teaches.
8
We	should	note	that	this	statement	of	Jesus	is	given	in	answer	to	the	Sadducees’	question	about	a	woman	who	had	been	married
seven	times,	and	that	Jesus	said	that	their	question	showed	lack	of	knowledge	both	of	Scripture	and	of	“the	power	of	God”	(Matt.
22:29).	Jesus’	answer,	therefore,	should	comfort	us	and	not	trouble	us:	we	should	contemplate	heaven	not	with	sorrow	at	the
anticipation	of	diminished	interpersonal	relationships,	but	with	joy	at	the	prospect	of	enriched	relationships.	(See	
chapter	20
,	for	a
discussion	of	the	“sons	of	God”	in	Gen.	6:2,	4.)
9
Whether	the	angels	who	sinned	lost	some	of	their	power	when	they	rebelled	against	God	and	became	demons,	or	whether	their
power	is	still	the	same	as	it	was	when	they	were	angels,	Scripture	does	not	tell	us.
10
See	
chapter	21
.
11
The	present	tense	verb	
epithymousin,	
“long,”	gives	the	sense	“are	continually	longing,	even	at	the	present	time”	to	look	into
these	things.	This	longing	includes	a	holy	curiosity	to	watch	and	delight	in	the	glories	of	Christ’s	kingdom	as	they	find	ever	fuller
realization	in	the	lives	of	individual	Christians	throughout	the	history	of	the	church.	(See	discussion	in	Wayne	Grudem,	
1	Peter,	
p.
73.)
12
This	is	not	to	deny	that	the	primary	deterrent	against	sinning	must	be	fear	of	displeasing	God	himself;	it	is	just	to	say	that	as	the
presence	of	other	human	beings	serves	as	an	additional	deterrent,	so	the	knowledge	of	the	presence	of	angels	should	also	serve	as
a	deterrent	to	us.
13
Note	also	the	report	in	Luke	22:43	that	when	Jesus	was	praying	in	the	Garden	of	Gethsemane,	“there	appeared	to	him	an	angel
from	heaven,	strengthening	him.”	This	text	has	substantial	ancient	attestation.
14
Of	course,	there	were	times	in	Scripture	when	doctrinal	truth	came	through	angels	(Luke	1:13–20,	30–37;	2:10–14;	Acts	1:11;
Heb.	2:2).	The	warning	passages	mentioned	above	forbid	receiving	doctrine	contrary	to	Scripture	from	angels.
15
See	the	discussion	of	the	cessation	of	some	spiritual	gifts	in	
chapter	52
,	below.
16
See	
chapter	53
.
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	20
Satan	and	Demons
How	should	Christians	think	of	Satan	and	demons	today?
Spiritual	warfare.
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
The	previous	chapter	leads	naturally	to	a	consideration	of	Satan	and	demons,
since	they	are	evil	angels	who	once	were	like	the	good	angels	but	who	sinned
and	lost	their	privilege	of	serving	God.	Like	angels,	they	are	also	created,
spiritual	beings	with	moral	judgment	and	high	intelligence	but	without
physical	bodies.	We	may	define	demons	as	follows:	
Demons	are	evil	angels
who	sinned	against	God	and	who	now	continually	work	evil	in	the	world.
A.	The	Origin	of	Demons
When	God	created	the	world,	he	“saw	everything	that	he	had	made,	and
behold,	it	was	very	good”	(Gen.	1:31).	This	means	that	even	the	angelic	world
that	God	had	created	did	not	have	evil	angels	or	demons	in	it	at	that	time.	But
by	the	time	of	Genesis	3,	we	find	that	Satan,	in	the	form	of	a	serpent,	was
tempting	Eve	to	sin	(Gen.	3:1–5).	Therefore,	sometime	between	the	events	of
Genesis	1:31	and	Genesis	3:1,	there	must	have	been	a	rebellion	in	the	angelic
world	with	many	angels	turning	against	God	and	becoming	evil.
The	New	Testament	speaks	of	this	in	two	places.	Peter	tells	us,	“God	did	not
spare	the	angels	when	they	sinned,	but	cast	them	into	hell	and	committed
them	to	pits	of	nether	gloom	to	be	kept	until	the	judgment”	(2	Peter	2:4).
1
Jude	also	says	that	“the	angels	that	did	not	keep	their	own	position	but	left
their	proper	dwelling	have	been	kept	by	him	in	eternal	chains	in	the	nether
gloom	until	the	judgment	of	the	great	day”	(Jude	6).	Once	again	the	emphasis
is	on	the	fact	that	they	are	removed	from	the	glory	of	God’s	presence	and	their
activity	is	restricted	(metaphorically,	they	are	in	“eternal	chains”),	but	the	text
does	not	imply	either	that	the	influence	of	demons	has	been	removed	from	the
world	or	that	some	demons	are	kept	in	a	place	of	punishment	apart	from	the
world	while	others	are	able	to	influence	it.
2
	Rather,	both	2	Peter	and	Jude	tell
us	that	some	angels	rebelled	against	God	and	became	hostile	opponents	to	his
Word.	Their	sin	seems	to	have	been	pride,	a	refusal	to	accept	their	assigned
place,	for	they	“did	not	keep	their	own	position	but	left	their	proper	dwelling”
(Jude	6).
It	is	also	possible	that	there	is	a	reference	to	the	fall	of	Satan,	the	prince	of
demons,	in	Isaiah	14.	As	Isaiah	is	describing	the	judgment	of	God	on	the	king
of	Babylon	(an	earthly,	human	king),	he	then	comes	to	a	section	where	he
begins	to	use	language	that	seems	too	strong	to	refer	to	any	merely	human
king:
How	you	are	fallen	from	heaven,
O	Day	Star,
3
	son	of	Dawn!
How	you	are	cut	down	to	the	ground,
you	who	laid	the	nations	low!
You	said	in	your	heart,
“
I	will	ascend	to	heaven;
above	the	stars	of	God
I	will	set	my	throne	on	high;
I	will	sit	on	the	mount	of	assembly
in	the	far	north;
I	will	ascend	above	the	heights	of	the	clouds,
I	will	make	myself	like	the	Most	High.”
But	you	are	brought	down	to	Sheol,
to	the	depths	of	the	Pit.	(Isa.	14:12–15)
This	language	of	ascending	to	heaven	and	setting	his	throne	on	high	and
saying,	“I	will	make	myself	like	the	Most	High”	strongly	suggests	a	rebellion
by	an	angelic	creature	of	great	power	and	dignity.	It	would	not	be	uncommon
for	Hebrew	prophetic	speech	to	pass	from	descriptions	of	human	events	to
descriptions	of	heavenly	events	that	are	parallel	to	them	and	that	the	earthly
events	picture	in	a	limited	way.
4
	If	this	is	so,	then	the	sin	of	Satan	is	described
as	one	of	pride	and	attempting	to	be	equal	to	God	in	status	and	authority.
However,	it	is	unlikely	that	Genesis	6:2–4	refers	to	the	fall	of	demons.	In
these	verses,	we	are	told	that	“the	sons	of	God	saw	that	the	daughters	of	men
were	fair;	and	they	took	to	wife	such	of	them	as	they	chose.	.	.	.	The	Nephilim
were	on	the	earth	in	those	days,	and	also	afterward,	when	the	sons	of	God
came	in	to	the	daughters	of	men,	and	they	bore	children	to	them.”	Although
some	have	thought	that	the	“sons	of	God”	in	this	passage	are	angels	who
sinned	by	marrying	human	women,	this	is	not	a	likely	interpretation,	for	the
following	reasons:
5
Angels	are	nonmaterial	beings	and	according	to	Jesus	do	not	marry	(Matt.
22:30),	facts	that	cast	doubt	on	the	idea	that	“the	sons	of	God”	are	angels	who
married	human	wives.	Moreover,	nothing	in	the	
context	
of	Genesis	6	itself
indicates	that	the	“sons	of	God”	should	be	understood	as	angels	(this	makes
this	passage	unlike	Job	1–2,	for	example,	where	the	context	of	a	heavenly
council	makes	it	clear	to	the	reader	that	angels	are	being	referred	to).	It	is	far
more	likely	that	the	phrase	“sons	of	God”	here	(as	in	Deut.	14:1)	refers	to
people	belonging	to	God	and,	like	God,	walking	in	righteousness	(note	Gen.
4:26	as	an	introduction	to	Gen.	5,	marking	the	beginning	of	Seth’s	line	at	the
same	time	as	“men	began	to	call	upon	the	name	of	the	L
ORD
”).	In	fact,	there	is
an	emphasis	on	sonship	as	including	likeness	to	one’s	father	in	Genesis	5:3.
Moreover,	the	text	traces	the	descendants	from	God	through	Adam	and	Seth
to	many	“sons”	in	all	of	chapter	5.	The	larger	purpose	of	the	narrative	seems
to	be	to	trace	the	parallel	development	of	the	godly	(ultimately	messianic)	line
of	Seth	and	the	ungodly	descendants	of	the	rest	of	mankind.	Therefore,	the
“sons	of	God”	in	Genesis	6:2	are	men	who	are	righteous	in	their	imitation	of
the	character	of	their	heavenly	Father,	and	the	“daughters	of	men”	are	the
ungodly	wives	whom	they	marry.
B.	Satan	as	Head	of	the	Demons
“Satan”	is	the	personal	name	of	the	head	of	the	demons.	This	name	is
mentioned	in	Job	1:6,	where	“the	sons	of	God	came	to	present	themselves
before	the	L
ORD
,	and	
Satan	
also	came	among	them”	(see	also	Job	1:7–2:7).
Here	he	appears	as	the	enemy	of	the	Lord	who	brings	severe	temptations
against	Job.	Similarly,	near	the	end	of	David’s	life,	“Satan	stood	up	against
Israel,	and	incited	David	to	number	Israel”	(1	Chron.	21:1).	Moreover,
Zechariah	saw	a	vision	of	“Joshua	the	high	priest	standing	before	the	angel	of
the	L
ORD
,	and	Satan	standing	at	his	right	hand	to	accuse	him”	(Zech.	3:1).
The	name	“Satan”	is	a	Hebrew	word	(
sātān
)	that	means	“adversary.”
6
	The
New	Testament	also	uses	the	name	“Satan,”	simply	taking	it	over	from	the
Old	Testament.	So	Jesus,	in	his	temptation	in	the	wilderness,	speaks	to	Satan
directly	saying,	“Begone,	Satan!”	(Matt.	4:10),	or	“I	saw	Satan	fall	like
lightning	from	heaven”	(Luke	10:18).
The	Bible	uses	other	names	for	Satan	as	well.	He	is	called	“the	devil”
7
	(only
in	the	New	Testament:	Matt.	4:1;	13:39;	25:41;	Rev.	12:9;	20:2;	et	al.),	“the
serpent”	(Gen.	3:1,	14;	2	Cor.	11:3;	Rev.	12:9;	20:2),	“Be-elzebul”	(Matt.
10:25;	12:24,	27;	Luke	11:15),	“the	ruler	of	this	world”	(John	12:31;	14:30;
16:11),
8
	“the	prince	of	the	power	of	the	air”	(Eph.	2:2),	or	“the	evil	one”
(Matt.	13:19;	1	John	2:13).	When	Jesus	says	to	Peter,	“Get	behind	me,	Satan!
You	are	a	hindrance	to	me;	for	you	are	not	on	the	side	of	God,	but	of	men”
(Matt.	16:23),	he	recognizes	that	Peter’s	attempt	to	keep	him	from	suffering
and	dying	on	the	cross	is	really	an	attempt	to	keep	him	from	obedience	to	the
Father’s	plan.	Jesus	realizes	that	opposition	ultimately	comes	not	from	Peter,
but	from	Satan	himself.
C.	The	Activity	of	Satan	and	Demons
1.
	Satan	Was	the	Originator	of	Sin.
	Satan	sinned	before	any	human	beings
did	so,	as	is	evident	from	the	fact	that	he	(in	the	form	of	the	serpent)	tempted
Eve	(Gen.	3:1–6;	2	Cor.	11:3).	The	New	Testament	also	informs	us	that	Satan
was	a	“murderer	from	the	beginning”	and	is	“a	liar	and	the	father	of	lies”
(John	8:44).	It	also	says	that	“the	devil	has	sinned	
from	the	beginning”	
(1
John	3:8).	In	both	of	these	texts,	the	phrase	“from	the	beginning”	does	not
imply	that	Satan	was	evil	from	the	time	God	began	to	create	the	world	(“from
the	beginning	of	the	world”)	or	from	the	beginning	of	his	existence	(“from	the
beginning	of	his	life”),	but	rather	from	the	“beginning”	parts	of	the	history	of
the	world	(Genesis	3	and	even	before).	The	devil’s	characteristic	has	been	to
originate	sin	and	tempt	others	to	sin.
2.	Demons	Oppose	and	Try	to	Destroy	Every	Work	of	God.
	Just	as	Satan
tempted	Eve	to	sin	against	God	(Gen.	3:1–6),	so	he	tried	to	get	Jesus	to	sin
and	thus	fail	in	his	mission	as	Messiah	(Matt.	4:1–11).	The	tactics	of	Satan
and	his	demons	are	to	use	lies	(John	8:44),	deception	(Rev.	12:9),	murder	(Ps.
106:37;	John	8:44),	and	every	other	kind	of	destructive	activity	to	attempt	to
cause	people	to	turn	away	from	God	and	destroy	themselves.
9
	Demons	will
try	every	tactic	to	blind	people	to	the	gospel	(2	Cor.	4:4)	and	keep	them	in
bondage	to	things	that	hinder	them	from	coming	to	God	(Gal.	4:8).	They	will
also	try	to	use	temptation,	doubt,	guilt,	fear,	confusion,	sickness,	envy,	pride,
slander,	or	any	other	means	possible	to	hinder	a	Christian’s	witness	and
usefulness.
3.	Yet	Demons	Are	Limited	by	God’s	Control	and	Have	Limited	Power.
The	story	of	Job	makes	it	clear	that	Satan	could	only	do	what	God	gave	him
permission	to	do	and	nothing	more	(Job	1:12;	2:6).	Demons	are	kept	in
“eternal	chains”	(Jude	6)	and	can	be	successfully	resisted	by	Christians
through	the	authority	that	Christ	gives	them	(James	4:7).
Moreover,	the	power	of	demons	is	limited.	After	rebelling	against	God	they
do	not	have	the	power	they	had	when	they	were	angels,	for	sin	is	a	weakening
and	destructive	influence.	The	power	of	demons,	though	significant,	is
therefore	probably	less	than	the	power	of	angels.
In	the	area	of	knowledge,	
we	should	not	think	that	demons	can	know	the
future	or	that	they	can	read	our	minds	or	know	our	thoughts.	
In	many	places
in	the	Old	Testament,	the	Lord	shows	himself	to	be	the	true	God	in	distinction
from	the	false	(demonic)	gods	of	the	nations	by	the	fact	that	
he	alone	can
know	the	future:	
“I	am	God,	and	there	is	none	like	me,	declaring	the	end	from
the	beginning	and	from	ancient	times	things	not	yet	done”	(Isa.	46:9–10).
10
Even	angels	do	not	know	the	time	of	Jesus’	return	(Mark	13:32),	and	there	is
no	indication	in	Scripture	that	they	or	demons	know	anything	else	about	the
future	either.
With	respect	to	knowing	our	thoughts,	the	Bible	tells	us	that	Jesus	knew
people’s	thoughts	(Matt.	9:4;	12:25;	Mark	2:8;	Luke	6:8;	11:17)	and	that	God
knows	people’s	thoughts	(Gen.	6:5;	Ps.	139:2,	4,	23;	Isa.	66:18),	but	there	is
no	indication	that	angels	or	demons	can	know	our	thoughts.	In	fact,	Daniel
told	King	Nebuchadnezzar	that	no	one	speaking	by	any	other	power	than	the
God	of	heaven	could	tell	the	king	what	he	had	dreamed:
Daniel	answered	the	king,	“No	wise	men,	enchanters,	magicians,	or
astrologers	can	show	to	the	king	the	mystery	which	the	king	has
asked,	but	there	is	a	God	in	heaven	who	reveals	mysteries,	and	he	has
made	known	to	King	Nebuchadnezzar	what	will	be	in	the	latter	days.
Your	dream	and	the	visions	of	your	head	as	you	lay	in	bed	are
these.	.	.	.”	(Dan.	2:27–28)
11
But	if	demons	cannot	read	people’s	minds,	how	shall	we	understand
contemporary	reports	of	witch	doctors,	fortune-tellers,	or	other	people
evidently	under	demonic	influence	who	are	able	to	tell	people	accurate	details
of	their	lives	which	they	thought	no	one	knew,	such	as	(for	example)	what
food	they	had	for	breakfast,	where	they	keep	some	hidden	money	in	their
house,	etc.?	Most	of	these	things	can	be	explained	by	realizing	that	demons
can	
observe	
what	goes	on	in	the	world	and	can	probably	draw	some
conclusions	from	those	observations.	A	demon	may	know	what	I	ate	for
breakfast	simply	because	it	saw	me	eat	breakfast!	It	may	know	what	I	said	in
a	private	telephone	conversation	because	it	listened	to	the	conversation.
Christians	should	not	be	led	astray	if	they	encounter	members	of	the	occult	or
of	other	false	religions	who	seem	to	demonstrate	such	unusual	knowledge
from	time	to	time.	These	results	of	observation	do	not	prove	that	demons	can
read	our	thoughts,	however,	and	nothing	in	the	Bible	would	lead	us	to	think
they	have	that	power.
4.	There	Have	Been	Differing	Stages	of	Demonic	Activity	in	the	History
of	Redemption.
a.	In	the	Old	Testament:
	Because	in	the	Old	Testament	the	word	
demon	
is
not	often	used,	it	might	at	first	seem	that	there	is	little	indication	of	demonic
activity.	However,	the	people	of	Israel	often	sinned	by	serving	false	gods,	and
when	we	realize	that	these	false	“gods”	were	really	demonic	forces,	we	see
that	there	is	quite	a	bit	of	Old	Testament	material	referring	to	demons.	This
identification	of	false	gods	as	demons	is	made	explicit,	for	example,	when
Moses	says,
“They	stirred	him	[God]	to	jealousy	with	strange	gods;
with	abominable	practices	they	provoked	him	to	anger.
They	sacrificed	to	demons	which	were	no	gods,
to	gods	they	had	never	known.”	(Deut.	32:16–17)
Moreover,	in	reflecting	on	the	horrible	practice	of	child	sacrifice,	which	the
Israelites	imitated	from	the	pagan	nations,	the	psalmist	says,
“They	mingled	with	the	nations
and	learned	to	do	as	they	did.
They	served	their	idols,
which	became	a	snare	to	them.
They	sacrificed	their	sons
and	their	daughters	
to	the	demons.”	
(Ps.	106:35–37)
These	references	demonstrate	that	the	worship	offered	to	idols	in	all	the
nations	surrounding	Israel	was	really	worship	of	Satan	and	his	demons.	This
is	why	Paul	can	say	of	the	false	religions	of	the	first-century	Mediterranean
world,	“What	pagans	sacrifice	
they	offer	to	demons	
and	not	to	God”	(1	Cor.
10:20).	It	is	thus	fair	to	conclude	that	all	the	nations	around	Israel	that
practiced	idol	worship	were	engaging	in	the	worship	of	demons.	The	battles
the	Israelites	fought	against	pagan	nations	were	battles	against	nations	who
were	controlled	by	demonic	forces	and	thus	“in	the	power	of	the	evil	one”	(cf.
1	John	5:19).	They	were	as	much	spiritual	battles	as	physical	battles:	the
people	of	Israel	needed	to	depend	on	God’s	power	to	help	them	in	the
spiritual	realm	as	much	as	in	the	physical.
In	light	of	this,	it	is	significant	that	there	is	no	clear	instance	of	the	casting	out
of	demons	in	the	Old	Testament.	The	nearest	analogy	is	the	case	of	David
playing	the	lyre	for	King	Saul:	“And	whenever	the	evil	spirit	from	God	was
upon	Saul,	David	took	the	lyre	and	played	it	with	his	hand;	so	Saul	was
refreshed,	and	was	well,	and	the	evil	spirit	departed	from	him”	(1	Sam.
16:23).	However,	Scripture	speaks	of	this	as	a	recurring	event	(“whenever”),
indicating	that	the	evil	spirit	returned	after	David	left	Saul.	This	was	not	the
completely	effective	triumph	over	evil	spirits	that	we	find	in	the	New
Testament.
Consistent	with	the	purpose	of	Satan	to	destroy	all	the	good	works	of	God,
pagan	worship	of	demonic	idols	was	characterized	by	destructive	practices
such	as	the	sacrifice	of	children	(Ps.	106:35–37),	inflicting	bodily	harm	on
oneself	(1	Kings	18:28;	cf.	Deut.	14:1),	and	cult	prostitution	as	a	part	of	pagan
worship	(Deut.	23:17;	1	Kings	14:24;	Hos.	4:14).
12
	Worship	of	demons	will
regularly	lead	to	immoral	and	self-destructive	practices.
b.	During	the	Ministry	of	Jesus:
	After	hundreds	of	years	of	inability	to	have
any	effective	triumph	over	demonic	forces,
13
	it	is	understandable	that	when
Jesus	came	casting	out	demons	with	absolute	authority,	the	people	were
amazed:	“And	they	were	all	amazed,	so	that	they	questioned	among
themselves,	saying,	‘What	is	this?	A	new	teaching!	With	authority	he
commands	even	the	unclean	spirits,	and	they	obey	him’	”	(Mark	1:27).	Such
power	over	demonic	forces	had	never	before	been	seen	in	the	history	of	the
world.
Jesus	explains	that	his	power	over	demons	is	a	distinguishing	mark	on	his
ministry	to	inaugurate	the	reign	of	the	kingdom	of	God	among	mankind	in	a
new	and	powerful	way:
But	if	it	is	by	the	Spirit	of	God	that	I	cast	out	demons,	
then	the
kingdom	of	God	has	come	upon	you.	
Or	how	can	one	enter	a	strong
man’s	house	and	plunder	his	goods,	unless	he	first	binds	the	strong
man?	Then	indeed	he	may	plunder	his	house.	(Matt.	12:28–29)
The	“strong	man”	is	Satan,	and	Jesus	had	bound	him,	probably	at	the	time	of
his	triumph	over	him	in	the	temptation	in	the	wilderness	(Matt.	4:1–11).
During	his	earthly	ministry,	Jesus	had	entered	the	strong	man’s	“house”	(the
world	of	unbelievers	who	are	under	the	bondage	of	Satan),	and	he	was
plundering	his	house,	that	is,	freeing	people	from	satanic	bondage	and
bringing	them	into	the	joy	of	the	kingdom	of	God.	It	was	“by	the	Spirit	of
God”	that	Jesus	did	this;	the	new	power	of	the	Holy	Spirit	working	to	triumph
over	demons	was	evidence	that	in	the	ministry	of	Jesus	“the	kingdom	of	God
has	come	upon	you.”
c.	During	the	New	Covenant	Age:
	This	authority	over	demonic	powers	was
not	limited	to	Jesus	himself,	for	he	gave	similar	authority	first	to	the	Twelve
(Matt.	10:8;	Mark	3:15),	and	then	to	seventy	disciples.	After	a	period	of
ministry,	the	seventy	“returned	with	joy,	saying,	‘Lord,	even	the	demons	are
subject	to	us	in	your	name!’	”	(Luke	10:17).	Then	Jesus	responded,	“I	saw
Satan	fall	like	lightning	from	heaven”	(Luke	10:18),	indicating	again	a
distinctive	triumph	over	Satan’s	power	(once	again,	this	was	probably	at	the
time	of	Jesus’	victory	in	the	temptation	in	the	wilderness,	but	Scripture	does
not	explicitly	specify	that	time).
14
	Authority	over	unclean	spirits	later
extended	beyond	the	seventy	disciples	to	those	in	the	early	church	who
ministered	in	Jesus’	name	(Acts	8:7;	16:18;	James	4:7;	1	Peter	5:8–9),	a	fact
consistent	with	the	idea	that	ministry	in	Jesus’	name	in	the	new	covenant	age
is	characterized	by	triumph	over	the	powers	of	the	devil	(1	John	3:8).
d.	During	the	Millennium:
	During	the	millennium,	the	future	thousand-year
reign	of	Christ	on	earth	mentioned	in	Revelation	20,
15
	the	activity	of	Satan
and	demons	will	be	further	restricted.	Using	language	that	suggests	a	much
greater	restriction	of	Satan’s	activity	than	we	see	today,	John	describes	his
vision	of	the	beginning	of	the	millennium	as	follows:
Then	I	saw	an	angel	coming	down	from	heaven,	holding	in	his	hand
the	key	of	the	bottomless	pit	and	a	great	chain.	And	he	seized	the
dragon,	that	ancient	serpent,	who	is	the	Devil	and	Satan,	and	
bound
him	for	a	thousand	years,	and	threw	him	into	the	pit,	and	shut	it	and
sealed	it	over	him,	that	he	should	deceive	the	nations	no	more,	
till	the
thousand	years	were	ended.	After	that	he	must	be	loosed	for	a	little
while.	(Rev.	20:1–3)
Here	Satan	is	described	as	completely	deprived	of	any	ability	to	influence	the
earth.	During	the	millennium,	however,	there	will	still	be	sin	in	the	hearts	of
the	unbelievers,	which	will	grow	until	the	end	of	the	thousand	years	when
there	will	be	a	large-scale	rebellion	against	Christ,	led	by	Satan	who,	having
been	“loosed	from	his	prison”	(Rev.	20:7),	will	come	to	lead	that	rebellion
(Rev.	20:8–9).	The	fact	that	sin	and	rebelliousness	persist	in	people’s	hearts
apart	from	the	activity	of	Satan,	even	during	the	thousand-year	reign	of
Christ,	shows	that	we	cannot	blame	all	sin	in	the	world	on	Satan	and	his
demons.	Even	when	Satan	is	without	influence	in	the	world,	sin	will	remain
and	be	a	problem	in	people’s	hearts.
e.	At	the	Final	Judgment:
	At	the	end	of	the	millennium,	when	Satan	is
loosed	and	gathers	the	nations	for	battle,	he	will	be	decisively	defeated	and
“thrown	into	the	lake	of	fire	and	sulphur”	and	“tormented	day	and	night	for
ever	and	ever”	(Rev.	20:10).	Then	the	judgment	of	Satan	and	his	demons	will
be	complete.
D.	Our	Relationship	to	Demons
1.
	Are	Demons	Active	in	the	World	Today?
	Some	people,	influenced	by	a
naturalistic	worldview	that	only	admits	the	reality	of	what	can	be	seen	or
touched	or	heard,	deny	that	demons	exist	today	and	maintain	that	belief	in
their	reality	reflects	an	obsolete	worldview	taught	in	the	Bible	and	other
ancient	cultures.	For	example,	the	German	New	Testament	scholar	Rudolf
Bultmann	emphatically	denied	the	existence	of	a	supernatural	world	of	angels
and	demons.	He	argued	that	these	were	ancient	“myths”	and	that	the	New
Testament	message	had	to	be	“demythologized”	by	removing	such
mythological	elements	so	that	the	gospel	could	be	received	by	modern,
scientific	people.	Others	have	thought	that	the	contemporary	equivalent	to	the
(unacceptable)	demonic	activity	mentioned	in	Scripture	is	the	powerful	and
sometimes	evil	influence	of	organizations	and	“structures”	in	our	society
today—evil	governments	and	powerful	corporations	that	control	thousands	of
people	are	sometimes	said	to	be	“demonic,”	especially	in	the	writings	of	more
liberal	theologians.
However,	if	Scripture	gives	us	a	true	account	of	the	world	as	it	really	is,	then
we	must	take	seriously	its	portrayal	of	intense	demonic	involvement	in	human
society.	Our	failure	to	perceive	that	involvement	with	our	five	senses	simply
tells	us	that	we	have	some	deficiencies	in	our	ability	to	understand	the	world,
not	that	demons	do	not	exist.	In	fact,	there	is	no	reason	to	think	that	there	is
any	less	demonic	activity	in	the	world	today	than	there	was	at	the	time	of	the
New	Testament.	We	are	in	the	same	time	period	in	God’s	overall	plan	for
history	(the	church	age	or	the	new	covenant	age),	and	the	millennium	has	not
yet	come	when	Satan’s	influence	will	be	removed	from	the	earth.	Much	of	our
western	secularized	society	is	unwilling	to	admit	the	existence	of	demons—
except	perhaps	in	“primitive”	societies—and	relegates	all	talk	of	demonic
activity	to	a	category	of	superstition.	But	the	unwillingness	of	modern	society
to	recognize	the	presence	of	demonic	activity	today	is,	from	a	biblical
perspective,	simply	due	to	people’s	blindness	to	the	true	nature	of	reality.
But	what	kind	of	activity	do	demons	engage	in	today?	Are	there	some
distinguishing	characteristics	that	will	enable	us	to	recognize	demonic	activity
when	it	occurs?
2.	Not	All	Evil	and	Sin	Is	From	Satan	and	Demons,	but	Some	Is.
	If	we
think	of	the	overall	emphasis	of	the	New	Testament	epistles,	we	realize	that
very	little	space	is	given	to	discussing	demonic	activity	in	the	lives	of
believers	or	methods	to	resist	and	oppose	such	activity.	The	emphasis	is	on
telling	believers	not	to	sin	but	to	live	lives	of	righteousness.	For	example,	in	1
Corinthians,	when	there	is	a	problem	of	“dissensions,”	Paul	does	not	tell	the
church	to	rebuke	a	spirit	of	dissension,	but	simply	urges	them	to	“agree”	and
“be	united	in	the	same	mind	and	the	same	judgment”	(1	Cor.	1:10).	When
there	is	a	problem	of	incest,	he	does	not	tell	the	Corinthians	to	rebuke	a	spirit
of	incest,	but	tells	them	that	they	ought	to	be	outraged	and	that	they	should
exercise	church	discipline	until	the	offender	repents	(1	Cor.	5:1–5).	When
there	is	a	problem	of	Christians	going	to	court	to	sue	other	believers,	Paul
does	not	command	them	to	cast	out	a	spirit	of	litigation	(or	selfishness,	or
strife),	but	simply	tells	them	to	settle	those	cases	within	the	church	and	to	be
willing	to	give	up	their	own	self-interest	(1	Cor.	6:1–8).	When	there	is
disorder	at	the	Lord’s	Supper,	he	does	not	command	them	to	cast	out	a	spirit
of	disorder	or	gluttony	or	selfishness,	but	simply	tells	them	that	they	should
“wait	for	one	another”	and	that	each	person	should	“examine	himself,	and	so
eat	of	the	bread	and	drink	of	the	cup”	(1	Cor.	11:33,	28).	These	examples
could	be	duplicated	many	times	in	the	other	New	Testament	epistles.
With	regard	to	preaching	the	gospel	to	unbelievers,	the	New	Testament
pattern	is	the	same:	although	occasionally	Jesus	or	Paul	would	cast	out	a
demonic	spirit	that	was	causing	significant	hindrance	to	proclaiming	the
gospel	in	a	certain	area	(see	Mark	5:1–20	[Gerasene	demoniac];	16:16–18
[soothsaying	girl	at	Philippi]),	that	is	not	the	usual	pattern	of	ministry
presented,	where	the	emphasis	is	simply	on	preaching	the	gospel	(Matt.	9:35;
Rom.	1:18–19;	1	Cor.	1:17–2:5).	Even	in	the	examples	above,	the	opposition
was	encountered	in	the	process	of	gospel	proclamation.	In	marked	contrast	to
the	practice	of	those	who	today	emphasize	“strategic	level	spiritual	warfare,”
in	no	instance	does	anyone	in	the	New	Testament	(1)	
summon	a	“territorial
spirit”	
upon	entering	an	area	to	preach	the	gospel	(in	both	examples	above	the
demon	was	in	a	person	and	the	demon-influenced	person	initiated	the
confrontation),	or	(2)	
demand	information	from	demons	about	a	local
demonic	hierarchy,	
(3)	
say	that	we	should	believe	or	teach	information
derived	from	demons,	
or	(4)	teach	by	word	or	example	that	certain	
“demonic
strongholds”	over	a	city	have	to	be	broken	
before	the	gospel	can	be
proclaimed	with	effectiveness.	Rather,	Christians	just	preach	the	gospel,	and	it
comes	with	power	to	change	lives!	(Of	course,	demonic	opposition	may	arise,
or	God	himself	may	reveal	the	nature	of	certain	demonic	opposition,	which
Christians	would	then	pray	and	battle	against,	according	to	1	Cor.	12:10;	2
Cor.	10:3–6;	Eph.	6:12).
Therefore,	though	the	New	Testament	clearly	recognizes	the	influence	of
demonic	activity	in	the	world,	and	even,	as	we	shall	see,	upon	the	lives	of
believers,	its	primary	focus	regarding	evangelism	and	Christian	growth	is	on
the	choices	and	actions	taken	by	people	themselves	(see	also	Gal.	5:16–26;
Eph.	4:1–6:9;	Col.	3:1–4:6;	et	al.).	Similarly,	this	should	be	the	primary	focus
of	our	efforts	today	when	we	strive	to	grow	in	holiness	and	faith	and	to
overcome	the	sinful	desires	and	actions	that	remain	in	our	lives	(cf.	Rom.	6:1–
23)	and	to	overcome	the	temptations	that	come	against	us	from	an
unbelieving	world	(1	Cor.	10:13).
16
	We	need	to	accept	our	own	responsibility
to	obey	the	Lord	and	not	to	shift	blame	for	our	own	misdeeds	onto	some
demonic	force.
Nevertheless,	a	number	of	passages	show	that	the	New	Testament	authors
were	definitely	aware	of	the	presence	of	demonic	influence	in	the	world	and
in	the	lives	of	Christians	themselves.	Writing	to	the	church	at	Corinth,	which
was	filled	with	temples	devoted	to	worship	of	idols,	Paul	said	that	“what
pagans	sacrifice	they	offer	to	demons	and	not	to	God”	(1	Cor.	10:20),	a
situation	true	not	only	of	Corinth	but	also	of	most	other	cities	in	the	ancient
Mediterranean	world.	Paul	also	warned	that	in	the	latter	days	some	would
“depart	from	the	faith	by	giving	heed	to	deceitful	spirits	and	doctrines	of
demons”	(1	Tim.	4:1),	and	that	this	would	lead	to	claims	for	avoiding
marriage	and	avoiding	certain	foods	(v.	
3),	both	of	which	God	had	created	as
“good”	(v.	
4).	Thus	he	saw	some	false	doctrine	as	being	demonic	in	origin.	In
2	Timothy,	Paul	implies	that	those	who	oppose	sound	doctrine	have	been
captured	by	the	devil	to	do	his	will:	“And	the	Lord’s	servant	must	not	be
quarrelsome	but	kindly	to	every	one,	an	apt	teacher,	forbearing,	correcting	his
opponents	with	gentleness.	God	may	perhaps	grant	that	they	will	repent	and
come	to	know	the	truth,	and	they	may	
escape	from	the	snare	of	the	devil,	after
being	captured	by	him	to	do	his	will”	
(2	Tim.	2:24–26).
Jesus	had	similarly	asserted	that	the	Jews	who	obstinately	opposed	him	were
following	their	father	the	devil:	“You	are	of	your	father	the	devil,	and	your
will	is	to	do	your	father’s	desires.	He	was	a	murderer	from	the	beginning	and
has	nothing	to	do	with	the	truth,	because	there	is	no	truth	in	him.	When	he
lies,	he	speaks	according	to	his	own	nature,	for	he	is	a	liar	and	the	father	of
lies”	(John	8:44).
Emphasis	on	the	hostile	deeds	of	unbelievers	as	having	demonic	influence	or
sometimes	demonic	origin	is	made	more	explicit	in	John’s	first	epistle.	He
makes	a	general	statement	that	“he	who	commits	sin	is	
of	the	devil”	
(1	John
3:8),	and	goes	on	to	say,	“By	this	it	may	be	seen	who	are	the	children	of	God,
and	who	are	the	children	of	the	devil:	whoever	does	not	do	right	is	not	of
God,	nor	he	who	does	not	love	his	brother”	(1	John	3:10).	Here	John
characterizes	all	those	who	are	not	born	of	God	as	children	of	the	devil	and
subject	to	his	influence	and	desires.	So	Cain,	when	he	murdered	Abel,	“was	
of
the	evil	one	
and	murdered	his	brother”	(1	John	3:12),	even	though	there	is	no
mention	of	influence	by	Satan	in	the	text	of	Genesis	(Gen.	4:1–16).	John	also
says,	“We	know	that	we	are	of	God,	and	
the	whole	world	is	in	the	power	of
the	evil	one”	
(1	John	5:19).	Then	in	Revelation	Satan	is	called	“the	deceiver
of	the	whole	world”	(Rev.	12:9).	As	we	noted	above,	Satan	is	also	called	“the
ruler	of	this	world”	(John	14:30),	“the	god	of	this	world”	(2	Cor.	4:4),	and
“the	spirit	that	is	now	at	work	in	the	sons	of	disobedience”	(Eph.	2:2).
When	we	combine	all	of	these	statements	and	see	that	Satan	is	thought	of	as
the	originator	of	lies,	murder,	deception,	false	teaching,	and	sin	generally,
then	it	seems	reasonable	to	conclude	that	the	New	Testament	wants	us	to
understand	that	there	is	some	degree	of	demonic	influence	in	nearly	all
wrongdoing	and	sin	that	occurs	today.	Not	all	sin	is	caused	by	Satan	or
demons,	nor	is	the	major	influence	or	cause	of	sin	demonic	activity,	but
demonic	activity	is	probably	a	factor	in	almost	all	sin	and	almost	all
destructive	activity	that	opposes	the	work	of	God	in	the	world	today.
In	the	lives	of	Christians,	as	we	noted	above,	the	emphasis	of	the	New
Testament	is	not	on	the	influence	of	demons	but	on	the	sin	that	remains	in	the
believer’s	life.	Nevertheless,	we	should	recognize	that	sinning	(even	by
Christians)	does	give	a	foothold	for	some	kind	of	demonic	influence	in	our
lives.	Thus	Paul	could	say,	“Be	angry	but	do	not	sin;	do	not	let	the	sun	go
down	on	your	anger,	and	
give	no	opportunity	to	the	devil”	
(Eph.	4:26).
Wrongful	anger	apparently	can	give	opportunity	for	the	devil	(or	demons)	to
exert	some	kind	of	negative	influence	in	our	lives—perhaps	by	attacking	us
through	our	emotions	and	perhaps	by	increasing	the	wrongful	anger	that	we
already	feel	against	others.	Similarly,	Paul	mentions	“the	breastplate	of
righteousness”	(Eph.	6:14)	as	part	of	the	armor	that	we	are	to	use	standing
against	“the	wiles	of	the	devil”	and	in	contending	“against	the	principalities,
against	the	powers,	against	the	world	rulers	of	this	present	darkness,	against
the	spiritual	hosts	of	wickedness	in	the	heavenly	places”	(Eph.	6:11–12).	If
we	have	areas	of	continuing	sin	in	our	lives,	then	there	are	weaknesses	and
holes	in	our	“breastplate	of	righteousness,”	and	these	are	areas	in	which	we
are	vulnerable	to	demonic	attack.	By	contrast,	Jesus,	who	was	perfectly	free
from	sin,	could	say	of	Satan,	“He	has	no	power	over	me”	(John	14:30).	We
may	also	note	the	connection	between	not	sinning	and	not	being	touched	by
the	evil	one	in	1	John	5:18:	“We	know	that	any	one	born	of	God	does	not
sin,
17
	but	He	who	was	born	of	God	keeps	him,	and	the	evil	one	does	not	touch
him.”
The	preceding	passages	suggest,	then,	that	where	there	is	a	pattern	of
persistent	sin	in	the	life	of	a	Christian	in	one	area	or	another,	the	primary
responsibility	for	that	sin	rests	with	the	individual	Christian	and	his	or	her
choices	to	continue	that	wrongful	pattern	(see	Rom.	6,	esp.	vv.	12–16;	also
Gal.	5:16–26).	Nevertheless,	there	could	possibly	be	some	demonic	influence
contributing	to	and	intensifying	that	sinful	tendency.	For	a	Christian	who	has
prayed	and	struggled	for	years	to	overcome	a	bad	temper,	for	example,	there
might	be	a	spirit	of	anger	that	is	one	factor	in	that	continued	pattern	of	sin.	A
Christian	who	has	struggled	for	some	time	to	overcome	a	sense	of	depression
may	have	been	under	attack	by	a	spirit	of	depression	or	discouragement,	and
this	could	be	one	factor	contributing	to	the	overall	situation.
18
	A	believer	who
has	struggled	in	other	areas,	such	as	unwillingness	to	submit	to	rightful
authority,	or	lack	of	self-control	in	eating,	or	laziness,	or	bitterness,	or	envy,
etc.,	may	consider	whether	a	demonic	attack	or	influence	could	be
contributing	to	this	situation	and	hindering	his	or	her	effectiveness	for	the
Lord.
3.	Can	a	Christian	Be	Demon	Possessed?
	The	term	
demon	possession	
is	an
unfortunate	term	that	has	found	its	way	into	some	English	translations	of	the
Bible	but	is	not	really	reflected	in	the	Greek	text.	The	Greek	New	Testament
can	speak	of	people	who	“have	a	demon”	(Matt.	11:18;	Luke	7:33;	8:27;	John
7:20;	8:48,	49,	52;	10:20),	or	it	can	speak	of	people	who	are	suffering	from
demonic	influence	(Gk.	
daimonizomai
),
19
	but	it	never	uses	language	that
suggests	that	a	demon	actually	“possesses”	someone.
The	problem	with	the	terms	
demon	possession	
and	
demonized	
is	that	they
give	the	nuance	of	such	strong	demonic	influence	that	they	seem	to	imply	that
the	person	who	is	under	demonic	attack	has	no	choice	but	to	succumb	to	it.
They	suggest	that	the	person	is	unable	any	longer	to	exercise	his	or	her	will
and	is	completely	under	the	domination	of	the	evil	spirit.	While	this	may	have
been	true	in	extreme	cases	such	as	that	of	the	Gerasene	demoniac	(see	Mark
5:1–20;	note	that	after	Jesus	cast	the	demons	out	of	him,	he	was	then	“in	his
right	mind,”	v.	
15),	it	is	certainly	not	true	with	many	cases	of	demonic	attack
or	conflict	with	demons	in	many	people’s	lives.
So	what	should	we	say	to	the	question,	“Can	a	Christian	be	demon
possessed?”	The	answer	depends	on	what	someone	means	by	“possessed.”
Since	the	term	does	not	reflect	any	word	found	in	the	Greek	New	Testament,
people	can	define	it	to	mean	various	things	without	having	clear	warrant	to
anchor	it	to	any	verse	of	Scripture,	and	it	becomes	difficult	to	say	that	one
person’s	definition	is	right	and	another	one’s	wrong.	My	own	preference,	for
reasons	explained	above,	is	not	to	use	the	phrase	
demon	possessed	
at	all,	for
any	kinds	of	cases.
But	if	people	explain	clearly	what	they	mean	by	“demon	possessed,”	then	an
answer	can	be	given	depending	on	the	definition	they	give.	If	by	“demon
possessed”	they	mean	that	a	person’s	will	is	completely	dominated	by	a
demon,	so	that	a	person	has	no	power	left	to	chose	to	do	right	and	obey	God,
then	the	answer	to	whether	a	Christian	could	be	demon	possessed	would
certainly	be	no,	for	Scripture	guarantees	that	sin	shall	have	no	dominion	over
us	since	we	have	been	raised	with	Christ	(Rom.	6:14,	see	also	vv.	4,	11).
On	the	other	hand,	most	Christians	would	agree	that	there	can	be	differing
degrees	of	demonic	attack	or	influence	in	the	lives	of	believers	(see	Luke	4:2;
2	Cor.	12:7;	Eph.	6:12;	James	4:7;	1	Peter	5:8).	A	believer	may	come	under
demonic	attack	from	time	to	time	in	a	mild	or	more	strong	sense.
20
	(Note	the
“daughter	of	Abraham”	whom	“Satan	bound	for	eighteen	years”	so	that	she
“had	a	spirit	of	infirmity”	and	“was	bent	over	and	could	not	fully	straighten
herself	“	[Luke	13:16,	11].)	Though	Christians	after	Pentecost	have	a	fuller
power	of	the	Holy	Spirit	working	within	them	to	enable	them	to	triumph	over
demonic	attacks,
21
	they	do	not	always	call	upon	or	even	know	about	the
power	that	is	rightfully	theirs.	So	how	severe	can	demonic	influence	become
in	the	life	of	a	Christian	after	Pentecost	who	is	indwelt	by	the	Holy	Spirit?
Before	answering	this	question,	we	should	note	that	it	is	similar	to	a	question
about	sin:	“How	much	can	a	genuine	Christian	let	his	or	her	life	be	dominated
by	sin,	and	still	be	a	born-again	Christian?”	It	is	difficult	to	answer	that
question	in	the	abstract,	because	we	realize	that	when	Christians	are	not	living
as	they	ought	to	live,	and	when	they	are	not	benefiting	from	regular
fellowship	with	other	Christians	and	from	regular	Bible	study	and	teaching,
they	can	stray	into	significant	degrees	of	sin	and	still	can	be	said	to	be	born-
again	Christians.	But	the	situation	is	abnormal;	it	is	not	what	the	Christian	life
should	be	and	can	be.	Similarly,	if	we	ask	how	much	demonic	influence	can
come	into	the	life	of	a	genuine	Christian,	it	is	hard	to	give	an	answer	in	the
abstract.	We	are	simply	asking	how	abnormal	a	Christian’s	life	can	become,
especially	if	that	person	does	not	know	about	or	make	use	of	the	weapons	of
spiritual	warfare	that	are	available	to	Christians,	persists	in	some	kinds	of	sin
that	give	entrance	to	demonic	activity,	and	is	outside	the	reach	of	any	ministry
that	is	accustomed	to	giving	spiritual	help	against	demonic	attack.	It	would
seem	that	in	such	cases	the	degree	of	demonic	attack	or	influence	in	a
Christian’s	life	could	be	quite	strong.	It	would	not	be	correct	to	say	there	can
be	no	such	influence	because	the	person	is	a	Christian.	Therefore	when
someone	asks,	“Can	a	Christian	be	demon	possessed?”	but	really	means,	“Can
a	Christian	come	under	quite	strong	influence	or	attack	by	demons?”	then	the
answer	would	have	to	be	a	positive	one	but	with	the	caution	that	the	word
possessed	
is	here	being	used	in	a	confusing	way.	Since	the	term	
demon
possessed	
is	a	misleading	one	to	use	in	all	cases,	especially	when	referring	to
Christians,	I	would	prefer	to	avoid	it	altogether.	It	seems	better	simply	to
recognize	that	there	can	be	varying	degrees	of	demonic	attack	or	influence	on
people,	even	on	Christians,	and	to	leave	it	at	that.	In	all	cases	the	remedy	will
be	the	same	anyway:	rebuke	the	demon	in	the	name	of	Jesus	and	command	it
to	leave	(see	discussion	below).
4.	How	Can	Demonic	Influences	Be	Recognized?
	In	severe	cases	of
demonic	influence,	as	reported	in	the	Gospels,	the	affected	person	would
exhibit	bizarre	and	often	violent	actions,	especially	opposition	to	the
preaching	of	the	gospel.	When	Jesus	came	into	the	synagogue	in	Capernaum,
“immediately	there	was	in	their	synagogue	a	man	with	an	unclean	spirit;	and
he	cried	out,	‘What	have	you	to	do	with	us,	Jesus	of	Nazareth?	Have	you
come	to	destroy	us?	I	know	who	you	are,	the	Holy	One	of	God’	”	(Mark
1:23–24).	The	man	stood	up	and	interrupted	the	service	by	shouting	these
things	(or,	more	precisely,	the	demon	within	the	man	shouted	them).
After	Jesus	came	down	from	the	Mount	of	Transfiguration,	a	man	brought	his
son	to	Jesus	saying,	“He	has	a	dumb	spirit;	and	wherever	it	seizes	him,	it
dashes	him	down;	and	he	foams	and	grinds	his	teeth	and	becomes	rigid.”
Then	they	brought	the	boy	to	Jesus,	“and	when	the	spirit	saw	him,
immediately	it	convulsed	the	boy,	and	he	fell	on	the	ground	and	rolled	about,
foaming	at	the	mouth.”	The	father	said,	“It	has	often	cast	him	into	the	fire	and
into	the	water,	to	destroy	him”	(Mark	9:17–18,	20,	22).	Such	violent	actions,
especially	those	tending	toward	destruction	of	the	affected	person,	were	clear
indications	of	demonic	activity.	Similar	actions	are	seen	in	the	case	of	the
Gerasene	demoniac,
a	man	with	an	unclean	spirit,	who	lived	among	the	tombs;	and	no	one
could	bind	him	any	more,	even	with	a	chain;	for	he	had	often	been
bound	with	fetters	and	chains,	but	the	chains	he	wrenched	apart,	and
the	fetters	he	broke	in	pieces;	and	no	one	had	the	strength	to	subdue
him.	Night	and	day	among	the	tombs	and	on	the	mountains	he	was
always	crying	out,	and	bruising	himself	with	stones.	(Mark	5:2–5)
When	Jesus	cast	out	the	demons	so	that	they	could	not	destroy	the	man	in
whom	they	had	lived,	they	destroyed	the	herd	of	swine	into	which	they
immediately	entered	(Mark	5:13).	Satanic	or	demonic	activity	always	tends
toward	the	ultimate	destruction	of	parts	of	God’s	creation	and	especially	of
human	beings	who	are	made	in	the	image	of	God	(cf.	Ps.	106:37,	on	child
sacrifice).
In	this	regard,	it	is	interesting	to	note	that	in	one	case	when	Jesus	healed	an
epileptic	he	did	it	by	casting	out	a	demon	(Matt.	17:14–18),	but	elsewhere
epileptics	are	distinguished	from	those	who	are	under	demonic	influence:
“They	brought	him	all	the	sick,	those	afflicted	with	various	diseases	and
pains,	
demoniacs,	epileptics,	
and	paralytics,	and	he	healed	them”	(Matt.	4:24).
So	it	is	with	other	cases	of	physical	sickness:	in	some	cases,	Jesus	simply
prayed	for	the	person	or	spoke	a	word	and	the	person	was	healed.	In	other
cases	there	are	hints	or	implicit	statements	of	demonic	influence	in	the
affliction:	a	woman	who	had	had	“a	spirit	of	infirmity	for	eighteen	years”
(Luke	13:11)	was	healed	by	Jesus,	and	then	he	explicitly	said	that	she	was	“a
daughter	of	Abraham	
whom	Satan	bound	
for	eighteen	years”	(Luke	13:16).	In
healing	Peter’s	mother-in-law,	Jesus	“rebuked	the	fever,	and	it	left	her”	(Luke
4:39),	suggesting	that	there	was	some	personal	influence	(probably	therefore
demonic)	that	was	capable	of	receiving	a	rebuke	from	Jesus.
In	other	cases,	the	Epistles	indicate	that	demonic	influence	will	lead	to
blatantly	false	doctrinal	statements,	such	as	exclaiming,	“Jesus	be	cursed”	(1
Cor.	12:3),	or	a	refusal	to	confess	“that	Jesus	Christ	has	come	in	the	flesh”	(1
John	4:2–3).	In	both	instances,	the	context	deals	with	the	testing	of	people
who	may	be	“false	prophets”	and	who	want	to	use	spiritual	gifts	to	speak	in
the	assembly	of	the	church	(1	Cor.	12)	or	specifically	to	prophesy	(1	John
4:1–6).	These	passages	do	not	indicate	that	all	false	doctrine	should	be
thought	to	be	demonically	inspired,	but	blatantly	false	doctrinal	statements
made	by	those	who	profess	to	be	speaking	by	the	power	of	the	Holy	Spirit
would	certainly	fall	into	this	category.	When	at	Corinth	there	was	active,
entrenched	opposition	to	Paul’s	apostolic	authority	by	those	who	claimed	to
be	apostles	but	were	not,	Paul	saw	them	as	servants	of	Satan	disguised	as
servants	of	righteousness	(2	Cor.	11:13–15).
In	addition	to	these	outwardly	evident	indications,	demonic	activity	was
sometimes	recognized	by	a	subjective	sense	of	the	presence	of	an	evil
spiritual	influence.	In	1	Corinthians	12:10,	Paul	mentions	“the	ability	to
distinguish	between	spirits”	(“discerning	of	spirits,”	KJV)	as	one	kind	of
spiritual	gift.	This	gift	would	seem	to	be	an	ability	to	sense	or	discern	the
difference	in	the	working	of	the	Holy	Spirit	and	the	working	of	evil	spirits	in
a	person’s	life.
22
	The	gift	would	apparently	include	an	awareness	of	demonic
influence	that	would	be	registered	both	in	terms	of	objective,	observable	facts,
and	also	in	terms	of	emotional	and/or	spiritual	uneasiness	or	perception	of	the
presence	of	evil.
But	does	this	ability	to	perceive	demonic	influence	have	to	be	limited	to	those
with	this	special	gift?	As	with	all	spiritual	gifts,	it	would	seem	that	there	are
degrees	of	intensity	or	strength	in	the	development	of	this	gift	as	well.
23
	So
some	may	have	this	gift	developed	to	a	very	high	degree	and	others	may	find
it	functioning	only	occasionally.	Moreover,	in	the	lives	of	all	believers,	there
may	be	something	analogous	to	this	gift,	some	kind	of	ability	to	sense	in	their
spirits	the	presence	of	the	Holy	Spirit	or	to	sense	demonic	influence	from	time
to	time	in	other	people.	In	fact,	Paul	speaks	of	a	
positive	
kind	of	spiritual
perception	that	believers	have	when	they	encounter	him	and	his	co-workers:
“For	we	are	the	aroma	of	Christ	to	God	among	those	who	are	being	saved	and
among	those	who	are	perishing,	to	one	a	fragrance	from	death	to	death,	to	the
other	a	fragrance	from	life	to	life”	(2	Cor.	2:15–16).	In	the	ordinary	course	of
life	today,	sometimes	Christians	will	have	a	subjective	sense	that	someone
else	is	a	Christian	before	they	have	opportunity	to	find	out	that	that	is	in	fact
the	case.	And	it	seems	likely	that	an	opposite	spiritual	perception	could	also
occur	from	time	to	time,	whereby	the	believer	would	sense	the	presence	of
demonic	influence	in	a	person’s	life	before	there	were	other,	more	objective
indications	of	that	fact.
Moreover,	sometimes	a	person	who	is	under	spiritual	attack	from	a	demonic
power	will	know	it	or	sense	it.	A	mature	pastor	or	a	Christian	friend,	in
counseling	someone	about	a	difficult	problem,	may	find	it	wise	to	ask,	“Do
you	think	that	an	attack	by	any	evil	spiritual	force	could	be	a	factor	in	this
situation?”	The	person	may	simply	say,	“No,”	but	in	many	instances	the
person	being	counseled	will	have	thought	of	that	possibility	or	even	have
been	quite	clearly	aware	of	it,	but	afraid	to	say	anything	for	fear	of	being
thought	strange.	Such	a	person	will	be	encouraged	that	another	Christian
would	consider	this	as	a	possible	factor.
In	all	of	these	attempts	to	recognize	demonic	influence,	we	must	remember
that	no	spiritual	gift	functions	perfectly	in	this	age,	nor	do	we	have	a	full
knowledge	of	people’s	hearts.	“We	all	make	many	mistakes,”	as	James
recognizes	(James	3:2).	There	are	many	cases	where	we	are	somewhat	unsure
whether	a	person	is	a	genuine	Christian	or	not,	or	where	we	are	somewhat
unsure	whether	a	person’s	motives	are	sincere.	There	are	also	times	when	we
are	unclear	as	to	the	direction	God	is	leading	us	in	our	lives,	or	we	may	be
uncertain	about	whether	it	is	appropriate	to	speak	or	remain	silent	about	a
certain	matter.	So	it	should	not	surprise	us	that	there	may	be	some	degree	of
uncertainty	in	our	perception	of	the	presence	of	demonic	influence	as	well.
This	does	not	mean	that	we	should	ignore	the	possibility	of	demonic
influence,	however,	and	as	we	grow	in	spiritual	maturity	and	sensitivity,	and
as	we	gain	experience	in	ministering	to	the	needs	of	others,	our	ability	to
recognize	demonic	influence	in	various	situations	will	no	doubt	increase.
5.	Jesus	Gives	All	Believers	Authority	to	Rebuke	Demons	and	Command
Them	to	Leave.
	When	Jesus	sent	the	twelve	disciples	ahead	of	him	to	preach
the	kingdom	of	God,	he	“gave	them	power	and	authority	over	all	demons”
(Luke	9:1).	After	the	seventy	had	preached	the	kingdom	of	God	in	towns	and
villages,	they	returned	with	joy,	saying,	“Lord,	
even	the	demons	are	subject	to
us	in	your	name!”	
(Luke	10:17),	and	Jesus	told	them,	“I	have	given	you
authority	.	.	.	over	all	the	power	of	the	enemy”	(Luke	10:19).	When	Philip,	the
evangelist,	went	down	to	Samaria	to	preach	the	gospel	of	Christ,	“unclean
spirits	came	out	of	many	who	had	them”	(Acts	8:7,	author’s	translation),	and
Paul	used	spiritual	authority	over	demons	to	say	to	a	spirit	of	divination	in	a
soothsaying	girl,	“I	charge	you	in	the	name	of	Jesus	Christ	to	come	out	of
her”	(Acts	16:18).
Paul	was	aware	of	the	spiritual	authority	he	had,	both	in	face-to-face
encounters	such	as	he	had	in	Acts	16,	and	in	his	prayer	life	as	well.	He	said,
“For	though	we	live	in	the	world	we	are	not	carrying	on	a	worldly	war,	for	the
weapons	of	our	warfare	are	not	worldly	but	have	divine	power	to	destroy
strongholds”	(2	Cor.	10:3–4).	Moreover,	he	spoke	at	some	length	of	the
struggle	Christians	have	against	“the	wiles	of	the	devil”	in	his	description	of
conflict	“against	the	spiritual	hosts	of	wickedness	in	the	heavenly	places”	(see
Eph.	6:10–18).	James	tells	all	his	readers	(in	many	churches)	to	“
resist	the
devil	
and	he	will	flee	from	you”	(James	4:7).	Similarly,	Peter	tells	his	readers
in	many	churches	in	Asia	Minor,	“Your	adversary	the	devil	prowls	around
like	a	roaring	lion,	seeking	some	one	to	devour.	
Resist	him,	
firm	in	your	faith”
(1	Peter	5:8–9).
24
Some	may	object	that	Jude	9	teaches	that	Christians	should	not	command	or
rebuke	evil	spirits.	It	says:	“But	when	the	archangel	Michael,	contending	with
the	devil,	disputed	about	the	body	of	Moses,	he	did	not	presume	to	pronounce
a	reviling	judgment	upon	him,	but	said,	‘The	Lord	rebuke	you.’	”
However,	in	context	Jude	is	not	talking	about	Christians	in	their	encounters
with	demonic	forces,	but	is	pointing	out	the	error	of	immoral	and	rebellious
false	teachers	who	“reject	authority”	in	general	and	“slander	celestial	beings”
(v.	
8	NIV):	on	their	own	authority	they	foolishly	speak	blasphemous	words
against	heavenly	beings,	whether	angelic	or	demonic.	The	reference	to
Michael	is	simply	to	show	that	the	greatest	angelic	creature,	no	matter	how
powerful,	did	not	presume	to	go	beyond	the	limits	of	the	authority	that	God
had	given	him.	The	false	teachers,	however,	have	far	overstepped	their
bounds,	and	they	show	their	foolishness	when	they	“revile	whatever	they	do
not	understand”	(v.	
10).	The	lesson	of	the	verse	is	simply,	“Don’t	try	to	go
beyond	the	authority	God	has	given	you!”	When	Jude	9	is	viewed	in	this	way,
the	only	question	that	arises	for	a	Christian	from	this	verse	is,	“What	authority
has	God	given	us	over	demonic	forces?”	And	the	rest	of	the	New	Testament
speaks	clearly	to	that	in	several	places.	Not	only	Jesus,	and	not	only	his
twelve	disciples,	but	also	the	seventy	disciples,	and	Paul,	and	Philip	(who	was
not	an	apostle)	are	given	authority	over	demons	by	the	Lord	Jesus	(see	verses
above).	Jude	9	therefore	simply	cannot	mean	that	it	is	wrong	for	human
beings	to	rebuke	or	command	demons,	or	that	it	is	wrong	for	any	but	the
apostles	to	do	so.	In	fact,	both	Peter	and	James	encourage	all	Christians	to
“resist”	the	devil,	and	Paul	encourages	believers	in	general	to	put	on	spiritual
armor	and	prepare	for	spiritual	warfare.
Before	we	examine	in	more	detail	how	that	authority	works	out	in	practice,	it
is	important,	first,	that	we	recognize	that	the	work	of	Christ	on	the	cross	is	the
ultimate	basis	for	our	authority	over	demons.
25
	Though	Christ	won	a	victory
over	Satan	in	the	wilderness,	the	New	Testament	epistles	point	to	the	cross	as
the	moment	when	Satan	was	decisively	defeated.	Jesus	took	on	flesh	and
blood,	“that	through	death	He	might	render	powerless	him	who	had	the	power
of	death,	that	is,	the	devil”	(Heb.	2:14	NASB).	At	the	cross	God	“disarmed
the	principalities	and	powers	and	made	a	public	example	of	them,	triumphing
over	them	in	him”	(Col.	2:15).	Therefore	Satan	hates	the	cross	of	Christ,
because	there	he	was	decisively	defeated	forever.	Because	the	blood	of	Christ
speaks	clearly	of	his	death,	we	read	in	Revelation	of	those	who	overcame
Satan	by	Christ’s	blood	during	conflict	in	this	world:	“And	they	have
conquered	him	by	the	blood	of	the	Lamb	and	by	the	word	of	their	testimony”
(Rev.	12:11).	Because	of	Christ’s	death	on	the	cross,	our	sins	are	completely
forgiven,	and	Satan	has	no	rightful	authority	over	us.
Second,	our	membership	as	children	in	God’s	family	is	the	firm	spiritual
position	from	which	we	engage	in	spiritual	warfare.	Paul	says	to	every
Christian,	“For	in	Christ	Jesus	you	are	all	sons	of	God,	through	faith”	(Gal.
3:26).	When	Satan	comes	to	attack	us,	he	is	attacking	one	of	God’s	own
children,	a	member	of	God’s	own	family:	this	truth	gives	us	authority	to
successfully	wage	war	against	him	and	defeat	him.
26
If	we	as	believers	find	it	appropriate	to	speak	a	word	of	rebuke	to	a	demon,	it
is	important	to	remember	that	we	need	not	fear	demons.	Although	Satan	and
demons	have	much	less	power	than	the	power	of	the	Holy	Spirit	at	work
within	us,	one	of	Satan’s	tactics	is	to	attempt	to	cause	us	to	be	afraid.	Instead
of	giving	in	to	such	fear,	Christians	should	remind	themselves	of	the	truths	of
Scripture,	which	tell	us,	“You	are	of	God,	and	have	overcome	them;	for	
he
who	is	in	you	is	greater	than	he	who	is	in	the	world”	
(1	John	4:4),	and	“God
did	not	give	us	a	spirit	of	timidity	but	a	spirit	of	power	and	love	and	self-
control”	(2	Tim.	1:7).	What	Paul	says	about	the	Philippians	in	their
relationship	to	human	opponents	can	also	be	applied	when	facing	demonic
opposition	to	the	gospel—Paul	tells	them	to	stand	firm	and	to	be	“
not
frightened	in	anything	by	your	opponents.	
This	is	a	clear	omen	to	them	of
their	destruction,	but	of	your	salvation,	and	that	from	God”	(Phil.	1:28).	He
also	tells	the	Ephesians	that	in	their	spiritual	warfare	they	are	to	use	the
“shield	of	faith”	with	which	they	can	“quench	all	the	flaming	darts	of	the	evil
one”	(Eph.	6:16).	This	is	very	important,	since	the	opposite	of	fear	is	faith	in
God.	He	also	tells	them	to	be	bold	in	their	spiritual	conflict,	so	that,	having
taken	the	whole	armor	of	God,	they	“may	be	able	to	withstand	in	the	evil	day,
and	having	done	all,	to	stand”	(Eph.	6:13).	In	their	conflict	with	hostile
spiritual	forces,	Paul’s	readers	should	not	run	away	in	retreat	or	cower	in	fear,
but	should	stand	their	ground	boldly,	knowing	that	their	weapons	and	their
armor	“have	divine	power	to	destroy	strongholds”	(2	Cor.	10:4;	cf.	1	John
5:18).
We	may	ask,	however,	why	does	God	want	Christians	to	speak	directly	to	the
demon	who	is	troubling	someone	rather	than	just	praying	and	asking	God	to
drive	away	the	demon	for	them?	In	a	way,	this	is	similar	to	asking	why
Christians	should	share	the	gospel	with	another	person	rather	than	simply
praying	and	asking	God	to	reveal	the	gospel	to	that	person	directly.	Or	why
should	we	speak	words	of	encouragement	to	a	Christian	who	is	discouraged
rather	than	just	praying	and	asking	God	himself	to	encourage	that	person
directly?	Why	should	we	speak	a	word	of	rebuke	or	gentle	admonition	to	a
Christian	whom	we	see	involved	in	some	kind	of	sin,	rather	than	just	praying
and	asking	God	to	take	care	of	the	sin	in	that	person’s	life?	The	answer	to	all
these	questions	is	that	in	the	world	that	God	has	created,	he	has	given	us	a
very	
active	
role	in	carrying	out	his	plans,	especially	his	plans	for	the
advancement	of	the	kingdom	and	the	building	up	of	the	church.	In	all	of	these
cases,	our	
direct	involvement	
and	
activity	
is	important	in	addition	to	our
prayers.	And	so	it	seems	to	be	in	our	dealing	with	demonic	forces	as	well.
Like	a	wise	father	who	does	not	settle	all	of	his	children’s	disputes	for	them,
but	sometimes	sends	them	back	out	to	the	playground	to	settle	a	dispute
themselves,	so	our	heavenly	Father	encourages	us	to	enter	directly	into
conflict	with	demonic	forces	in	the	name	of	Christ	and	in	the	power	of	the
Holy	Spirit.	Thereby	he	enables	us	to	gain	the	joy	of	participating	in	eternally
significant	ministry	and	the	joy	of	triumphing	over	the	destructive	power	of
Satan	and	his	demons	in	people’s	lives.	It	is	not	that	God	could	not	deal	with
demonic	attacks	every	time	we	prayed	and	asked	him	to	do	so,	for	he
certainly	could	and	he	no	doubt	sometimes	does.	But	the	New	Testament
pattern	seems	to	be	that	God	ordinarily	expects	Christians	themselves	to
speak	directly	to	the	unclean	spirits.
In	actual	practice,	this	authority	to	rebuke	demons	may	result	in	briefly
speaking	a	command	to	an	evil	spirit	to	leave	when	we	suspect	the	presence
of	demonic	influence	in	our	personal	lives	or	the	lives	of	those	around	us.
27
We	are	to	“resist	the	devil”	(James	4:7),	and	he	will	flee	from	us.
28
Sometimes	a	very	brief	command	in	the	name	of	Jesus	will	be	enough.	At
other	times	it	will	be	helpful	to	quote	Scripture	in	the	process	of	commanding
an	evil	spirit	to	leave	a	situation.	Paul	speaks	of	“the	sword	of	the	Spirit,
which	is	the	word	of	God”	(Eph.	6:17).
29
	And	Jesus,	when	he	was	tempted	by
Satan	in	the	wilderness,	repeatedly	quoted	Scripture	in	response	to	Satan’s
temptations	(Matt.	4:1–11).	Appropriate	Scriptures	may	include	general
statements	of	the	triumph	of	Jesus	over	Satan	(Matt.	12:28–29;	Luke	10:17–
19;	2	Cor.	10:3–4;	Col.	2:15;	Heb.	2:14;	James	4:7;	1	Peter	5:8–9;	1	John	3:8;
4:4;	5:18),
30
	but	also	verses	that	speak	directly	to	the	particular	temptation	or
difficulty	at	hand.
In	our	own	personal	lives,	if	we	find	sinful	emotions	that	are	unusually	strong
welling	up	in	our	minds	or	hearts	(whether	they	be	emotions	of	irrational	fear,
anger,	hatred,	bitterness,	lust,	greed,	etc.),	in	addition	to	praying	and	asking
Jesus	for	help	in	overcoming	them,	it	would	also	be	appropriate	for	us	to	say
something	like,	“Spirit	of	fear,	in	Jesus’	name,	I	command	you,	go	away	from
here	and	don’t	return!”	Even	though	we	may	be	unsure	whether	there	is	a
demonic	factor	in	that	particular	situation,	and	even	though	a	demon’s
presence	may	be	only	one	factor	contributing	to	the	situation,	nonetheless,
such	words	of	rebuke	will	sometimes	be	very	effective.	Though	we	do	not
have	in	the	New	Testament	a	complete	record	of	the	personal	prayer	life	of
the	apostle	Paul,	he	talks	openly	about	wrestling	“not	.	.	.	against	flesh	and
blood,	but	.	.	.	against	the	spiritual	hosts	of	wickedness	in	the	heavenly
places”	(Eph.	6:12)	and	about	“not	carrying	on	a	worldly	war”	(2	Cor.	10:3).
It	is	reasonable	to	think	that	his	own	extensive	prayer	life	included	this	kind
of	verbal	rebuke	of	demonic	forces	as	one	aspect	of	his	spiritual	warfare.
Moreover,	such	wrestling	against	“the	spiritual	hosts	of	wickedness”	may
mean	that	in	our	private	times	of	intercessory	prayer	for	others	we	will
include	an	element	of	verbal	rebuke	to	demonic	forces	that	may	be	a
component	in	situations	for	which	we	are	praying.	(This	kind	of	spiritual
warfare	would	not	be	in	the	presence	of	the	person	for	whom	we	are
concerned,	who	in	many	cases	would	be	confused	or	frightened
unnecessarily.)	For	example,	parents	may	appropriately	include	a	brief	word
of	rebuke	to	a	spirit	of	rebelliousness	in	one	child,	of	laziness	in	another,	or	of
anger	in	yet	another,	in	addition	to	praying	that	the	Lord	would	give	victory	in
those	areas,	and	in	addition	to	teaching	and	disciplining	their	children.
31
6.	Appropriate	Use	of	the	Christian’s	Spiritual	Authority	in	Ministry	to
Other	People.
	When	we	pass	from	the	discussion	of	private	spiritual	warfare
in	our	own	personal	lives	and	perhaps	the	lives	of	close	family	members,	we
move	to	the	question	of	direct	personal	ministry	to	others	who	have	come
under	spiritual	attack.	For	example,	we	may	at	times	be	involved	in
counseling	or	prayer	with	another	person	when	we	suspect	that	demonic
activity	is	a	factor	in	their	situation.	In	these	cases,	some	additional
considerations	must	be	kept	in	mind.
First,	it	is	important	not	to	frighten	people	by	talking	very	glibly	about	an	area
that	may	be	familiar	to	us	but	quite	unfamiliar	and	somewhat	frightening	to
others.	The	Holy	Spirit	is	a	Spirit	of	gentleness	and	peace	(see	1	Cor.	14:33).
Because	of	this,	it	is	often	considerate	simply	to	ask	questions	of	the	person
we	are	helping.	We	might	ask,	“Do	you	think	an	evil	spirit	may	be	attacking
you	in	this	situation?”	or	“Would	you	mind	if	I	spoke	a	word	of	rebuke	to	any
evil	spirit	that	may	be	a	factor	in	this?”	It	would	also	be	important	to	assure
the	person	that	if	there	is	a	demonic	factor	involved,	it	should	not	be	thought
of	as	a	negative	reflection	on	the	person’s	spiritual	condition	but	may	simply
indicate	that	Satan	is	trying	to	attack	the	person	to	keep	him	or	her	from	more
effective	ministry	for	the	Lord.	Each	Christian	is	a	soldier	in	the	Lord’s
spiritual	army	and	therefore	subject	to	attacks	from	the	forces	of	the	enemy.
If	the	other	person	gives	permission	to	do	so,	a	brief	command	should	be
spoken	aloud,	telling	the	evil	spirit	to	leave.
32
	Since	the	person	under	attack
will	often	have	had	a	sense	of	a	demonic	presence,	it	would	be	appropriate,
after	commanding	the	evil	spirit	to	leave,	to	ask	the	person	if	he	or	she	felt	or
sensed	anything	different	when	those	words	were	spoken.	If	there	really	was	a
demonic	influence	in	the	situation,	the	person	may	express	an	immediate
feeling	of	relief	or	freedom,	often	with	a	sense	of	joy	and	peace	as	well.
All	of	this	does	not	have	to	be	a	highly	dramatic	or	emotionally	charged
procedure.	Some	contemporary	stories	tell	of	long,	drawn-out	battles	in	which
the	Christian	counselor	argues	with	the	demon	and	shouts	at	it	repeatedly	over
a	period	of	several	hours.	But	there	is	no	indication	in	the	New	Testament	that
demons	are	hard	of	hearing,	nor	are	there	examples	of	such	long	periods	of
conflict	in	order	to	get	a	demon	to	leave.	Jesus	simply	“cast	out	the	spirits
with	a	word”	(Matt.	8:16),	even	though	in	one	case	(with	the	Gerasene
demoniac)	the	evil	spirit	showed	some	initial	resistance	(see	Mark	5:8;	Luke
8:29).	Jesus	then	asked	its	name	and	then	cast	out	many	demons	at	once
(Mark	5:9–13;	Luke	8:30–33).	The	power	to	cast	out	demons	comes	not	from
our	own	strength	or	the	power	of	our	own	voice,	but	from	the	Holy	Spirit
(Matt.	12:28;	Luke	11:20).	Thus,	a	quiet,	confident,	authoritative	tone	of
voice	should	be	sufficient.
Second,	to	avoid	being	drawn	into	a	long	conversation	or	battle	with	the
demon	itself	the	Christian	counselor	should	focus	not	on	the	demon	but	on	the
person	being	ministered	to	and	the	truths	of	the	Bible	that	need	to	be	affirmed
and	believed.	The	“belt	of	truth”	(Eph.	6:14	NIV)	is	part	of	the	armor	that
protects	us	against	Satan,	as	is	the	“sword	of	the	Spirit,	which	is	the	word	of
God”	(Eph.	6:17).	If	the	person	who	is	receiving	ministry	will	focus	on	and
believe	the	truth	of	Scripture	and	will	renounce	sin	and	thereby	put	on	the
“breastplate	of	righteousness”	(Eph.	6:14),	then	the	evil	spirit	will	have	no
foothold	in	that	person’s	life.	If	the	demon	refuses	to	leave	in	spite	of	the
command	given	in	the	name	of	Jesus,	then	it	may	be	best	to	wait	until	another
time	after	more	prayer	and	personal	spiritual	preparation	on	the	part	of	the
person	being	ministered	to	and	the	persons	who	are	engaging	in	this	ministry
(Matt.	17:19–20;	Mark	9:29;	see	discussions	below).
33
Third,	it	is	important	for	Christians	not	to	become	overly	curious	in	this	area
of	demonic	conflict.	Though	it	is	a	ministry	that	the	Lord	gives	all	Christians
authority	to	engage	in,	Scripture	nonetheless	tells	us	that	we	are	to	be	“babes
in	evil”	(1	Cor.	14:20).	That	is,	we	are	not	to	become	overly	fascinated	with
matters	of	evil	and	attempt	to	become	“experts”	in	some	kinds	of	evil	just	to
satisfy	our	curiosity.
34
Fourth,	if	the	person	being	ministered	to	is	not	a	Christian,	it	is	important	that
he	or	she	be	urged	to	come	to	Christ	as	Savior	immediately	after	the	demon	is
cast	out	so	that	the	Holy	Spirit	will	reside	in	the	person	and	protect	him	or	her
from	future	attacks.	Otherwise	there	may	be	a	worse	result	later.
When	the	unclean	spirit	has	gone	out	of	a	man,	he	passes	through
waterless	places	seeking	rest,	but	he	finds	none.	Then	he	says,	“I	will
return	to	my	house	from	which	I	came.”	And	when	he	comes	he	finds
it	empty,	swept,	and	put	in	order.	Then	he	goes	and	brings	with	him
seven	other	spirits	more	evil	than	himself,	and	they	enter	and	dwell
there;	and	the	last	state	of	that	man	becomes	worse	than	the	first.	So
shall	it	be	also	with	this	evil	generation.	(Matt.	12:43–45)
Fifth,	effectiveness	in	difficult	cases	of	demonic	influence	may	be	related	to
our	own	spiritual	condition.	When	Jesus	had	cast	a	demon	out	of	an	epileptic
boy,	and	“the	boy	was	cured	instantly,”	the	disciples	privately	came	to	Jesus
and	asked,	“Why	could	we	not	cast	it	out?”	(Matt.	17:18–19).	Jesus	said	to
them,	“Because	of	your	little	faith”	(Matt.	17:20).	Mark’s	gospel	reports	that
Jesus	also	said	in	response	to	the	disciples,	“This	kind	cannot	be	driven	out	by
anything	but	prayer”	(Mark	9:29).	The	disciples	apparently	were	at	that	time
weak	in	faith;	they	had	not	spent	enough	time	in	prayer	recently	and	they
were	not	walking	fully	in	the	power	of	the	Holy	Spirit.
35
Jesus	issues	a	clear	warning	that	we	should	not	rejoice	too	much	or	become
proud	in	our	power	over	demons,	but	that	we	should	rejoice	rather	in	our	great
salvation.	We	must	keep	this	in	mind	lest	we	become	proud	and	the	Holy
Spirit	withdraw	his	power	from	us.	When	the	seventy	returned	with	joy
saying,	“Lord,	even	the	demons	are	subject	to	us	in	your	name!”	(Luke	10:17)
Jesus	told	them,	“Do	not	rejoice	in	this,	that	the	spirits	are	subject	to	you;	but
rejoice	that	your	names	are	written	in	heaven”	(Luke	10:20).
36
7.	We	Should	Expect	the	Gospel	to	Come	in	Power	to	Triumph	Over	the
Works	of	the	Devil.
	When	Jesus	came	preaching	the	gospel	in	Galilee,
“demons	also	came	out	of	many”	(Luke	4:41).	When	Philip	went	to	Samaria
to	preach	the	gospel,	“unclean	spirits	came	out	of	many	.	.	.	crying	with	a	loud
voice”	(Acts	8:7).	Jesus	commissioned	Paul	to	preach	among	the	Gentiles
“that	they	may	turn	from	darkness	to	light	and	from	the	power	of	Satan	to
God,	that	they	may	receive	forgiveness	of	sins	and	a	place	among	those	who
are	sanctified	by	faith	in	me”	(Acts	26:18).	Paul’s	proclamation	of	the	gospel,
he	said,	was	“not	in	plausible	words	of	wisdom,	but	in	demonstration	of	the
Spirit	and	of	power,	that	your	faith	might	not	rest	in	the	wisdom	of	men	but	in
the	power	of	God”	(1	Cor.	2:4–5;	cf.	2	Cor.	10:3–4).	If	we	really	believe	the
scriptural	testimony	to	the	existence	and	activity	of	demons,	and	if	we	really
believe	that	“the	reason	the	Son	of	God	appeared	was	
to	destroy	the	works	of
the	devil”	
(1	John	3:8),	then	it	would	seem	appropriate	to	expect	that	even
today	when	the	gospel	is	proclaimed	to	unbelievers,	and	when	prayer	is	made
for	believers	who	have	perhaps	been	unaware	of	this	dimension	of	spiritual
conflict,	there	will	be	a	genuine	and	often	immediately	recognizable	triumph
over	the	power	of	the	enemy.	We	should	expect	that	this	would	happen,	think
of	it	as	a	normal	part	of	the	work	of	Christ	in	building	up	his	kingdom,	and
rejoice	in	Christ’s	victory	in	it.
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
Before	reading	this	chapter,	did	you	think	that	most	demonic	activity	was
confined	to	the	time	of	the	New	Testament	or	to	other	cultures	than	your
own?	After	reading	this	chapter,	are	there	areas	in	your	own	society
where	you	think	there	might	be	some	demonic	influence	today?	Do	you
feel	some	fear	at	the	prospect	of	encountering	demonic	activity	in	your
own	life	or	the	lives	of	others	around	you?	What	does	the	Bible	say	that
will	specifically	address	that	feeling	of	fear?	Do	you	think	that	the	Lord
wants	you	to	feel	that	fear,	if	you	do?
2
.	
Are	there	any	areas	of	sin	in	your	own	life	now	that	might	give	a
foothold	to	some	demonic	activity?	If	so,	what	would	the	Lord	have	you
do	with	respect	to	that	sin?
3
.	
Are	there	cases	where	you	have	had	victory	over	some	demonic	force	by
speaking	to	it	in	the	name	of	Jesus?	How	can	the	material	in	this	chapter
help	you	be	more	effective	in	this	kind	of	spiritual	conflict?	What	are	the
dangers	of	becoming	too	interested	in	or	too	deeply	involved	in	this	kind
of	ministry?	How	can	you	safeguard	against	that	excessive	emphasis?
What	do	you	think	Paul’s	procedure	was	when	he	came	to	preach	the
gospel	in	city	after	city	where	it	had	never	been	heard	before	and	where
there	was	demon	worship?	How	could	the	church	today	profit	from
Paul’s	example?
SPECIAL	TERMS
demonized
	
	
	
distinguishing	between	spirits
demon	possession
	
	
	
exorcism
demons
	
	
	
Satan
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the	
bibliography	to
chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be	found	in	
Appendix	4
.)
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92			Litton,	129–36
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1892–94			Miley,	1:539–40;	2:497–504
1940			Wiley,	1:476–77
1983			Carter,	2:1069–97
3.			Baptist
1767			Gill,	1:435–440
1887			Boyce,	181–89
1907			Strong,	450–64
1917			Mullins,	279–80
1976–83			Henry,	6:229–50
1983–85			Erickson,	445–51
1987–94			Lewis/Demarest,	2:257–63
4.			Dispensational
1947			Chafer,	2:33–124
1949			Thiessen,	133–50
1986			Ryrie,	135–68
5.			Lutheran
1917–24			Pieper,	1:504–14
1934			Mueller,	202–4
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1559			Calvin,	1:172–79	(1.14.13–19)
1724–58			Edwards,	2:607–12
1861			Heppe,	201–19
1871–73			Hodge,	1:643–48
1937–66			Murray,	
CW,	
2:67–70
1938			Berkhof,	148–49
7.			Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988–92			Williams,	1:173,	224–36
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955			Ott,	119–24
2.			Roman	Catholic:	Post-Vatican	II
1980			McBrien,	1:329;	2:1105,	1153–54
Other	Works
Anderson,	Neil.	
The	Bondage	Breaker.	
Eugene,	Ore.:	Harvest	House,
1990.
_____.	
Victory	Over	the	Darkness.	
Ventura,	Calif.:	Regal,	1990.
Dickason,	C.	Fred.	
Angels,	Elect	and	Evil.	
Chicago:	Moody,	1975.
_____.	
Demon	Possession	and	the	Christian:	A	New	Perspective.
Westchester,	Ill.:	Crossway,	1991.
Green,	Michael.	
I	Believe	in	Satan’s	Downfall.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,
1981.
Lewis,	C.	S.	
The	Screwtape	Letters.	
New	York:	Macmillan,	1961.
MacMillan,	John	A.	
The	Authority	of	the	Believer:	A	Compilation	of
“The	Authority	of	the	Believer”	and	“The	Authority	of	the	Intercessor.”
Harrisburg,	Pa.:	Christian	Publications,	1980.
McClelland,	S.	E.	“Demon,	Demon	Possession.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	306–8.
Mallone,	George.	
Arming	for	Spiritual	Warfare.	
Downers	Grove,	Ill.:
InterVarsity	Press,	1991.
Penn-Lewis,	Jessie,	with	Evan	Roberts.	
War	on	the	Saints.	
Unabridged
ed.	New	York:	Thomas	E.	Lowe,	1973.
Pentecost,	Dwight.	
The	Adversary,	the	Devil.	
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,
1969.
Twelftree,	G.	H.	“Devil	and	Demons.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	196–98.
Unger,	M.	F.	“Satan.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	972–73.
_____.	
Demons	in	the	World	Today:	A	Study	of	Occultism	in	the	Light	of
God’s	Word.	
Wheaton,	Ill.:	Tyndale,	1971.
Warner,	Timothy	M.	
Spiritual	Warfare:	Victory	Over	the	Powers	of	This
Dark	World.	
Wheaton,	Ill.:	Crossway,	1991.
Wright,	Nigel.	
The	Satan	Syndrome:	Putting	the	Power	of	Darkness	In
Its	Place.	
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1990.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
James	4:7–8:	
Submit	yourselves	therefore	to	God.	Resist	the	devil	and	he	will
flee	from	you.	Draw	near	to	God	and	he	will	draw	near	to	you.	Cleanse	your
hands,	you	sinners,	and	purify	your	hearts,	you	men	of	double	mind.
HYMN
“Christian,	Dost	Thou	See	Them?”
Christian,	dost	thou	see	them	on	the	holy	ground,
How	the	pow’rs	of	darkness	rage	thy	steps	around?
Christian,	up	and	smite	them,	counting	gain	but	loss,
In	the	strength	that	cometh	by	the	holy	Cross.
Christian,	dost	thou	feel	them,	how	they	work	within,
Striving,	tempting,	luring,	goading	into	sin?
Christian,	never	tremble;	never	be	downcast;
Gird	thee	for	the	battle,	watch	and	pray	and	fast.
Christian,	dost	thou	hear	them,	how	they	speak	thee	fair?
“Always	fast	and	vigil?	Always	watch	and	prayer?”
Christian,	answer	boldly,	“While	I	breathe	I	pray!”
Peace	shall	follow	battle,	night	shall	end	in	day.
Hear	the	words	of	Jesus:	“O	my	servant	true;
Thou	art	very	weary,	I	was	weary	too;
But	that	toil	shall	make	thee	some	day	all	mine	own,
And	the	end	of	sorrow	shall	be	near	my	throne.”
AUTHOR:	JOHN	MASON	NEALE,	1862
Alternative	hymns:	“Soldiers	of	Christ	Arise”;	“Lead	On,	O	King	Eternal”
“Onward,	Christian	Soldiers.”
NOTES
1
This	does	not	mean	that	these	sinful	angels	have	no	current	influence	on	the	world,	for	in	v.	
9	Peter	says	that	the	Lord	also	knows
how	“to	keep	the	unrighteous	under	punishment	until	the	day	of	judgment,”	here	referring	to	sinful	human	beings	who	were
obviously	still	having	influence	in	the	world	and	even	troubling	Peter’s	readers.	2	Peter	2:4	simply	means	that	the	wicked	angels
have	been	removed	from	the	presence	of	God	and	are	kept	under	some	kind	of	restraining	influence	until	the	final	judgment,	but
this	does	not	rule	out	their	continued	activity	in	the	world	meanwhile.
2
2	Peter	2:4	does	not	say,	“God	did	not	spare	some	of	the	angels	when	they	sinned,”	or,	“God	cast	some	of	the	sinning	angels	into
hell,”	but	it	speaks	generally	of	“the	angels”	when	they	sinned,	implying	all	of	them	who	sinned.	Similarly,	Jude	6	speaks	of	“the
angels	that	did	not	keep	their	own	position,”	implying	all	who	sinned.	Therefore,	these	verses	must	say	something	that	is	true	of
all	demons.	Their	current	home,	their	dwelling	place,	is	“hell”	and	“pits	of	nether	gloom,”	although	they	can	range	from	there	to
influence	people	in	the	world.
3
The	KJV	translates	“Day	Star”	as	“Lucifer,”	a	name	meaning	“bearer	of	light.”	The	name	Lucifer	does	not	appear	elsewhere	in
the	KJV	and	does	not	appear	at	all	in	more	modern	translations	of	the	Bible.
4
See,	for	example,	Ps.	45,	which	moves	from	a	description	of	an	earthly	king	to	a	description	of	a	divine	Messiah.
5
For	a	more	detailed	argument	see	W.	Grudem,	
The	First	Epistle	of	Peter,	
pp.	211–13,	which	is	summarized	in	the	discussion
here.	Later	Jewish	interpreters	of	these	verses	were	about	equally	divided	between	those	who	thought	the	“sons	of	God”	were
angels	and	those	who	thought	they	were	human	beings.
6
BDB,	p.	
966.
7
The	word	
devil	
is	an	English	translation	of	Greek	
diabolos,	
which	means	“slanderer”	(BAGD,	p.	
182).	In	fact,	the	English	word
devil	
is	ultimately	derived	from	this	same	Greek	word,	but	the	sound	of	the	word	changed	considerably	as	the	word	passed	from
Greek	to	Latin	to	Old	English	to	modern	English.
8
John	frequently	uses	“the	world”	or	“this	world”	to	refer	to	the	present	evil	world	system	in	opposition	to	God:	John	7:7;	8:23;
12:31;	14:17,	30;	15:18,	19;	16:11;	17:14.	Scripture	does	not	teach	that	Satan	rules	over	the	entire	world,	but	that	he	is	ruler	over
the	system	of	sinful	opposition	to	God.	Compare	Paul’s	phrase	“the	god	of	this	world”	(2	Cor.	4:4).
9
Cf.	John	10:10:	“The	thief	comes	only	to	steal	and	kill	and	destroy.”
10
See	the	discussion	of	God’s	knowledge	of	the	future	in	
chapter	11
.
11
Paul	also	says,	“For	what	person	knows	a	man’s	thoughts	except	the	spirit	of	the	man	which	is	in	him?”	(1	Cor.	2:11),
suggesting	that	there	is	no	other	creature	who	can	know	a	person’s	thoughts	(although	admittedly	the	inclusion	of	angelic	or
demonic	creatures	in	Paul’s	idea	is	not	made	explicit	in	this	context	as	it	is	in	Dan.	2).	See	also	1	Cor.	14:24–25,	where	the
disclosure	of	the	“secrets”	of	a	visitor’s	heart	is	clear	evidence	that	God	himself	is	present,	working	through	the	gift	of	prophecy.
This	is	significant	in	Corinth,	which	was	filled	with	demon	worship	in	idol	temples	(1	Cor.	10:20)—it	indicates	that	demons	could
not	know	the	secret	thoughts	in	a	person’s	heart.
12
Even	today,	one	distinguishing	mark	of	many	non-Christian	religions	is	that	their	most	devoted	adherents	engage	in	religious
rituals	that	destroy	one	or	several	aspects	of	humanity,	such	as	their	physical	health,	their	mental	or	emotional	stability,	or	their
human	sexuality	as	God	intended	it	to	function.	Such	things	clearly	fulfill	the	goals	of	Satan	to	destroy	everything	that	God	has
created	good	(cf.	1	Tim.	4:1–3).	Since	Satan	is	“a	liar	and	the	father	of	lies”	(John	8:44),	distortion	or	denial	of	the	truth	is	always
present	in	false	religions	as	well,	particularly	when	there	is	strong	demonic	influence.
13
There	were	Jewish	exorcists	in	the	period	between	the	Old	and	the	New	Testaments	who	attempted	to	deal	with	demonic	forces,
but	it	is	doubtful	whether	they	were	very	effective:	Acts	19:13	mentions	some	“itinerant	Jewish	exorcists”	who	attempted	to	use
the	name	of	the	Lord	Jesus	as	a	new	magic	formula,	though	they	were	not	Christians	and	did	not	have	any	spiritual	authority	from
Jesus	himself.	They	met	with	disastrous	results	(vv.	15–16).	Also	when	confronting	the	Pharisees,	Jesus	said,	“If	I	cast	out	demons
by	Be-elzebul,	by	whom	do	your	sons	cast	them	out?”	(Matt.	12:27).	His	statement	does	not	mean	that	their	sons	were	very
successful	but	only	that	they	were	casting	out	demons,	or	were	trying	to,	with	some	limited	success.	In	fact,	Jesus’	argument
works	very	well	if	they	generally	failed:	“If	my	great	success	in	casting	out	demons	is	due	to	Satan,	then	what	is	your	sons’
limited	success	due	to?	Presumably	a	power	less	than	Satan;	certainly	not	God!”	The	suggestion	is	that	the	Jewish	exorcists’
limited	power	was	not	from	God	but	was	from	Satan.
Josephus	does	record	an	apparently	effective	example	of	exorcism	by	a	Jew	named	Eleazar	who	used	an	incantation	said	to	be
derived	from	Solomon	(
Antiquities	
8:45–48;	cf.	a	rabbinic	story	in	Numbers	Rabbah	19:8;	Tobit	8:2–3;	and	The	Testament	of
Solomon,	throughout).	It	is	difficult	to	know	exactly	how	widespread	and	how	successful	such	practices	were.	On	the	one	hand,
God	himself	could	have	granted	some	degree	of	spiritual	power	over	demons	to	the	faithful	remnant	of	Jewish	believers	in	all
ages:	he	certainly	did	protect	the	faithful	people	of	Israel	in	general	from	the	demonic	forces	of	the	nations	around	them.	On	the
other	hand,	it	is	not	impossible	that	Satan	would	work	among	unbelieving	Jews,	as	well	as	among	many	other	unbelieving
cultures,	to	give	some	appearance	of	limited	power	to	exorcists,	witch	doctors,	etc.,	but	always	with	the	result	of	bringing	people
ultimately	into	greater	spiritual	bondage.	What	is	certain	is	that	Jesus	came	with	much	more	spiritual	power	over	demons	than	the
people	had	ever	seen	before,	and	they	were	amazed.	(An	extensive	discussion	of	Jewish	exorcism	is	found	in	Emil	Schürer,	
The
History	of	the	Jewish	People	in	the	Age	of	Jesus	Christ,	
rev.	English	ed.,	ed.	G.	Vermes	et	al.	[3	vols.	in	4;	Edinburgh:	T.	&	T.
Clark,	1973–87],	vol.	
3.1,	pp.	342–61,	376,	440.)
14
Another	interpretation	says	that	in	the	mission	of	the	seventy	Jesus	saw	the	fall	of	Satan.
15
See	
chapter	55
	for	a	discussion	of	the	millennium.
16
A	common	way	of	summarizing	the	three	sources	of	evil	in	our	lives	today	is	“the	world,	the	flesh,	and	the	devil”	(where
“flesh”	refers	to	our	own	sinful	desires).
17
The	present	tense	of	the	Greek	verb	here	gives	the	sense	“does	not	continue	to	sin.”
18
Not	all	depression	is	demonic	in	origin.	Some	may	be	caused	by	chemical	factors	that	will	respond	to	medical	treatment.	Other
depression	may	be	due	to	a	variety	of	behavioral	patterns	or	interpersonal	relationships	that	are	not	being	conducted	according	to
biblical	standards.	But	we	should	not	rule	out	demonic	influence	as	a	possible	factor.
19
This	word	
diamonizomai,	
which	may	be	translated	“under	demonic	influence”	or	“to	be	demonized”	occurs	thirteen	times	in	the
New	Testament,	all	in	the	Gospels:	Matt.	4:24;	8:16,	28,	33;	9:32;	12:22;	15:22	(“badly	demonized”);	Mark	1:32;	5:15,	16,	18;
Luke	8:36;	and	John	10:21.	All	of	these	instances	indicate	quite	severe	demonic	influence.	In	light	of	this,	it	is	perhaps	better	to
reserve	the	English	word	
demonized	
for	more	extreme	or	severe	cases	such	as	those	represented	by	the	instances	that	are	used	in
the	Gospels.	The	word	
demonized	
in	English	seems	to	me	to	suggest	very	strong	demonic	influence	or	control.	(Cf.	other	similar
“-ized”	words:	pasteurized,	homogenized,	tyrannized,	materialized,	nationalized,	etc.	These	words	all	speak	of	a	total
transformation	of	the	object	being	spoken	about,	not	simply	of	mild	or	moderate	influence.)	But	it	has	become	common	in	some
Christian	literature	today	to	speak	of	people	under	any	kind	of	demonic	attack	as	being	“demonized.”	It	would	be	wiser	to	reserve
the	term	for	more	severe	cases	of	demonic	influence.
20
It	does	not	seem	very	helpful	to	attempt	to	define	categories	or	degrees	of	demonic	influence,	as	has	sometimes	been	done,	with
words	such	as	“depressed,”	“oppressed,”	“obsessed,”	etc.,	for	Scripture	does	not	define	a	list	of	categories	like	this	for	us	to	use,
and	such	categories	only	tend	to	make	complicated	what	is	a	simple	truth:	that	there	can	be	varying	degrees	of	demonic	attack	or
influence	in	a	person’s	life.
21
See	
chapter	30
,	and	
chapter	39
,	for	a	discussion	of	the	greater	power	of	the	Holy	Spirit	at	work	in	believers’	lives	after
Pentecost.
22
For	an	extensive	analysis	of	the	meaning	of	the	Greek	phrase	
diakriseis	pneumatōn,	
“distinguishing	between	spirits,”	in	1	Cor.
12:10,	see	W.	Grudem,	“A	Response	to	Gerhard	Dautzenberg	on	1	Corinthians	12:10,”	in	
Biblische	Zeitschrift,	
NF,	22:2	(1978),
pp.	253–70.
23
See	
chapter	52
,	on	the	fact	that	spiritual	gifts	may	vary	in	strength.
24
Of	course,	our	greatest	example	of	dealing	with	demonic	powers	by	speaking	to	them	directly	and	commanding	them	to	leave	is
the	example	of	Jesus	himself,	who	frequently	did	this	in	the	Gospels,	and	by	example	and	word	he	taught	the	disciples	to	imitate
him.
25
In	this	paragraph	and	the	following	one	on	adoption	I	am	indebted	to	the	fine	work	of	Timothy	M.	Warner,	
Spiritual	Warfare
(Wheaton,	Ill.:	Crossway,	1991),	pp.	55–63.
26
See	
chapter	37
,	on	adoption.
27
Because	Scripture	gives	no	indication	that	demons	can	know	our	thoughts	(see	above),	it	would	seem	that	the	command	should
be	spoken	audibly.
28
For	example,	if	we	or	one	of	our	children	wakes	up	with	a	frightening	dream,	in	addition	to	praying	to	Jesus	for	comfort	and
protection,	we	might	also	say,	“In	the	name	of	Jesus,	I	command	any	evil	spirit	causing	this	frightening	dream,	begone!”	Children
from	a	very	young	age	can	be	taught	to	say,	“In	Jesus’	name,	go	away!”	to	any	images	of	witches,	goblins,	etc.	that	may	appear	in
their	dreams	or	in	mental	images	that	trouble	them	at	night,	and	then	to	pray	to	Jesus	for	protection	and	happy	thoughts	of	him.
Such	action	by	those	little	ones	who	trust	in	Christ	will	often	be	remarkably	effective,	for	their	faith	in	Jesus	is	very	simple	and
genuine	(see	Matt.	18:1–4).
29
The	Greek	word	here	translated	“word”	is	
rhēma,	
which	usually	refers	to	spoken	words	(whether	by	God	or	by	others).	It	is
sometimes	used	to	speak	of	the	words	of	Scripture	when	they	are	spoken	by	God	or	by	people	quoting	Scripture	(Matt.	4:4;	John
15:7;	17:8;	Rom.	10:17;	Heb.	6:5;	1	Peter	1:25	[twice]),	and	that	is	the	sense	in	which	Paul	seems	to	use	it	in	Eph.	6:17:	as	we
speak	the	words	of	Scripture	they	are	accompanied	by	the	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	and	have	the	power	of	a	spiritual	sword.
30
It	would	be	good	for	Christians	to	memorize	the	verses	in	the	list	just	mentioned	so	as	to	be	able	to	speak	them	from	memory
when	involved	in	any	spiritual	warfare.
31
Since	Scripture	gives	no	indication	that	demons	can	read	our	minds,	such	rebukes	against	demons	would	probably	have	to	be
spoken	audibly,	even	if	softly.	By	contrast,	God	of	course	knows	our	thoughts,	and	prayer	to	him	can	be	in	our	minds	only,
without	being	spoken	aloud.
32
The	verb	
exorcise	
in	English	means	“to	drive	out	(an	evil	spirit)	by	a	magic	formula	or	a	spoken	command.”	An	“exorcism”	is
defined	as	the	action	of	driving	out	an	evil	spirit	in	this	way.	These	words	do	not	occur	in	the	Bible	(although	Acts	19:13	mentions
Jewish	exorcists).	Because	these	terms	are	used	in	pagan	as	well	as	Christian	contexts	throughout	history,	there	is	room	for
Christians	to	differ	over	whether	it	is	wise	to	use	them	to	refer	to	Christian	practices	today.
33
It	would	often	be	wise,	in	difficult	cases,	to	have	help	from	someone	with	more	maturity	and	experience	in	this	area.
34
Christians	should	therefore	not	be	preoccupied	with	matters	concerning	the	occult	or	the	New	Age	movement.	We	should	think
about	things	that	are	“honorable”	and	“pure”	and	“worthy	of	praise”	(Phil.	4:8).
35
When	Jesus	said,	“This	kind	cannot	be	driven	out	by	anything	but	prayer”	(Mark	9:29),	he	cannot	have	meant	that	it	was
necessary	to	pray	for	a	long	time	about	that	specific	situation	before	the	demon	would	be	cast	out,	for	he	did	not	pray	at	all	but
simply	spoke	a	word	and	cast	out	the	demon	at	once.	He	must	have	meant,	rather,	that	a	continual	life	of	prayer	and	abiding	in
God	will	result	in	a	spiritual	preparedness	and	a	possession	of	a	spiritual	power	through	the	anointing	of	the	Holy	Spirit	that	will
be	effective	in	conflict	even	over	very	severe	demonic	attack	or	influence.
36
Jesus	cannot	mean	that	it	is	wrong	to	rejoice	when	the	enemy	is	vanquished	and	people	are	set	free	from	bondage,	for	that	is
certainly	a	good	reason	for	rejoicing.	He	must	rather	be	putting	a	relative	contrast	in	absolute	terms	in	telling	the	disciples	that	the
greatness	of	their	salvation	is	the	primary	thing	that	they	should	be	rejoicing	in.
OceanofPDF.com
Part	3
The	Doctrine	of	Man
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	21
The	Creation	of	Man
Why	did	God	create	us?	How	did	God	make	us	like	himself?	How
can	we	please	him	in	everyday	living?
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
The	previous	chapters	have	discussed	the	nature	of	God	and	his	creation	of
the	universe,	the	spiritual	beings	that	he	created,	and	his	relationship	to	the
world	in	terms	of	working	miracles	and	answering	prayer.	In	this	next	section,
we	focus	on	the	pinnacle	of	God’s	creative	activity,	his	creation	of	human
beings,	both	male	and	female,	to	be	more	like	him	than	anything	else	he	has
made.	We	will	consider	first	God’s	purpose	in	creating	man	and	the	nature	of
man	as	God	created	him	to	be	(chapters	21–23).	Then	we	will	look	at	the
nature	of	sin	and	man’s	disobedience	to	God	(chapter	24).	Finally,	we	will
examine	the	initiation	of	God’s	plan	for	saving	man,	discussing	man’s
relationship	to	God	in	the	covenants	that	God	established	(chapter	25).
A.	The	Use	of	the	Word	
Man	
to	Refer
to	the	Human	Race
Before	discussing	the	subject	matter	of	this	chapter,	it	is	necessary	to	consider
briefly	whether	it	is	appropriate	to	use	the	word	
man	
to	refer	to	the	entire
human	race	(as	in	the	title	for	this	chapter).	Some	people	today	object	to	ever
using	the	word	“man”	to	refer	to	the	human	race	in	general	(including	both
men	and	women),	because	it	is	claimed	that	such	usage	is	insensitive	to
women.	Those	who	make	this	objection	would	prefer	that	we	
only	
use
“gender	neutral”	terms	such	as	“humanity,”	“humankind,”	“human	beings,”	or
“persons”	to	refer	to	the	human	race.
After	considering	this	suggestion,	I	decided	to	continue	to	use	the	word
“man”	(as	well	as	several	of	these	other	terms)	to	refer	to	the	human	race	in
this	book	because	such	usage	has	divine	warrant	in	Genesis	5,	and	because	I
think	there	is	a	theological	issue	at	stake.	In	Genesis	5:1–2	we	read,	“When
God	created	man,	he	made	him	in	the	likeness	of	God.	Male	and	female	he
created	them,	and	he	blessed	them	
and	named	them	Man	
when	they	were
created”	(cf.	Gen.	1:27).	The	Hebrew	term	translated	“Man”	is	
’ādām,	
the
same	term	used	for	the	name	of	Adam,	and	the	same	term	that	is	sometimes
used	of	man	in	distinction	from	woman	(Gen.	2:22,	25;	3:12;	Eccl.	7:28).
Therefore	the	practice	of	using	the	same	term	to	refer	(1)	to	male	human
beings	and	(2)	to	the	human	race	generally	is	a	practice	that	originated	with
God	himself,	and	we	should	not	find	it	objectionable	or	insensitive.
Someone	might	object	that	this	is	just	an	accidental	feature	of	the	Hebrew
language,	but	this	argument	is	not	persuasive	because	Genesis	5:2	specifically
describes	God’s	activity	of	choosing	a	name	that	would	apply	to	the	human
race	as	a	whole.
I	am	
not	
here	arguing	that	we	must	always	duplicate	biblical	patterns	of
speech,	
or	
that	it	is	wrong	to	use	gender-neutral	terms	sometimes	to	refer	to
the	human	race	(as	I	just	did	in	this	sentence),	but	rather	that	God’s	
naming
activity	reported	in	Genesis	5:2	indicates	that	the	use	of	“man”	to	refer	to	the
entire	race	is	a	good	and	very	appropriate	choice,	and	one	that	we	should	not
avoid.
1
The	theological	issue	is	whether	there	is	a	suggestion	of	male	leadership	or
headship	in	the	family	from	the	beginning	of	creation.	The	fact	that	God	did
not	choose	to	call	the	human	race	“woman,”	but	“man,”	probably	has	some
significance	for	understanding	God’s	original	plan	for	men	and	women.
2
	Of
course,	this	question	of	the	name	we	use	to	refer	to	the	race	is	not	the	only
factor	in	that	discussion,	but	it	is	one	factor,	and	our	use	of	language	in	this
regard	does	have	some	significance	in	the	discussion	of	male-female	roles
today.
3
B.	Why	Was	Man	Created?
1.
	God	Did	Not	Need	to	Create	Man,	Yet	He	Created	Us	for	His	Own
Glory.
	In	the	discussion	of	God’s	independence	in	chapter	11	(see	
section	B
),
we	noted	several	Scripture	passages	that	teach	that	God	does	not	need	us	or
the	rest	of	creation	for	anything,	yet	we	and	the	rest	of	creation	glorify	him
and	bring	him	joy.	Since	there	was	perfect	love	and	fellowship	among
members	of	the	Trinity	for	all	eternity	(John	17:5,	24),	God	did	not	create	us
because	he	was	lonely	or	because	he	needed	fellowship	with	other	persons—
God	did	not	need	us	for	any	reason.
Nevertheless,	
God	created	us	for	his	own	glory.	
In	our	treatment	of	his
independence	we	noted	that	God	speaks	of	his	sons	and	daughters	from	the
ends	of	the	earth	as	those	“whom	I	created	
for	my	glory”	
(Isa.	43:7;	cf.	Eph.
1:11–12).	Therefore,	we	are	to	“do	all	to	the	glory	of	God”	(1	Cor.	10:31).
This	fact	guarantees	that	our	lives	are	significant.	When	we	first	realize	that
God	did	not	need	to	create	us	and	does	not	need	us	for	anything,	we	could
conclude	that	our	lives	have	no	importance	at	all.	But	Scripture	tells	us	that
we	were	created	to	glorify	God,	indicating	that	we	are	important	
to	God
himself.	
This	is	the	final	definition	of	genuine	importance	or	significance	to
our	lives:	If	we	are	truly	important	to	God	for	all	eternity,	then	what	greater
measure	of	importance	or	significance	could	we	want?
2.	What	Is	Our	Purpose	in	Life?
	The	fact	that	God	created	us	for	his	own
glory	determines	the	correct	answer	to	the	question,	“What	is	our	purpose	in
life?”	Our	purpose	must	be	to	fulfill	the	reason	that	God	created	us:	to	glorify
him.	When	we	are	speaking	with	respect	to	God	himself,	that	is	a	good
summary	of	our	purpose.	But	when	we	think	of	our	own	interests,	we	make
the	happy	discovery	that	we	are	to	enjoy	God	and	take	delight	in	him	and	in
our	relationship	to	him.	Jesus	says,	“I	came	that	they	may	have	life,	and	have
it	abundantly”	(John	10:10).	David	tells	God,	“In	your	presence	there	is
fulness	of	joy,	
in	your	right	hand	are	pleasures	for	evermore”	(Ps.	16:11).	He
longs	to	dwell	in	the	house	of	the	Lord	forever,	“to	behold	the	beauty	of	the
L
ORD
”	(Ps.	27:4),	and	Asaph	cries	out,
Whom	have	I	in	heaven	but	you?
And	there	is	nothing	upon	earth	that	I	desire	besides	you.
My	flesh	and	my	heart	may	fail,
but	God	is	the	strength	of	my	heart
and	my	portion	for	ever.	(Ps.	73:25–26)
Fullness	of	joy	is	found	in	knowing	God	and	delighting	in	the	excellence	of
his	character.	To	be	in	his	presence,	to	enjoy	fellowship	with	him,	is	a	greater
blessing	than	anything	that	can	be	imagined.
How	lovely	is	your	dwelling	place,
O	L
ORD
	of	hosts!
My	soul	longs,	yea,	faints
for	the	courts	of	the	L
ORD
;
my	heart	and	flesh	sing	for	joy
to	the	living	God.	.	.	.
For	a	day	in	your	courts	is	better
than	a	thousand	elsewhere.	(Ps.	84:1–2,	10)
Therefore,	the	normal	heart	attitude	of	a	Christian	is	rejoicing	in	the	Lord	and
in	the	lessons	of	the	life	he	gives	us	(Rom.	5:2–3;	Phil.	4:4;	1	Thess.	5:16–18;
James	1:2;	1	Peter	1:6,	8;	et	al.).
4
As	we	glorify	God	and	enjoy	him,	Scripture	tells	us	that	he	rejoices	in	us.	We
read,	“As	the	bridegroom	rejoices	over	the	bride,	
so	shall	your	God	rejoice
over	you”	
(Isa.	62:5),	and	Zephaniah	prophesies	that	the	Lord	“will	rejoice
over	you	with	gladness,	he	will	renew	you	in	his	love;	he	will	exult	over	you
with	loud	singing	as	on	a	day	of	festival”	(Zeph.	3:17–18).
This	understanding	of	the	doctrine	of	the	creation	of	man	has	very	practical
results.	When	we	realize	that	God	created	us	to	glorify	him,	and	when	we
start	to	act	in	ways	that	fulfill	that	purpose,	then	we	begin	to	experience	an
intensity	of	joy	in	the	Lord	that	we	have	never	before	known.	When	we	add	to
that	the	realization	that	God	himself	is	rejoicing	in	our	fellowship	with	him,
our	joy	becomes	“inexpressible	and	filled	with	heavenly	glory”	(1	Peter	1:8,
author’s	expanded	paraphrase).
5
Someone	might	object	that	it	is	wrong	for	God	to	seek	glory	for	himself	in
creating	man.	Certainly	it	is	wrong	for	human	beings	to	seek	glory	for
themselves,	as	we	see	in	the	dramatic	example	of	the	death	of	Herod	Agrippa
I.	When	he	proudly	accepted	the	shout	of	the	crowd,	“The	voice	of	a	god,	and
not	of	man!”	(Acts	12:22),	“immediately	an	angel	of	the	Lord	smote	him,
because	he	did	not	give	God	the	glory;	and	he	was	eaten	by	worms	and	died”
(Acts	12:23).	Herod	died	because	he	robbed	God	of	glory,	glory	that	God
deserved	and	he	did	not.
But	when	God	takes	glory	to	himself,	from	whom	is	he	robbing	glory?	Is
there	anyone	who	deserves	glory	more	than	he	does?	Certainly	not!	He	is	the
Creator,	he	made	all	things,	and	he	
deserves	
all	glory.	He	is	
worthy	
of
receiving	glory.	
Man	
may	not	seek	glory	for	himself,	but	in	this	case	what	is
wrong	for	man	is	right	for	God,	because	he	is	the	Creator.	It	is	
right,	
not
wrong,	that	he	be	glorified—in	fact,	if	he	did	not	receive	glory	from	all
creatures	in	the	universe,	that	would	be	horribly	wrong!	The	twenty-four
elders	around	God’s	throne	continually	sing,
“You	are	
worthy,	
our	Lord	and	God,
to	receive	glory	
and	honor	and	power,
for	you	created	all	things,
and	by	your	will	they	existed	and	were	created.”
(Rev.	4:11)
Paul	exclaims,	“For	from	him	and	through	him	and	to	him	are	all	things.	To
him	be	glory	for	ever.	Amen”	(Rom.	11:36).	When	we	begin	to	appreciate	the
nature	of	God	as	the	infinitely	perfect	Creator	who	deserves	all	praise,	then
our	hearts	will	not	rest	until	we	give	him	glory	with	all	of	our	“heart	.	.	.	soul
.	.	.	mind,	and	.	.	.	strength”	(Mark	12:30).
C.	Man	in	the	Image	of	God
1.
	The	Meaning	of	“Image	of	God.”
	Out	of	all	the	creatures	God	made,	only
one	creature,	man,	is	said	to	be	made	“in	the	image	of	God.”
6
	What	does	that
mean?	We	may	use	the	following	definition:	
The	fact	that	man	is	in	the	image
of	God	means	that	man	is	like	God	and	represents	God.
When	God	says,	“Let	us	make	man	in	our	image,	after	our	likeness”	(Gen.
1:26),	the	meaning	is	that	God	plans	to	make	a	creature	similar	to	himself.
Both	the	Hebrew	word	for	“image”	(
tselem
)	and	the	Hebrew	word	for
“likeness”	(
demût
)	refer	to	something	that	is	
similar	
but	not	identical	to	the
thing	it	represents	or	is	an	“image”	of.	The	word	
image	
can	also	be	used	of
something	that	
represents	
something	else.
7
Theologians	have	spent	much	time	attempting	to	specify	one	characteristic	of
man,	or	a	very	few,	in	which	the	image	of	God	is	primarily	seen.
8
	Some	have
thought	that	the	image	of	God	consists	in	man’s	intellectual	ability,	others	in
his	power	to	make	moral	decisions	and	willing	choices.	Others	have	thought
that	the	image	of	God	referred	to	man’s	original	moral	purity,	or	his	creation
as	male	and	female	(see	Gen.	1:27),	or	his	dominion	over	the	earth.
In	this	discussion	it	would	be	best	to	focus	attention	primarily	on	the
meanings	
of	the	words	“image”	and	“likeness.”	As	we	have	seen,	these	terms
had	quite	clear	meanings	to	the	original	readers.	When	we	realize	that	the
Hebrew	words	for	“image”	and	“likeness”	simply	informed	the	original
readers	that	man	was	
like	
God,	and	would	in	many	ways	
represent	
God,	much
of	the	controversy	over	the	meaning	of	“image	of	God”	is	seen	to	be	a	search
for	too	narrow	and	too	specific	a	meaning.	When	Scripture	reports	that	God
said,	“Let	us	make	man	in	our	image,	after	our	likeness”	(Gen.	1:26),	it
simply	would	have	meant	to	the	original	readers,	“Let	us	make	man	to	be	
like
us	and	to	
represent	
us.”
Because	“image”	and	“likeness”	had	these	meanings,	Scripture	does	not	need
to	say	something	like,
The	fact	that	man	is	in	the	image	of	God	means	that	man	is	like	God
in	the	following	ways:	intellectual	ability,	moral	purity,	spiritual
nature,	dominion	over	the	earth,	creativity,	ability	to	make	ethical
choices,	and	immortality	[or	some	similar	statement].
Such	an	explanation	is	unnecessary,	not	only	because	the	terms	had	clear
meanings,	but	also	because	no	such	list	could	do	justice	to	the	subject:	the	text
only	needs	to	affirm	that	man	is	
like	God,	
and	the	rest	of	Scripture	fills	in
more	details	to	explain	this.	In	fact,	as	we	read	the	rest	of	Scripture,	we
realize	that	a	full	understanding	of	man’s	likeness	to	God	would	require	a	full
understanding	of	
who	God	is	
in	his	being	and	in	his	actions	and	a	full
understanding	of	
who	man	is	
and	what	he	does.	The	more	we	know	about
God	and	man	the	more	similarities	we	will	recognize,	and	the	more	fully	we
will	understand	what	Scripture	means	when	it	says	that	man	is	in	the	image	of
God.	The	expression	refers	to	every	way	in	which	man	is	like	God.
This	understanding	of	what	it	means	that	man	is	created	in	the	image	of	God
is	reinforced	by	the	similarity	between	Genesis	1:26,	where	God	declares	his
intention	to	create	man	in	his	image	and	likeness,	and	Genesis	5:3:	“When
Adam	had	lived	a	hundred	and	thirty	years,	he	became	the	father	of	a	son	in
his	own	
likeness	
[
demût
],	after	his	
image	
[
tselem
],	and	named	him	Seth.”	Seth
was	not	identical	to	Adam,	but	he	was	like	him	in	many	ways,	as	a	son	is	like
his	father.	The	text	simply	means	that	Seth	was	like	Adam.	It	does	not	specify
any	specific	number	of	ways	that	Seth	was	like	Adam,	and	it	would	be	overly
restrictive	for	us	to	assert	that	one	or	another	characteristic	determined	the
way	in	which	Seth	was	in	Adam’s	image	and	likeness.	Was	it	his	brown	eyes?
Or	his	curly	hair?	Perhaps	it	was	his	athletic	prowess,	or	his	serious
disposition	or	even	his	quick	temper?	Of	course,	such	speculation	would	be
useless.	It	is	evident	that	
every	
way	in	which	Seth	was	like	Adam	would	be	a
part	of	his	likeness	to	Adam	and	thus	part	of	his	being	“in	the	image”	of
Adam.	Similarly,	
every	
way	in	which	man	is	like	God	is	part	of	his	being	in
the	image	and	likeness	of	God.
2.	The	Fall:	God’s	Image	Is	Distorted	but	Not	Lost.
	We	might	wonder
whether	man	could	still	be	thought	to	be	
like	God	
after	he	sinned.	This
question	is	answered	quite	early	in	Genesis	where	God	gives	Noah	the
authority	to	establish	the	death	penalty	for	murder	among	human	beings	just
after	the	flood:	God	says	“Whoever	sheds	the	blood	of	man,	by	man	shall	his
blood	be	shed;	
for	God	made	man	in	his	own	image”	
(Gen.	9:6).	Even	though
men	are	sinful,	there	is	still	enough	likeness	to	God	remaining	in	them	that	to
murder	another	person	(to	“shed	blood”	is	an	Old	Testament	expression	for
taking	a	human	life)	is	to	attack	the	part	of	creation	that	most	resembles	God,
and	it	betrays	an	attempt	or	desire	(if	one	were	able)	to	attack	God	himself.
9
Man	is	still	in	God’s	image.	The	New	Testament	gives	confirmation	to	this
when	James	3:9	says	that	men	generally,	not	just	believers,	“are	made	in	the
likeness	of	God.”
However,	since	man	has	sinned,	he	is	certainly	not	as	fully	like	God	as	he	was
before.	His	moral	purity	has	been	lost	and	his	sinful	character	certainly	does
not	reflect	God’s	holiness.	His	intellect	is	corrupted	by	falsehood	and
misunderstanding;	his	speech	no	longer	continually	glorifies	God;	his
relationships	are	often	governed	by	selfishness	rather	than	love,	and	so	forth.
Though	man	is	still	in	the	image	of	God,	in	every	aspect	of	life	
some	
parts	of
that	image	have	been	distorted	or	lost.	In	short,	“God	made	man	upright,	but
they	have	sought	out	many	devices”	(Eccl.	7:29).	After	the	fall,	then,	we	are
still	in	God’s	image—we	are	still	like	God	and	we	still	represent	God—but
the	image	of	God	in	us	is	distorted;	we	are	less	fully	like	God	than	we	were
before	the	entrance	of	sin.
Therefore	it	is	important	that	we	understand	the	full	meaning	of	the	image	of
God	not	simply	from	observation	of	human	beings	as	they	currently	exist,	but
from	the	biblical	indications	of	the	nature	of	Adam	and	Eve	when	God
created	them	and	when	all	that	God	had	made	was	“very	good”	(Gen.	1:31).
The	true	nature	of	man	in	the	image	of	God	was	also	seen	in	the	earthly	life	of
Christ.	The	full	measure	of	the	excellence	of	our	humanity	will	not	be	seen
again	in	life	on	earth	until	Christ	returns	and	we	have	obtained	all	the	benefits
of	the	salvation	he	earned	for	us.
3.	Redemption	in	Christ:	a	Progressive	Recovering	of	More	of	God’s
Image.
	Nonetheless,	it	is	encouraging	to	turn	to	the	New	Testament	and	see
that	our	redemption	in	Christ	means	that	we	can,	even	in	this	life,
progressively	grow	into	more	and	more	likeness	to	God.	For	example,	Paul
says	that	as	Christians	we	have	a	new	nature	that	is	“being	renewed	in
knowledge	after	the	image	of	its	creator”	(Col.	3:10).	As	we	gain	in	true
understanding	of	God,	his	Word,	and	his	world,	we	begin	to	think	more	and
more	of	the	thoughts	that	God	himself	thinks.	In	this	way	we	are	“renewed	in
knowledge”	and	we	become	more	like	God	in	our	thinking.	This	is	a
description	of	the	ordinary	course	of	the	Christian	life.	So	Paul	also	can	say
that	we	“are	being	changed	into	his	likeness	[lit.	“image,”	Gk.	
eikōn
]	from
one	degree	of	glory	to	another”	(2	Cor.	3:18).
10
	Throughout	this	life,	as	we
grow	in	Christian	maturity	we	grow	in	greater	likeness	to	God.	More
particularly,	we	grow	in	likeness	to	Christ	in	our	lives	and	in	our	character.	In
fact,	the	goal	for	which	God	has	redeemed	us	is	that	we	might	be	“conformed
to	the	image	of	his	Son”	(Rom.	8:29)	and	thus	be	exactly	like	Christ	in	our
moral	character.
4.	At	Christ’s	Return:	Complete	Restoration	of	God’s	Image.
	The
amazing	promise	of	the	New	Testament	is	that	just	as	we	have	been	like
Adam	(subject	to	death	and	sin),	we	shall	also	be	like	Christ	(morally	pure,
never	subject	to	death	again):	“Just	as	we	have	borne	the	image	of	the	man	of
dust,	we	shall	also	bear	the	image	of	the	man	of	heaven”	(1	Cor.	15:49).
11
	The
full	measure	of	our	creation	in	the	image	of	God	is	not	seen	in	the	life	of
Adam	who	sinned,	nor	is	it	seen	in	our	lives	now,	for	we	are	imperfect.	But
the	New	Testament	emphasizes	that	God’s	purpose	in	creating	man	in	his
image	was	completely	realized	in	the	person	of	Jesus	Christ.	He	himself	“is
the	image	of	God”	(2	Cor.	4:4	NASB);	“He	is	the	image	of	the	invisible	God”
(Col.	1:15).	In	Jesus	we	see	human	likeness	to	God	as	it	was	intended	to	be,
and	it	should	cause	us	to	rejoice	that	God	has	predestined	us	“to	be	
conformed
to	the	image	of	his	son”	
(Rom.	8:29;	cf.	1	Cor.	15:49):	“When	he	appears	
we
shall	be	like	him”	
(1	John	3:2).
5.	Specific	Aspects	of	Our	Likeness	to	God.
	Though	we	have	argued	above
that	it	would	be	difficult	to	define	all	the	ways	in	which	we	are	like	God,	we
can	nevertheless	mention	several	aspects	of	our	existence	that	show	us	to	be
more	like	God	than	all	the	rest	of	creation.
12
a.	Moral	Aspects:
	(1)	We	are	creatures	who	are	morally	accountable	before
God	for	our	actions.	Corresponding	to	that	accountability,	we	have	(2)	an
inner	sense	of	right	and	wrong	that	sets	us	apart	from	animals	(who	have	little
if	any	innate	sense	of	morality	or	justice	but	simply	respond	from	fear	of
punishment	or	hope	of	reward).	When	we	act	according	to	God’s	moral
standards,	our	likeness	to	God	is	reflected	in	(3)	behavior	that	is	holy	and
righteous	before	him,	but,	by	contrast,	our	
un
likeness	to	God	is	reflected
whenever	we	sin.
b.	Spiritual	Aspects:
	(4)	We	have	not	only	physical	bodies	but	also
immaterial	spirits,	and	we	can	therefore	act	in	ways	that	are	significant	in	the
immaterial,	spiritual	realm	of	existence.	This	means	that	we	have	(5)	a
spiritual	life	that	enables	us	to	relate	to	God	as	persons,	to	pray	and	praise
him,	and	to	hear	him	speaking	his	words	to	us.
13
	No	animal	will	ever	spend
an	hour	in	intercessory	prayer	for	the	salvation	of	a	relative	or	a	friend!
Connected	with	this	spiritual	life	is	the	fact	that	we	have	(6)	immortality;	we
will	not	cease	to	exist	but	will	live	forever.
c.	Mental	Aspects:
	(7)	We	have	an	ability	to	reason	and	think	logically	and
learn	that	sets	us	apart	from	the	animal	world.	Animals	sometimes	exhibit
remarkable	behavior	in	solving	mazes	or	working	out	problems	in	the
physical	world,	but	they	certainly	do	not	engage	in	abstract	reasoning—there
is	no	such	thing	as	the	“history	of	canine	philosophy,”	for	example,	nor	have
any	animals	since	creation	developed	at	all	in	their	understanding	of	ethical
problems	or	use	of	philosophical	concepts,	etc.	No	group	of	chimpanzees	will
ever	sit	around	the	table	arguing	about	the	doctrine	of	the	Trinity	or	the
relative	merits	of	Calvinism	or	Arminianism!	In	fact,	even	in	developing
physical	and	technical	skills	we	are	far	different	from	animals:	beavers	still
build	the	same	kind	of	dams	they	have	built	for	a	thousand	generations,	birds
still	build	the	same	kind	of	nests,	and	bees	still	build	the	same	kinds	of	hives.
But	we	continue	to	develop	greater	skill	and	complexity	in	technology,	in
agriculture,	in	science,	and	in	nearly	every	field	of	endeavor.
(8)	Our	use	of	complex,	abstract	language	sets	us	far	apart	from	the	animals.	I
could	tell	my	son,	when	he	was	four	years	old,	to	go	and	get	the	big,	red
screwdriver	from	my	workbench	in	the	basement.	Even	if	he	had	never	seen	it
before,	he	could	easily	perform	the	task	because	he	knew	meanings	of	“go,”
“get,”	“big,”	“red,”	“screwdriver,”	“workbench,”	and	“basement.”	He	could
have	done	the	same	for	a	small,	brown	hammer	or	a	black	bucket	beside	the
workbench	or	any	of	dozens	of	other	items	that	he	perhaps	had	never	seen
before	but	could	visualize	when	I	described	them	in	a	few	brief	words.	No
chimpanzee	in	all	history	has	been	able	to	perform	such	a	task—a	task	that
has	not	been	learned	through	repetition	with	reward,	but	is	simply	described
in	words	that	refer	to	an	item	that	the	hearer	has	never	seen	before.	Yet	four-
year-old	human	beings	can	do	this	routinely,	and	we	think	nothing	of	it.	Most
eight-year-olds	can	write	an	understandable	letter	to	their	grandparents
describing	a	trip	to	the	zoo,	or	can	move	to	a	foreign	country	and	learn	any
other	language	in	the	world,	and	we	think	it	entirely	normal.	But	no	animal
will	ever	write	such	a	letter	to	its	grandparents,	or	give	the	past,	present,	and
future	of	even	one	French	verb,	or	read	a	detective	story	and	understand	it,	or
understand	the	meaning	of	even	one	verse	from	the	Bible.	Human	children	do
all	these	things	quite	readily,	and	in	so	doing	they	show	themselves	so	far
superior	to	the	whole	animal	kingdom	that	we	wonder	why	people	have
sometimes	thought	that	we	are	merely	another	kind	of	animal.
(9)	Another	mental	difference	between	humans	and	animals	is	that	we	have	an
awareness	of	the	distant	future,	even	an	inward	sense	that	we	will	live	beyond
the	time	of	our	physical	death,	a	sense	that	gives	many	people	a	desire	to
attempt	to	be	right	with	God	before	they	die	(God	“has	put	eternity	into	man’s
mind,”	Eccl.	3:11).
(10)	Our	likeness	to	God	is	also	seen	in	our	human	creativity	in	areas	such	as
art,	music,	and	literature,	and	in	scientific	and	technological	inventiveness.
We	should	not	think	of	such	creativity	as	restricted	to	world-famous
musicians	or	artists—it	is	also	reflected	in	a	delightful	way	in	the	play	acting
or	skits	put	on	by	children,	in	the	skill	reflected	in	the	cooking	of	a	meal	or
the	decorating	of	a	home	or	the	planting	of	a	garden,	and	in	the	inventiveness
shown	by	every	human	being	who	“fixes”	something	that	just	wasn’t	working
correctly.
The	foregoing	aspects	of	likeness	to	God	have	been	ways	in	which	we	differ
from	animals	
absolutely,	
not	merely	in	degree.	But	there	are	other	areas	where
we	differ	from	animals	in	significant	degree,	and	these	also	can	show	our
likeness	to	God.
(11)	In	the	area	of	emotions,	our	likeness	to	God	is	seen	in	a	large	difference
in	degree	and	complexity	of	emotions.	Of	course,	animals	do	show	some
emotions	(anyone	who	has	owned	a	dog	can	remember	evident	expressions	of
joy,	sadness,	fear	of	punishment	when	it	has	done	wrong,	anger	if	another
animal	invades	its	“turf,”	contentment,	and	affection,	for	example).	But	in	the
complexity	of	emotions	that	we	experience,	once	again	we	are	far	different
than	the	rest	of	creation.	After	watching	my	son’s	baseball	game,	I	can
simultaneously	feel	sad	that	his	team	lost,	happy	that	he	played	well,	proud
that	he	was	a	good	sport,	thankful	to	God	for	giving	me	a	son	and	giving	me
the	joy	of	watching	him	grow	up,	joyful	because	of	the	song	of	praise	that	has
been	echoing	in	my	mind	all	afternoon,	and	anxious	because	we	are	going	to
be	late	for	dinner!	It	is	very	doubtful	that	an	animal	experiences	anything
approaching	this	complexity	of	emotional	feeling.
d.	Relational	Aspects:
	In	addition	to	our	unique	ability	to	relate	to	God
(discussed	above),	there	are	other	relational	aspects	of	being	in	God’s	image.
(12)	Although	animals	no	doubt	have	some	sense	of	community	with	each
other,	the	depth	of	interpersonal	harmony	experienced	in	human	marriage,	in
a	human	family	when	it	functions	according	to	God’s	principles,	and	in	a
church	when	a	community	of	believers	is	walking	in	fellowship	with	the	Lord
and	with	each	other,	is	much	greater	than	the	interpersonal	harmony
experienced	by	any	animals.	In	our	family	relationships	and	in	the	church,	we
are	also	superior	to	angels,	who	do	not	marry	or	bear	children	or	live	in	the
company	of	God’s	redeemed	sons	and	daughters.
(13)	In	marriage	itself	we	reflect	the	nature	of	God	in	the	fact	that	as	men	and
women	we	have	equality	in	importance	but	difference	in	roles	from	the	time
that	God	created	us	(see	discussion	in	
chapter	22
).
(14)	Man	is	like	God	also	in	his	relationship	to	the	rest	of	creation.
Specifically,	man	has	been	given	the	right	to	rule	over	the	creation	and	when
Christ	returns	will	even	be	given	authority	to	sit	in	judgment	over	angels	(1
Cor.	6:3;	Gen.	1:26,	28;	Ps.	8:6–8).
e.	Physical	Aspects:
	Is	there	any	sense	in	which	our	human	bodies	are	also	a
part	of	what	it	means	to	be	made	in	the	image	of	God?	Certainly	we	should
not	think	that	our	physical	bodies	imply	that	God	himself	has	a	body,	for
“God	is	spirit”	(John	4:24),	and	it	is	sin	to	think	of	him	or	to	portray	him	in
any	way	that	would	imply	that	he	has	a	material	or	a	physical	body	(see	Ex.
20:4;	Ps.	115:3–8;	Rom.	1:23).
14
	But	even	though	our	physical	bodies	should
in	no	way	be	taken	to	imply	that	God	has	a	physical	body,	are	there	still	some
ways	in	which	our	bodies	reflect	something	of	God’s	own	character	and
thereby	constitute	part	of	what	it	means	to	be	created	in	the	image	of	God?
Certainly	this	is	true	in	some	respects.	For	example,	our	physical	bodies	give
us	the	ability	to	see	with	our	eyes.	This	is	a	Godlike	quality	because	God
himself	sees,	and	sees	far	more	than	we	will	ever	see,	although	he	does	not	do
it	with	physical	eyes	like	we	have.	Our	ears	give	us	the	ability	to	hear,	and
this	is	a	Godlike	ability,	even	though	God	does	not	have	physical	ears.	Our
mouths	give	us	the	ability	to	speak,	reflecting	the	fact	that	God	is	a	God	who
speaks.	Our	senses	of	taste	and	touch	and	smell	give	us	the	ability	to
understand	and	enjoy	God’s	creation,	reflecting	the	fact	that	God	himself
understands	and	enjoys	his	creation,	though	in	a	far	greater	sense	than	we	do.
It	is	important	that	we	recognize	that	it	is	
man	himself	
who	is	created	in	the
image	of	God,	not	just	his	spirit	or	his	mind.	Certainly	our	physical	bodies	are
a	very	important	part	of	our	existence	and,	as	transformed	when	Christ
returns,	they	will	continue	to	be	part	of	our	existence	for	all	eternity	(see	1
Cor.	15:43–45,	51–55).	Our	bodies	therefore	have	been	created	by	God	as
suitable	instruments	to	represent	in	a	physical	way	our	human	nature,	which
has	been	made	to	be	like	God’s	own	nature.	In	fact,	almost	everything	we	do
is	done	by	means	of	the	use	of	our	physical	bodies—our	thinking,	our	moral
judgments,	our	prayer	and	praise,	our	demonstrations	of	love	and	concern	for
each	other—all	are	done	using	the	physical	bodies	God	has	given	us.
Therefore,	if	we	are	careful	to	point	out	that	we	are	
not	
saying	that	God	has	a
physical	body,	we	may	say	that	(15)	our	physical	bodies	in	various	ways
reflect	something	of	God’s	own	character	as	well.	Moreover,	much	physical
movement	and	demonstration	of	God-given	skill	comes	about	through	the	use
of	our	body.	And	certainly	(16)	the	God-given	physical	ability	to	bear	and
raise	children	who	are	like	ourselves	(see	Gen.	5:3)	is	a	reflection	of	God’s
own	ability	to	create	human	beings	who	are	like	himself.
Especially	in	the	last	several	points,	these	differences	between	human	beings
and	the	rest	of	creation	are	not	
absolute	differences	
but	often	differences	of
very	great	degree.	We	mentioned	that	there	is	some	kind	of	emotion
experienced	by	animals.	There	is	some	experience	of	authority	in
relationships	where	animal	communities	have	leaders	whose	authority	is
accepted	by	the	others	in	the	group.	Moreover,	there	is	
some	
similarity	even
in	those	differences	we	think	more	absolute:	animals	are	able	to	reason	to
some	extent	and	can	communicate	with	each	other	in	various	ways	that	in
some	primitive	sense	can	be	called	“language.”	This	should	not	be	surprising:
if	God	made	the	entire	creation	so	that	it	reflects	his	character	in	various
ways,	this	is	what	we	would	expect.	In	fact,	the	more	complex	and	highly
developed	animals	are	
more	
like	God	than	lower	forms	of	animals.	Therefore
we	should	not	say	that	
only	
man	reflects	any	likeness	to	God	at	all,	for	in	one
way	or	another	all	of	creation	reflects	some	likeness	to	God.
15
	But	it	is	still
important	to	recognize	that	
only	man,	
out	of	all	of	creation,	is	so	like	God	that
he	can	be	said	to	be	“in	the	image	of	God.”	This	scriptural	affirmation,
together	with	the	scriptural	commands	that	we	are	to	imitate	God	in	our	lives
(Eph.	5:1;	1	Peter	1:16),	and	the	observable	facts	that	we	can	recognize	in
looking	at	ourselves	and	the	rest	of	creation,	all	indicate	that	we	are	
much
more	like	God	
than	all	the	rest	of	creation.	In	some	respects	the	differences
are	absolute,	and	in	other	respects	they	are	relative,	but	they	are	all
significant.
Finally,	our	appreciation	of	the	ways	in	which	we	are	like	God	can	be
enhanced	by	the	realization	that,	unlike	the	rest	of	God’s	creation,	we	have	an
ability	to	grow	to	become	
more	like	God	
throughout	our	lives.	Our	moral
sense	can	be	more	highly	developed	through	study	of	Scripture	and	prayer.
Our	moral	behavior	can	reflect	more	and	more	the	holiness	of	God	(2	Cor.
7:1;	1	Peter	1:16;	et	al.).	Our	spiritual	life	can	be	enriched	and	deepened.	Our
use	of	reason	and	language	can	become	more	accurate	and	truthful	and	more
honoring	to	God.	Our	sense	of	the	future	can	become	intensified	as	we	grow
in	our	hope	of	living	with	God	forever.	Our	future	existence	can	be	enriched
as	we	lay	up	treasures	in	heaven	and	seek	for	increased	heavenly	reward	(see
Matt.	6:19–21;	1	Cor.	3:10–15;	2	Cor.	5:10).	Our	ability	to	rule	over	the
creation	can	be	extended	by	faithful	use	of	the	gifts	God	has	given	us;	our
faithfulness	to	the	God-given	purposes	for	our	creation	as	men	and	women
can	be	increased	as	we	follow	biblical	principles	in	our	families;	our
creativity	can	be	employed	in	ways	that	are	more	and	more	pleasing	to	God;
our	emotions	can	be	more	and	more	conformed	to	the	pattern	of	Scripture	so
that	we	become	more	like	David,	a	man	after	God’s	own	heart	(1	Sam.	13:14).
Our	interpersonal	harmony	in	our	families	and	in	the	church	can	reflect	more
and	more	the	unity	that	exists	among	the	persons	in	the	Trinity.	As	we
consciously	seek	to	grow	into	greater	likeness	to	God	in	all	these	areas,	we
also	demonstrate	an	ability	that	itself	sets	us	apart	from	the	rest	of	creation.
6.	Our	Great	Dignity	as	Bearers	of	God’s	Image.
	It	would	be	good	for	us	to
reflect	on	our	likeness	to	God	more	often.	It	will	probably	amaze	us	to	realize
that	when	the	Creator	of	the	universe	wanted	to	create	something	“in	his
image,”	something	
more	like	himself	
than	all	the	rest	of	creation,	he	made	us.
This	realization	will	give	us	a	profound	sense	of	dignity	and	significance	as
we	reflect	on	the	excellence	of	all	the	rest	of	God’s	creation:	the	starry
universe,	the	abundant	earth,	the	world	of	plants	and	animals,	and	the	angelic
kingdoms	are	remarkable,	even	magnificent.	But	we	are	more	like	our	Creator
than	any	of	these	things.	We	are	the	culmination	of	God’s	infinitely	wise	and
skillful	work	of	creation.	Even	though	sin	has	greatly	marred	that	likeness,	we
nonetheless	now	reflect	much	of	it	and	shall	even	more	as	we	grow	in
likeness	to	Christ.
Yet	we	must	remember	that	even	fallen,	sinful	man	has	the	
status	
of	being	in
God’s	image	(see	discussion	of	Gen.	9:6,	above).	Every	single	human	being,
no	matter	how	much	the	image	of	God	is	marred	by	sin,	or	illness,	or
weakness,	or	age,	or	any	other	disability,	still	has	the	
status	
of	being	in	God’s
image	and	therefore	must	be	treated	with	the	dignity	and	respect	that	is	due	to
God’s	image-bearer.	This	has	profound	implications	for	our	conduct	toward
others.	It	means	that	people	of	every	race	deserve	equal	dignity	and	rights.	It
means	that	elderly	people,	those	seriously	ill,	the	mentally	retarded,	and
children	yet	unborn,	deserve	full	protection	and	honor	as	human	beings.	If	we
ever	deny	our	unique	status	in	creation	as	God’s	only	image-bearers,	we	will
soon	begin	to	depreciate	the	value	of	human	life,	will	tend	to	see	humans	as
merely	a	higher	form	of	animal,	and	will	begin	to	treat	others	as	such.	We	will
also	lose	much	of	our	sense	of	meaning	in	life.
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
According	to	Scripture,	what	should	be	the	major	purpose	of	your	life?	If
you	consider	the	major	commitments	or	goals	of	your	life	at	the	present
time	(with	respect	to	friendships,	marriage,	education,	job,	use	of	money,
church	relationships,	etc.),	are	you	acting	as	though	your	goal	were	the
one	that	Scripture	specifies?	Or	do	you	have	some	other	goals	that	you
have	acted	upon	(perhaps	without	consciously	deciding	to	do	so)?	As
you	think	about	the	pattern	of	most	of	your	days,	do	you	think	that	God
delights	in	you	and	rejoices	over	you?
2
.	
How	does	it	make	you	feel	to	think	that	you,	as	a	human	being,	are	more
like	God	than	any	other	creature	in	the	universe?	How	does	that
knowledge	make	you	want	to	act?
3
.	
Do	you	think	that	there	are	any	more	intelligent,	more	Godlike	creatures
anywhere	else	in	the	universe?	What	does	the	fact	that	Jesus	became	a
man	rather	than	some	other	kind	of	creature	say	about	the	importance	of
human	beings	in	God’s	sight?
4
.	
Do	you	think	that	God	has	made	us	so	that	we	become	more	happy	or
less	happy	when	we	grow	to	become	more	like	him?	As	you	look	over
the	list	of	ways	in	which	we	can	be	more	like	God,	can	you	name	one	or
two	areas	in	which	growth	in	likeness	to	God	has	given	you	increasing
joy	in	your	life?	In	which	areas	would	you	now	like	to	make	more
progress	in	likeness	to	God?
5
.	
Is	it	only	Christians	or	all	people	who	are	in	the	image	of	God?	How
does	that	make	you	feel	about	your	relationships	to	non-Christians?
6
.	
Do	you	think	an	understanding	of	the	image	of	God	might	change	the
way	you	think	and	act	toward	people	who	are	racially	different,	or
elderly,	or	weak,	or	unattractive	to	the	world?
SPECIAL	TERMS
image	of	God
	
	
imago	Dei
	
	
likeness
	
	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the	
bibliography	to
chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be	found	in	
Appendix	4
.)
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92			Litton,	109–22
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1875–76			Pope,	1:430–36
1892–94			Miley,	1:355–422,	406–8
1940			Wiley,	2:7–50
1960			Purkiser,	204–22
1983			Carter,	1:195–236
3.			Baptist
1767			Gill,	1:440–51
1887			Boyce,	189–94,	213–17
1907			Strong,	465–83,	514–32
1917			Mullins,	255–62
1976–83			Henry,	2:124–42;	4:494–521
1983–85			Erickson,	455–518,	541–58
1987–94			Lewis/Demarest,	2:123–82
4.			Dispensational
1947			Chafer,	2:125–43,	161–73
1949			Thiessen,	151–57
1986			Ryrie,	189–94
5.			Lutheran
1917–24			Pieper,	1:515–27
1934			Mueller,	205–9
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1559			Calvin,	1:183–96	(1.15)
1861			Heppe,	4:197–228,	220–50
1871–73			Hodge,	2:92–116
1878			Dabney,	293–94
1887–1921			Warfield,	
BTS,	
238–61
1889			Shedd,	2a:3–115;	3:249–377
1937–66			Murray,	
CW,	
2:14–22,	34–46
1938			Berkhof,	181–90,	202–10
1962			Buswell,	1:231–61
7.			Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988–92			Williams,	1:197–220
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955			Ott,	94–96,	101–6
2.			Roman	Catholic:	Post-Vatican	II
1980			McBrien,	1:101–78
Other	Works
Barclay,	D.	R.	“Creation.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	177–79.
Berkouwer,	G.	C.	
Man:	The	Image	of	God.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,
1962.
Boston,	Thomas.	
Human	Nature	in	Its	Fourfold	State.	
London:	Banner	of
Truth,	1964	(first	published	1720).
Ferguson,	S.	B.	“Image	of	God.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	328–29.
Henry,	C.	F.	H.	“Image	of	God.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	545–48.
Hoekema,	Anthony	A.	
Created	in	God’s	Image.	
Grand	Rapids:
Eerdmans,	and	Exeter:	Paternoster,	1986,	pp.	1–111.
Hughes,	Philip	Edgcumbe.	
The	True	Image:	The	Origin	and	Destiny	of
Man	in	Christ.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	and	Leicester:	Inter-Varsity
Press,	1989,	pp.	1–70.
Kline,	Meredith	G.	
Images	of	the	Spirit.	
Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1980.
Laidlaw,	John.	
The	Bible	Doctrine	of	Man.	
Edinburgh:	T.	&	T.	Clark,
1905.
Machen,	J.	Gresham.	
The	Christian	View	of	Man.	
London:	Banner	of
Truth,	1965	(reprint	of	1937	edition).
McDonald,	H.	D.	“Man,	Doctrine	of.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	676–80.
_____.	
The	Christian	View	of	Man.	
Westchester,	Ill.:	Crossway,	1981.
Robinson,	H.	W.	
The	Christian	Doctrine	of	Man.	
3d	ed.	Edinburgh:	T.	&
T.	Clark,	1926.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
Genesis	1:26–27:	
Then	God	said,	“Let	us	make	man	in	our	image,	after	our
likeness;	and	let	them	have	dominion	over	the	fish	of	the	sea,	and	over	the
birds	of	the	air,	and	over	the	cattle,	and	over	all	the	earth,	and	over	every
creeping	thing	that	creeps	upon	the	earth.”	So	God	created	man	in	his	own
image,	in	the	image	of	God	he	created	him;	male	and	female	he	created	them.
HYMNS
“Love	Divine,	All	Love	Excelling”
Love	divine,	all	love	excelling,
Joy	of	heav’n,	to	earth	come	down!
Fix	in	us	thy	humble	dwelling;
All	thy	faithful	mercies	crown.
Jesus,	thou	art	all	compassion,
Pure,	unbounded	love	thou	art;
Visit	us	with	thy	salvation,
Enter	ev’ry	trembling	heart.
Breathe,	O	breathe	thy	loving	Spirit
Into	ev’ry	troubled	breast!
Let	us	all	in	thee	inherit,
Let	us	find	the	promised	rest.
Take	away	the	love	of	sinning;
Alpha	and	Omega	be;
End	of	faith,	as	its	beginning,
Set	our	hearts	at	liberty.
Come,	Almighty	to	deliver,
Let	us	all	thy	life	receive;
Suddenly	return,	and	never,
Never	more	thy	temples	leave.
Thee	we	would	be	always	blessing,
Serve	thee	as	thy	hosts	above,
Pray,	and	praise	thee,	without	ceasing,
Glory	in	thy	perfect	love.
Finish,	then,	thy	new	creation;
Pure	and	spotless	let	us	be;
Let	us	see	thy	great	salvation
Perfectly	restored	in	thee:
Changed	from	glory	into	glory,
Till	in	heav’n	we	take	our	place,
Till	we	cast	our	crowns	before	thee,
Lost	in	wonder,	love,	and	praise.
AUTHOR:	CHARLES	WESLEY,	1747
Alternative	hymn:	
“Thou	Art	Worthy”
Thou	art	worthy,	thou	art	worthy,
thou	art	worthy,	O	Lord.
To	receive	glory,	glory	and	honor,
glory	and	honor	and	power.
For	thou	hast	created,	hast	all	things	created,
thou	hast	created	all	things;
And	for	thy	pleasure,	they	are	created,
thou	art	worthy,	O	Lord.
AUTHOR:	PAULINE	MICHAEL	MILLS	
COPYRIGHT	C.	FRED	BOCK	MUSIC,	1963,	1975.	
USED	BY	PERMISSION.
NOTES
1
However,	the	question	of	whether	to	use	“man”	to	refer	to	a	person	indefinitely,	as	in,	“If	any	
man	
would	come	after	me,	let	him
deny	himself	and	take	up	his	cross	daily	and	follow	me	(Luke	9:23),”	is	a	different	question,	because	the	naming	of	the	human
race	is	not	in	view.	In	these	cases,	considerateness	toward	women	as	well	as	men,	and	present-day	language	patterns,	would	make
it	appropriate	to	use	gender-neutral	language	such	as,	“If	any	
one	
would	come	after	me.”
2
See	
chapter	22
;	also	Raymond	C.	Ortlund,	Jr.,	“Male-Female	Equality	and	Male	Headship:	Genesis	1–3,”	in	
Recovering	Biblical
Manhood	and	Womanhood:	A	Response	to	Evangelical	Feminism,	
ed.	John	Piper	and	Wayne	Grudem	(Wheaton,	Ill.:	Crossway,
1991,	p.	
98).
3
This	is	probably	also	recognized	by	many	of	those	who	raise	the	most	objection	to	the	use	of	“man”	to	refer	to	the	race	(namely,
feminists	who	oppose	any	unique	male	headship	in	the	family).
4
The	first	question	in	the	Westminster	Larger	Catechism	is	“What	is	the	chief	and	highest	end	of	man?”	The	answer	is,	“Man’s
chief	and	highest	end	is	to	glorify	God,	and	fully	to	enjoy	Him	forever.”
5
See	W.	Grudem,	
1	Peter,	
p.	66.
6
The	Latin	phrase	
imago	Dei	
means	“image	of	God”	and	is	sometimes	used	in	theological	discussions	in	place	of	the	English
phrase	“image	of	God.”	I	have	not	used	it	elsewhere	in	this	book.
7
The	word	
image	
(
tselem
)	means	an	object	similar	to	something	else	and	often	representative	of	it.	The	word	is	used	to	speak	of
statues	or	replicas	of	tumors	and	of	mice	(1	Sam.	6:5,	11),	of	paintings	of	soldiers	on	the	wall	(Ezek.	23:14),	and	of	pagan	idols	or
statues	representing	deities	(Num.	33:42;	2	Kings	11:18;	Ezek.	7:27;	16:17;	et	al.).
The	word	
likeness	
(
demût
)	also	means	an	object	similar	to	something	else,	but	it	tends	to	be	used	more	frequently	in	contexts
where	the	idea	of	similarity	is	emphasized	more	than	the	idea	of	being	a	representative	or	substitute	(of	a	god,	for	example).	King
Ahaz’s	model	or	drawing	of	the	altar	he	saw	in	Damascus	is	called	a	“likeness”	(2	Kings	16:10),	as	are	the	figures	of	bulls	beneath
the	bronze	altar	(2	Chron.	4:3–4),	and	the	wall	paintings	of	Babylonian	chariot	officers	(Ezek.	23:15).	In	Ps.	58:4	(Heb.	v.	
5)	the
venom	of	the	wicked	is	a	“likeness”	of	the	venom	of	a	snake:	here	the	idea	is	that	they	are	very	similar	in	their	characteristics,	but
there	is	no	thought	of	actual	representation	or	substitution.
All	of	this	evidence	indicates	that	the	English	words	
image	
and	
likeness	
are	very	accurate	equivalents	for	the	Hebrew	terms	they
translate.
8
A	brief	survey	of	various	views	is	found	in	D.	J.	A.	Clines,	“The	Image	of	God	in	Man,”	
TB	
(1968),	pp.	54–61.	Millard	Erickson,
Christian	Theology,	
pp.	498–510,	also	gives	a	helpful	summary	of	three	major	views	of	the	image	of	God	in	man	that	have	been
held	throughout	the	history	of	the	church:	(1)	the	substantive	view,	which	identifies	some	particular	quality	of	man	(such	as	reason
or	spirituality)	as	being	the	image	of	God	in	man	(Luther,	Calvin,	many	early	church	writers);	(2)	relational	views,	which	held	that
the	image	of	God	had	to	do	with	our	interpersonal	relationships	(Emil	Brunner;	also	Karl	Barth,	who	saw	the	image	of	God
specifically	in	our	being	created	as	male	and	female);	and	(3)	the	functional	view,	which	holds	that	the	image	of	God	has	to	do
with	a	function	we	carry	out,	usually	our	exercise	of	dominion	over	the	creation	(a	Socinian	view	that	is	also	held	by	some
modern	writers	such	as	Norman	Snaith	and	Leonard	Verduin).
9
For	a	detailed	analysis	of	this	passage,	see	John	Murray,	
Principles	of	Conduct	
(Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1957),	pp.	109–13.
10
In	this	verse	Paul	specifically	says	that	we	are	being	changed	into	the	image	of	Christ,	but	then	four	verses	later	he	says	that
Christ	is	the	image	of	God	(2	Cor.	4:4;	both	verses	use	
eikōn
).
11
The	New	Testament	Greek	word	for	“image”	(
eikōn
)	has	a	similar	meaning	to	its	Old	Testament	counterpart	(see	above).	It
indicates	something	that	is	similar	to	or	very	much	like	the	thing	it	represents.	One	interesting	usage	is	a	reference	to	the	picture	of
Caesar	on	a	Roman	coin.	Jesus	asked	the	Pharisees,	“Whose	likeness	[Gk.	
eikōn,	
“image”]	and	inscription	is	this?”	They	replied,
“Caesar’s”	(Matt.	22:20–21).	The	image	both	resembles	Caesar	and	represents	him.	(The	Greek	word	
homoioma,	
“likeness,”	is
not	used	in	the	New	Testament	to	refer	to	man	in	the	likeness	of	God.)
12
However,	angels	also	share	a	significant	degree	of	likeness	to	God	in	a	number	of	these	aspects.
13
Although	it	is	not	a	separate	aspect	of	our	likeness	to	God,	the	fact	that	we	have	been	redeemed	by	Christ	sets	us	apart	in	an
absolute	way	from	every	other	creature	God	has	made.	This	is	a	consequence	of	our	being	in	God’s	image,	and	of	God’s	love	for
us,	rather	than	one	part	of	what	it	means	to	be	in	his	image.
14
See	also	the	discussion	of	God’s	spirituality	in	
chapter	12
.
15
See	discussion	of	the	names	of	God	and	the	way	God’s	nature	is	reflected	in	all	of	creation	in	
chapter	11
.
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	22
Man	As	Male	and	Female
Why	did	God	create	two	sexes?	Can	men	and	women	be	equal	and
yet	have	different	roles?
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
We	noted	in	the	previous	chapter	that	one	aspect	of	man’s	creation	in	the
image	of	God	is	his	creation	as	male	and	female:	“So	God	created	man	in	his
own	image,	in	the	image	of	God	he	created	him;	
male	and	female	he	created
them”	
(Gen.	1:27).	The	same	connection	between	creation	in	the	image	of
God	and	creation	as	male	and	female	is	made	in	Genesis	5:1–2,	“When	God
created	man,	he	made	him	in	the	likeness	of	God.	
Male	and	female	
he	created
them,	and	he	blessed	them	and	named	them	Man	when	they	were	created.”
1
Although	the	creation	of	man	as	male	and	female	is	not	the	only	way	in	which
we	are	in	the	image	of	God,	it	is	a	significant	enough	aspect	of	our	creation	in
the	image	of	God	that	Scripture	mentions	it	in	the	very	same	verse	in	which	it
describes	God’s	initial	creation	of	man.	We	may	summarize	the	ways	in
which	our	creation	as	male	and	female	represents	something	of	our	creation	in
God’s	image	as	follows:
The	creation	of	man	as	male	and	female	shows	God’s	image	in	(1)
harmonious	interpersonal	relationships,	(2)	equality	in	personhood	and
importance,	and	(3)	difference	in	role	and	authority.
2
A.	Personal	Relationships
God	did	not	create	human	beings	to	be	isolated	persons,	but,	in	making	us	in
his	image,	he	made	us	in	such	a	way	that	we	can	attain	interpersonal	unity	of
various	sorts	in	all	forms	of	human	society.	Interpersonal	unity	can	be
especially	deep	in	the	human	family	and	also	in	our	spiritual	family,	the
church.	Between	men	and	women,	interpersonal	unity	comes	to	its	fullest
expression	in	this	age	in	marriage,	where	husband	and	wife	become,	in	a
sense,	two	persons	in	one:	“Therefore	a	man	leaves	his	father	and	his	mother
and	cleaves	to	his	wife,	and	they	become	one	flesh”	(Gen.	2:24).	This	unity	is
not	only	a	physical	unity;	it	is	also	a	spiritual	and	emotional	unity	of	profound
dimensions.	A	husband	and	wife	joined	together	in	marriage	are	people	that
“God	has	joined	together”	(Matt.	19:6).	Sexual	union	with	someone	other
than	one’s	own	wife	or	husband	is	a	specially	offensive	kind	of	sin	against
one’s	own	body	(1	Cor.	6:16,	18–20),	and,	within	marriage,	husbands	and
wives	no	longer	have	exclusive	rule	over	their	own	bodies,	but	share	them
with	their	spouses	(1	Cor.	7:3–5).	Husbands	“should	love	their	wives	as	their
own	bodies”	(Eph.	5:28).	The	union	between	husband	and	wife	is	not
temporary	but	lifelong	(Mal.	2:14–16;	Rom.	7:2),	and	it	is	not	trivial	but	is	a
profound	relationship	created	by	God	in	order	to	picture	the	relationship
between	Christ	and	his	church	(Eph.	5:23–32).
The	fact	that	God	created	two	distinct	persons	as	male	and	female,	rather	than
just	one	man,	is	part	of	our	being	in	the	image	of	God	because	it	can	be	seen
to	reflect	to	some	degree	the	plurality	of	persons	within	the	Trinity.	In	the
verse	prior	to	the	one	that	tells	of	our	creation	as	male	and	female,	we	see	the
first	explicit	indication	of	a	plurality	of	persons	within	God:	“Then	God	said,
‘Let	
us	
make	man	in	
our	
image,	after	our	likeness;	and	let	them	have
dominion’	”	(Gen.	1:26).	There	is	some	similarity	here:	just	as	there	was
fellowship	and	communication	and	sharing	of	glory	among	the	members	of
the	Trinity	before	the	world	was	made	(see	John	17:5,	24,	and	
chapter	14
	on
the	Trinity,	above),	so	God	made	Adam	and	Eve	in	such	a	way	that	they
would	share	love	and	communication	and	mutual	giving	of	honor	to	one
another	in	their	interpersonal	relationship.	Of	course	such	reflection	of	the
Trinity	would	come	to	expression	in	various	ways	within	human	society,	but
it	would	certainly	exist	from	the	beginning	in	the	close	interpersonal	unity	of
marriage.
Someone	might	object	that	such	a	representation	of	the	plurality	of	persons	in
God	is	not	really	a	complete	one,	for	God	is	three	persons	in	one	while	God
created	Adam	and	Eve	as	only	two	persons	in	one.	If	God	intended	us	to
reflect	the	plurality	of	persons	in	the	Trinity,	why	did	he	not	create	three
persons	rather	than	two	who	could	reflect	the	interpersonal	unity	among	the
members	of	the	Trinity?	First,	we	must	agree	that	this	fact	shows	the	analogy
between	marriage	and	the	Trinity	to	be	an	inexact	one.	Second,	although	we
cannot	be	certain	of	the	reasons	why	God	did	not	do	something	when
Scripture	does	not	explicitly	tell	us	those	reasons,	we	can	suggest	two
possible	answers:	(1)	The	fact	that	God	is	three	in	one	while	Adam	and	Eve
were	only	two	in	one	may	be	a	reminder	that	God’s	own	excellence	is	far
greater	than	ours,	that	he	possesses	far	greater	plurality	and	far	greater	unity
than	we	ourselves,	as	creatures,	can	possess.	(2)	Though	the	unity	is	not
exactly	the	same,	the	unity	in	a	family	among	husband,	wife,	and	children,
does	also	reflect	to	some	degree	the	interpersonal	unity	yet	diversity	of
persons	among	the	members	of	the	Trinity.
A	second	objection	might	be	raised	from	the	fact	that	Jesus	himself	was
unmarried,	that	Paul	was	unmarried	at	the	time	he	was	an	apostle	(and
perhaps	earlier),	and	that	Paul	in	1	Corinthians	7:1,	7–9	seems	to	say	that	it	is
better	for	Christians	not	to	marry.	If	marriage	is	such	an	important	part	of	our
reflection	of	the	image	of	God,	then	why	were	Paul	and	Jesus	not	married,
and	why	did	Paul	encourage	others	not	to	be	married?
For	Jesus,	the	situation	is	unique,	for	he	is	both	God	and	man,	and	sovereign
Lord	over	all	creation.	Rather	than	being	married	to	any	one	individual	human
being,	he	has	taken	the	entire	church	as	his	bride	(see	Eph.	5:23–32)	and
enjoys	with	each	member	of	his	church	a	spiritual	and	emotional	unity	that
will	last	for	eternity.
The	situation	with	Paul	and	his	advice	to	the	Corinthian	Christians	is
somewhat	different.	There	Paul	does	not	say	that	it	is	wrong	to	marry	(see	1
Cor.	7:28,	36),	but	rather	views	marriage	as	something	good,	a	right	and	a
privilege	that	may	be	given	up	for	the	sake	of	the	kingdom	of	God:	“I	think
that	in	view	of	the	present	distress	it	is	well	for	a	person	to	remain	as	he	is	.	.	.
the	appointed	time	has	grown	very	short.	.	.	.	For	the	form	of	this	world	is
passing	away”	(1	Cor.	7:26,	29,	31).	In	this	way	Paul	gives	up	one	way	in
which	he	might	reflect	likeness	to	God	(marriage)	in	order	to	further	other
ways	in	which	he	might	reflect	likeness	to	God	and	further	God’s	purposes	in
the	world	(namely,	in	his	work	for	the	church).	For	example,	his	evangelism
and	discipleship	are	thought	of	as	bearing	“spiritual	children”	and	nurturing
them	in	the	Lord	(see	1	Cor.	4:14,	where	he	calls	the	Corinthians	“my	beloved
children”;	also	Gal.	4:19;	1	Tim.	1:2;	Titus	1:4).	Moreover,	the	entire	building
up	of	the	church	was	a	process	of	bringing	thousands	of	people	to	glorify	God
as	they	reflected	his	character	more	fully	in	their	lives.	In	addition,	we	must
realize	that	marriage	is	not	the	only	way	in	which	the	unity	and	diversity	in
the	Trinity	can	be	reflected	in	our	lives.	It	is	also	reflected	in	the	union	of
believers	in	the	fellowship	of	the	church—and	in	genuine	church	fellowship,
single	persons	(like	Paul	and	Jesus)	as	well	as	those	who	are	married	can	have
interpersonal	relationships	that	reflect	the	nature	of	the	Trinity.	Therefore,
building	the	church	and	increasing	its	unity	and	purity	also	promote	the
reflection	of	God’s	character	in	the	world.
B.	Equality	in	Personhood	and	Importance
Just	as	the	members	of	the	Trinity	are	equal	in	their	importance	and	in	their
full	existence	as	distinct	persons	(see	
chapter	14
,	above),	so	men	and	women
have	been	created	by	God	to	be	equal	in	their	importance	and	personhood.
When	God	created	man,	he	created	both	“male	and	female”	in	his	image
(Gen.	1:27;	5:1–2).	Men	and	women	are	made	
equally	in	God’s	image,	
and
both	men	and	women	reflect	God’s	character	in	their	lives.	This	means	that
we	should	see	aspects	of	God’s	character	reflected	in	each	other’s	lives.	If	we
lived	in	a	society	consisting	of	only	Christian	men	or	a	society	consisting	of
only	Christian	women,	we	would	not	gain	as	full	a	picture	of	the	character	of
God	as	when	we	see	both	godly	men	and	godly	women	in	their
complementary	differences	together	reflecting	the	beauty	of	God’s	character.
But	if	we	are	equally	in	God’s	image,	then	certainly	men	and	women	are
equally	important	
to	God	and	
equally	valuable	
to	him.	We	have	equal	worth
before	him	for	all	eternity.	The	fact	that	both	men	and	women	are	said	by
Scripture	to	be	“in	the	image	of	God”	should	exclude	all	feelings	of	pride	or
inferiority	and	any	idea	that	one	sex	is	“better”	or	“worse”	than	the	other.	In
particular,	in	contrast	to	many	non-Christian	cultures	and	religions,	no	one
should	feel	proud	or	superior	because	he	is	a	man,	and	no	one	should	feel
disappointed	or	inferior	because	she	is	a	woman.
3
	If	God	thinks	us	to	be	equal
in	value,	then	that	settles	the	question,	for	God’s	evaluation	is	the	true
standard	of	personal	value	for	all	eternity.
When	in	1	Corinthians	11:7	Paul	says,	“A	man	ought	not	to	cover	his	head,
since	he	is	the	image	and	glory	of	God;	but	woman	is	the	glory	of	man,”	he	is
not	denying	that	woman	was	created	in	the	image	of	God.	He	is	simply	saying
that	there	are	abiding	differences	between	men	and	women	that	should	be
reflected	in	the	way	they	dress	and	act	in	the	assembled	congregation.	One	of
those	differences	is	that	man	in	relationship	to	woman	has	a	particular	role	of
representing	God	or	showing	what	he	is	like,	and	woman	in	that	relationship
shows	the	excellence	of	the	man	from	whom	she	was	created.	Yet	in	both
cases	Paul	goes	on	to	emphasize	their	interdependence	(see	vv.	11–12).
Our	equality	as	persons	before	God,	reflecting	the	equality	of	persons	in	the
Trinity,	should	lead	naturally	to	men	and	women	giving	honor	to	one	another.
Proverbs	31	is	a	beautiful	picture	of	the	honor	given	to	a	godly	woman:
A	good	wife	who	can	find?
She	is	far	more	precious	than	jewels.	.	.	.
Her	children	rise	up	and	call	her	blessed;
her	husband	also,	and	he	praises	her:
“Many	women	have	done	excellently,
but	you	surpass	them	all.”
Charm	is	deceitful,	and	beauty	is	vain,
but	a	woman	who	fears	the	L
ORD
	is	to	be	praised.
(Prov.	31:10,	28–30)
Similarly,	Peter	tells	husbands	that	they	are	to	“bestow	honor”	on	their	wives
(1	Peter	3:7),	and	Paul	emphasizes,	“In	the	Lord	woman	is	not	independent	of
man	nor	man	of	woman;	for	as	woman	was	made	from	man,	so	man	is	now
born	of	woman”	(1	Cor.	11:11,	12).	Both	men	and	women	are	equally
important;	both	depend	upon	each	other;	both	are	worthy	of	honor.
The	equality	in	personhood	with	which	men	and	women	were	created	is
emphasized	in	a	new	way	in	the	new	covenant	church.	At	Pentecost	we	see
the	fulfillment	of	Joel’s	prophecy	in	which	God	promises:
“I	will	pour	out	my	Spirit	upon	all	flesh,
and	your	
sons	
and	your	
daughters	
shall	prophesy
.	.	.	and	on	my	
menservants	
and	my	
maidservants	
in	those	days
I	will	pour	out	my	Spirit;	and	they	shall	prophesy.”
(Acts	2:17–18;	quoting	Joel	2:28–29)
The	Holy	Spirit	is	poured	out	in	new	power	on	the	church,	and	men	and
women	
both	
are	given	gifts	to	minister	in	remarkable	ways.	Spiritual	gifts	are
distributed	to	all	men	and	women,	beginning	at	Pentecost	and	continuing
throughout	the	history	of	the	church.	Paul	regards	every	Christian	as	a
valuable	member	of	the	body	of	Christ,	for	“to	
each	
is	given	the	manifestation
of	the	Spirit	for	the	common	good”	(1	Cor.	12:7).	After	mentioning	several
gifts	he	says,	“All	these	are	inspired	by	one	and	the	same	Spirit,	who
apportions	
to	each	one	
individually	as	he	wills,”	(1	Cor.	12:11).	Peter	also,	in
writing	to	many	churches	throughout	Asia	Minor,	says,	“As	
each	
has	received
a	gift,	employ	it	for	one	another,	as	good	stewards	of	God’s	varied	grace”	(1
Peter	4:10).	These	texts	do	not	teach	that	all	believers	have	the	same	gifts,	but
they	do	mean	that	both	men	and	women	will	have	valuable	gifts	for	the
ministry	of	the	church,	and	that	we	should	expect	that	these	gifts	will	be
widely	and	freely	distributed	to	both	men	and	women.
It	seems,	therefore,	pointless	to	ask,	“Who	can	pray	more	effectively,	men	or
women?”	or,	“Who	can	sing	praise	to	God	better,	men	or	women?”	or,	“Who
will	have	more	spiritual	sensitivity	and	depth	of	relationship	with	God?”	To
all	of	these	questions,	we	simply	cannot	give	an	answer.	Men	and	women	are
equal	in	their	ability	to	receive	the	new	covenant	empowerment	of	the	Holy
Spirit.	There	have	been	both	great	men	and	great	women	of	God	throughout
the	history	of	the	church.	Both	men	and	women	have	been	mighty	warriors	in
prayer,	prevailing	over	earthly	powers	and	kingdoms	and	spiritual	strongholds
in	the	authority	of	our	Lord	Jesus	Christ.
4
Equality	before	God	is	further	emphasized	in	the	new	covenant	church	in	the
ceremony	of	baptism.	At	Pentecost,	both	men	and	women	who	believed	were
baptized:	“those	who	received	his	word	were	baptized,	and	there	were	added
that	day	about	three	thousand	souls”	(Acts	2:41).	This	is	significant	because
in	the	old	covenant,	the	sign	of	membership	of	God’s	people	was
circumcision,	which	was	given	only	to	men.	The	new	sign	of	membership	of
God’s	people,	the	sign	of	baptism,	given	to	both	men	and	women,	is	further
evidence	that	both	should	be	seen	as	fully	and	equally	members	of	the	people
of	God.
Equality	in	status	among	God’s	people	is	also	emphasized	by	Paul	in
Galatians:	“For	as	many	of	you	as	were	baptized	into	Christ	have	put	on
Christ.	There	is	neither	Jew	nor	Greek,	there	is	neither	slave	nor	free,	
there	is
neither	male	nor	female;	
for	you	are	all	one	in	Christ	Jesus”	(Gal.	3:27–28).
Paul	is	here	underlining	the	fact	that	no	class	of	people,	such	as	the	Jewish
people	who	had	come	from	Abraham	by	physical	descent,	or	the	freedmen
who	had	greater	economic	and	legal	power,	could	claim	special	status	or
privilege	in	the	church.	Slaves	should	not	think	themselves	inferior	to	free
men	or	women,	nor	should	the	free	think	themselves	superior	to	slaves.	Jews
should	not	think	themselves	superior	to	Greeks,	nor	should	Greeks	think
themselves	inferior	to	Jews.	Similarly,	Paul	wants	to	insure	that	men	will	not
adopt	some	of	the	attitudes	of	the	surrounding	culture,	or	even	some	of	the
attitudes	of	first-century	Judaism,	and	think	that	they	have	greater	importance
than	women	or	are	of	superior	value	before	God.	Nor	should	women	think
themselves	inferior	or	less	important	in	the	church.	Both	men	and	women,
Jews	and	Greeks,	slaves	and	free,	are	equal	in	importance	and	value	to	God
and	equal	in	membership	in	Christ’s	body,	the	church,	for	all	eternity.
In	practical	terms,	we	must	never	think	that	there	are	any	second-class
citizens	in	the	church.	Whether	someone	is	a	man	or	woman,	employer	or
employee,	Jew	or	Gentile,	black	or	white,	rich	or	poor,	healthy	or	ill,	strong	or
weak,	attractive	or	unattractive,	extremely	intelligent	or	slow	to	learn,	all	are
equally	valuable	to	God	and	should	be	equally	valuable	to	one	another	as
well.	This	equality	is	an	amazing	and	wonderful	element	of	the	Christian	faith
and	sets	Christianity	apart	from	almost	all	religions	and	societies	and	cultures.
The	true	dignity	of	godly	manhood	and	womanhood	can	be	fully	realized	only
in	obedience	to	God’s	redeeming	wisdom	as	found	in	Scripture.
C.	Differences	in	Roles
1.
	The	Relationship	Between	the	Trinity	and	Male	Headship	in	Marriage.
Between	the	members	of	the	Trinity	there	has	been	equality	in	importance,
personhood,	and	deity	throughout	all	eternity.	But	there	have	also	been
differences	in	roles	between	the	members	of	the	Trinity.
5
	God	the	Father	has
always	been	the	Father	and	has	always	related	to	the	Son	as	a	Father	relates	to
his	Son.	Though	all	three	members	of	the	Trinity	are	equal	in	power	and	in	all
other	attributes,	the	Father	has	a	greater	authority.	He	has	a	leadership	role
among	all	the	members	of	the	Trinity	that	the	Son	and	Holy	Spirit	do	not
have.	In	creation,	the	Father	speaks	and	initiates,	but	the	work	of	creation	is
carried	out	through	the	Son	and	sustained	by	the	continuing	presence	of	the
Holy	Spirit	(Gen.	1:1–2;	John	1:1–3;	1	Cor.	8:6;	Heb.	1:2).	In	redemption,	the
Father	sends	the	Son	into	the	world,	and	the	Son	comes	and	is	obedient	to	the
Father	and	dies	to	pay	for	our	sins	(Luke	22:42;	Phil.	2:6–8).	After	the	Son
has	ascended	into	heaven,	the	Holy	Spirit	comes	to	equip	and	empower	the
church	(John	16:7;	Acts	1:8;	2:1–36).	The	Father	did	not	come	to	die	for	our
sins,	nor	did	the	Holy	Spirit.	The	Father	was	not	poured	out	on	the	church	at
Pentecost	in	new	covenant	power,	nor	was	the	Son.	Each	member	of	the
Trinity	has	distinct	roles	or	functions.	Differences	in	roles	and	authority
between	the	members	of	the	Trinity	are	thus	completely	consistent	with	equal
importance,	personhood,	and	deity.
If	human	beings	are	to	reflect	the	character	of	God,	then	we	would	expect
some	similar	differences	in	roles	among	human	beings,	even	with	respect	to
the	most	basic	of	all	differences	among	human	beings,	the	difference	between
male	and	female.	And	this	is	certainly	what	we	find	in	the	biblical	text.
Paul	makes	this	parallel	explicit	when	he	says,	“I	want	you	to	understand	that
the	head	of	every	man	is	Christ,	
the	head	of	a	woman	is	her	husband,	
and	
the
head	of	Christ	is	God”	
(1	Cor.	11:3).	Here	is	a	distinction	in	authority	that
may	be	represented	as	in	figure	22.1.
EQUALITY	AND	DIFFERENCES	IN	THE	TRINITY	ARE	REFLECTED	IN	EQUALITY	AND
DIFFERENCES	IN	MARRIAGE
Figure	22.1
Just	as	God	the	Father	has	authority	over	the	Son,	though	the	two	are	equal	in
deity,	so	in	a	marriage,	the	husband	has	authority	over	the	wife,	though	they
are	equal	in	personhood.
6
	In	this	case,	the	man’s	role	is	like	that	of	God	the
Father,	and	the	woman’s	role	is	parallel	to	that	of	God	the	Son.	They	are	equal
in	importance,	but	they	have	different	roles.	In	the	context	of	1	Corinthians
11:2–16,	Paul	sees	this	as	a	basis	for	telling	the	Corinthians	to	wear	the
different	kinds	of	clothing	appropriate	for	the	men	and	women	of	that	day,	so
that	the	distinctions	between	men	and	women	might	be	outwardly	evident	in
the	Christian	assembly.
7
2.	Indications	of	Distinct	Roles	Before	the	Fall.
	But	were	these	distinctions
between	male	and	female	roles	part	of	God’s	original	creation,	or	were	they
introduced	as	part	of	the	punishment	of	the	fall?	When	God	told	Eve,	“Yet
your	desire	shall	be	for	your	husband,	and	
he	shall	rule	over	you”	
(Gen.
3:16),	was	that	the	time	when	Eve	began	to	be	subject	to	Adam’s	authority?
The	idea	that	differences	in	authority	were	introduced	only	after	there	was	sin
in	the	world	has	been	advocated	by	several	writers	such	as	Aida	B.	Spencer
8
and	Gilbert	Bilezikian.
9
	Bilezikian	says,	“Because	it	resulted	from	the	Fall,
the	rule	of	Adam	over	Eve	is	viewed	as	satanic	in	origin,	no	less	than	is	death
itself.”
10
However,	if	we	examine	the	text	of	the	creation	narrative	in	Genesis,	we	see
several	indications	of	
differences	in	role	
between	Adam	and	Eve	
even	before
there	was	sin	in	the	world.
a.	Adam	Was	Created	First,	Then	Eve:
	The	fact	that	God	first	created
Adam,	then	after	a	period	of	time	created	Eve	(Gen.	2:7,	18–23),	suggests	that
God	saw	Adam	as	having	a	leadership	role	in	his	family.	No	such	two-stage
procedure	is	mentioned	for	any	of	the	animals	God	made,	but	here	it	seems	to
have	a	special	purpose.	The	creation	of	Adam	first	is	consistent	with	the	Old
Testament	pattern	of	“primogeniture,”	the	idea	that	the	firstborn	in	any
generation	in	a	human	family	has	leadership	in	the	family	for	that	generation.
The	right	of	primogeniture	is	assumed	throughout	the	Old	Testament	text,
even	when	at	times	because	of	God’s	special	purposes	the	birthright	is	sold	or
otherwise	transferred	to	a	younger	person	(Gen.	25:27–34;	35:23;	38:27–30;
49:3–4;	Deut.	21:15–17;	1	Chron.	5:1–2).	The	“birthright”	belongs	to	the
firstborn	son	and	is	his	unless	special	circumstances	intervene	to	change	that
fact.
11
	The	fact	that	we	are	correct	in	seeing	a	purpose	of	God	in	creating
Adam	first,	and	that	this	purpose	reflects	an	abiding	distinction	in	the	roles
God	has	given	to	men	and	women,	is	supported	by	1	Timothy	2:13,	where
Paul	uses	the	fact	that	“Adam	was	formed	first,	then	Eve”	as	a	reason	for
restricting	some	distinct	governing	and	teaching	roles	in	the	church	to	men.
b.	Eve	Was	Created	as	a	Helper	for	Adam:
	Scripture	specifies	that	God
made	Eve	for	Adam,	not	Adam	for	Eve.	God	said,	“It	is	not	good	that	the	man
should	be	alone;	
I	will	make	him	a	helper	fit	for	him”	
(Gen.	2:18).	Paul	sees
this	as	significant	enough	to	base	a	requirement	for	differences	between	men
and	women	in	worship	on	it.	He	says,	“Neither	was	man	created	for	woman,
but	
woman	for	man”	
(1	Cor.	11:9).	This	should	not	be	taken	to	imply	lesser
importance,	but	it	does	indicate	that	there	was	a	difference	in	roles	from	the
beginning.
Recently	some	writers	have	denied	that	the	creation	of	Eve	as	a	helper	fit	for
Adam	signals	any	difference	in	role	or	authority,	because	the	word	
helper
(Heb.,	
’ezer
)	is	often	used	in	the	Old	Testament	of	someone	who	is	greater	or
more	powerful	than	the	one	who	is	being	helped.
12
	In	fact,	the	word	
helper	
is
used	in	the	Old	Testament	of	God	himself	who	helps	his	people.	But	the	point
is	that	whenever	someone	“helps”	someone	else,	whether	in	the	Hebrew	Old
Testament	or	in	our	modern-day	use	of	the	word	
help,	
in	the	specific	task	in
view	the	person	who	is	helping	is	occupying	a	subordinate	or	inferior	position
with	regard	to	the	person	being	helped.	That	is	true	even	when	I	“help”	a
young	boy	in	my	neighborhood	to	fix	his	bicycle—it	is	his	responsibility,	and
his	task,	and	I	am	only	giving	some	assistance	as	needed;	it	is	not	my
responsibility.	David	Clines	concludes	that	this	is	the	case	throughout	the
Hebrew	Old	Testament:
What	I	conclude,	from	viewing	all	of	the	occurrences	in	the	Hebrew
Bible,	is	that	though	superiors	may	help	inferiors,	strong	may	help
weak,	gods	many	help	humans,	in	the	act	of	helping	they	are	being
“inferior.”	That	is	to	say,	they	are	subjecting	themselves	to	a
secondary,	subordinate	position.	Their	help	may	be	necessary	or
crucial,	but	they	are	assisting	some	task	that	is	someone	else’s
responsibility.	They	are	not	actually	doing	the	task	themselves,	or
even	in	cooperation,	for	there	is	different	language	for	that.	Being	a
helper	is	not	a	Hebrew	way	of	being	an	equal.
13
Another	objection	is	that	the	Hebrew	term	translated	“fit	for”	in	Genesis	2:18
implies	that	Eve	was	actually	superior	to	Adam,	because	the	term	really
means	“in	front	of.”
14
	But	Raymond	C.	Ortlund	correctly	points	out	that	the
Hebrew	term	cannot	mean	“superior	to”	or	Psalm	119:168	would	have	the
psalmist	saying	to	God,	“All	my	ways	are	
superior	
to	you”!	It	simply	means
“corresponding	to.”
15
c.	Adam	Named	Eve:
	The	fact	that	Adam	gave	names	to	all	the	animals
(Gen.	2:19–20)	indicated	Adam’s	authority	over	the	animal	kingdom,	because
in	Old	Testament	thought	the	right	to	name	someone	implied	authority	over
that	person	(this	is	seen	both	when	God	gives	names	to	people	such	as
Abraham	and	Sarah,	and	when	parents	give	names	to	their	children).	Since	a
Hebrew	name	designated	the	character	or	function	of	someone,	Adam	was
specifying	the	characteristics	or	functions	of	the	animals	he	named.	Therefore
when	Adam	named	Eve	by	saying,	“She	shall	be	called	Woman,	because	she
was	taken	out	of	Man”	(Gen.	2:23),	it	indicated	a	leadership	role	on	his	part	as
well.
16
	This	is	true	before	the	fall,	where	Adam	names	his	wife	“Woman,”
and	it	is	true	after	the	fall	as	well,	when	“the	man	called	his	wife’s	name	Eve,
because	she	was	the	mother	of	all	living”	(Gen.	3:20).
17
	Some	have	objected
that	Adam	doesn’t	really	name	Eve	before	the	fall.
18
	But	certainly	calling	his
wife	“Woman”	(Gen.	2:23),	just	as	he	called	all	the	living	creatures	by	their
names	(Gen.	2:19–20),	is	giving	her	a	name.	The	fact	that	mothers	sometimes
give	their	children	names	in	the	Old	Testament	does	not	contradict	the	idea	of
name-giving	as	representing	authority,	since	both	mothers	and	fathers	have
parental	authority	over	their	children.
d.	God	Named	the	Human	Race	“Man,”	Not	“Woman”:
	The	fact	that	God
named	the	human	race	“man,”	rather	than	“woman”	or	some	gender-neutral
term	was	explained	in	chapter	21.
19
	Genesis	5:2	specifies	that	“in	the	day
when	they	were	created”	(NASB)	God	
“named	them	Man.”	
The	naming	of
the	human	race	with	a	term	that	also	referred	to	Adam	in	particular,	or	man	in
distinction	from	woman,	suggests	a	leadership	role	belonging	to	the	man.	This
is	similar	to	the	custom	of	a	woman	taking	the	last	name	of	the	man	when	she
marries:	it	signifies	his	headship	in	the	family.
e.	The	Serpent	Came	to	Eve	First:
	Satan,	after	he	had	sinned,	was
attempting	to	distort	and	undermine	everything	that	God	had	planned	and
created	as	good.	It	is	likely	that	Satan	(in	the	form	of	a	serpent),	in
approaching	Eve	first,	was	attempting	to	institute	a	role	reversal	by	tempting
Eve	to	take	the	leadership	in	disobeying	God	(Gen.	3:1).	This	stands	in
contrast	to	the	way	God	approached	them,	for	when	God	spoke	to	them,	he
spoke	to	Adam	first	(Gen.	2:15–17;	3:9).	Paul	seems	to	have	this	role	reversal
in	mind	when	he	says,	“Adam	was	not	deceived,	but	the	woman	was	deceived
and	became	a	transgressor”	(1	Tim.	2:14).	This	at	least	suggests	that	Satan
was	trying	to	undermine	the	pattern	of	male	leadership	that	God	had
established	in	the	marriage	by	going	first	to	the	woman.
f.	God	Spoke	to	Adam	First	After	the	Fall:
	Just	as	God	spoke	to	Adam	on
his	own	even	before	Eve	was	created	(Gen.	2:15–17),	so,	after	the	fall,	even
though	Eve	had	sinned	first,	God	
came	first	to	Adam	
and	called	
him	
to
account	for	his	actions:	“But	the	L
ORD
	
God	called	to	the	man,	
and	said	to	
him,
‘Where	are	you?’	”	(Gen.	3:9).	God	thought	of	Adam	as	the	leader	of	his
family,	the	one	to	be	called	to	account	first	for	what	had	happened	in	the
family.	It	is	significant	that	though	this	is	after	sin	has	occurred,	it	is	before
the	statement	to	Eve,	“He	shall	rule	over	you”	in	Genesis	3:16,	where	some
writers	today	claim	male	headship	in	the	family	began.
g.	Adam,	Not	Eve,	Represented	the	Human	Race:
	Even	though	Eve	sinned
first	(Gen.	3:6),	we	are	counted	sinful	because	of	Adam’s	sin,	not	because	of
Eve’s	sin.	The	New	Testament	tells	us,	“
In	Adam	
all	die”	(1	Cor	15:22;	cf.	v.
49),	and,	“Many	died	through	
one	man’s	
trespass”	(Rom.	5:15;	cf.	vv.	12–21).
This	indicates	that	God	had	given	Adam	headship	or	leadership	with	respect
to	the	human	race,	a	role	that	was	not	given	to	Eve.
h.	The	Curse	Brought	a	Distortion	of	Previous	Roles,	Not	the
Introduction	of	New	Roles:
	In	the	punishments	God	gave	to	Adam	and	Eve,
he	did	not	introduce	new	roles	or	functions,	but	simply	introduced	pain	and
distortion	into	the	functions	they	previously	had.	Thus,	Adam	would	still	have
primary	responsibility	for	tilling	the	ground	and	raising	crops,	but	the	ground
would	bring	forth	“thorns	and	thistles”	and	in	the	sweat	of	his	face	he	would
eat	bread	(Gen.	3:18,	19).	Similarly,	Eve	would	still	have	the	responsibility	of
bearing	children,	but	to	do	so	would	become	painful:	“In	pain	you	shall	bring
forth	children”	(Gen.	3:16).	Then	God	also	introduced	conflict	and	pain	into
the	previously	harmonious	relationship	between	Adam	and	Eve.	God	said	to
Eve,	“Your	
desire	
shall	be	
for	your	husband,	
and	he	shall	rule	over	you”
(Gen.	3:16).	Susan	Foh	has	effectively	argued	that	the	word	translated
“desire”	(Heb.	
teshûqāh
)	means	“desire	to	conquer,”	and	that	it	indicates	Eve
would	have	a	wrongful	desire	to	usurp	authority	over	her	husband.
20
	If	this
understanding	of	the	word	“desire”	is	correct,	as	it	seems	to	be,	then	it	would
indicate	that	God	is	introducing	
a	conflict	into	the	relationship	
between	Adam
and	Eve	and	a	desire	on	Eve’s	part	to	rebel	against	Adam’s	authority.
Concerning	Adam,	God	told	Eve,	“He	shall	
rule	
over	you”	(Gen.	3:16).	Here
the	word	“rule”	(Heb.	
māshal
)	is	a	strong	term	usually	used	of	monarchical
governments,	not	generally	of	authority	within	a	family.
21
	The	word	certainly
does	not	imply	any	“participatory”	government	by	those	who	are	ruled,	but
rather	has	nuances	of	dictatorial	or	absolute,	uncaring	use	of	authority,	rather
than	considerate,	thoughtful	rule.	It	suggests	harshness	rather	than	kindness.
The	sense	here	is	that	Adam	will	misuse	his	authority	
by	ruling	harshly	
over
his	wife,	again	introducing	pain	and	conflict	into	a	relationship	that	was
previously	harmonious.	It	is	not	that	Adam	had	no	authority	before	the	fall;	it
is	simply	that	he	will	misuse	it	after	the	fall.
So	in	both	cases,	the	curse	brought	a	
distortion	
of	Adam’s	humble,
considerate	leadership	and	Eve’s	intelligent,	willing	submission	to	that
leadership	which	existed	before	the	fall.
i.	Redemption	in	Christ	Reaffirms	the	Creation	Order:
	If	the	previous
argument	about	the	distortion	of	roles	introduced	at	the	fall	is	correct,	then
what	we	would	expect	to	find	in	the	New	Testament	is	an	undoing	of	the
painful	aspects	of	the	relationship	that	resulted	from	sin	and	the	curse.	We
would	expect	that	in	Christ,	redemption	would	encourage	wives	not	to	rebel
against	their	husbands’	authority	and	would	encourage	husbands	not	to	use
their	authority	harshly.	In	fact,	that	is	indeed	what	we	do	find:	“Wives,	
be
subject	to	your	husbands,	
as	is	fitting	in	the	Lord.	Husbands,	
love	your	wives,
and	do	not	be	harsh	with	them”	(Col.	3:18–19;	cf.	Eph.	5:22–33;	Titus	2:5;	1
Peter	3:1–7).	If	it	were	a	sinful	pattern	for	wives	to	be	subject	to	their
husbands’	authority,	Peter	and	Paul	would	not	have	commanded	it	to	be
maintained	in	Christian	marriages!	They	do	not	say,	for	example,	“Encourage
thorns	to	grow	in	your	garden,”	or	“Make	childbirth	as	painful	as	possible,”	or
“Stay	alienated	from	God,	cut	off	from	fellowship	with	him!”	The	redemption
of	Christ	is	aimed	at	
removing	
the	results	of	sin	and	of	the	fall	in	every	way:
“The	reason	the	Son	of	God	appeared	was	to	destroy	the	works	of	the	devil”
(1	John	3:8).	
New	Testament	commands	concerning	marriage	do	not
perpetuate	any	elements	of	the	curse	or	any	sinful	behavior	patterns;	
they
rather	reaffirm	the	order	and	distinction	of	roles	that	were	there	from	the
beginning	of	God’s	good	creation.
In	terms	of	practical	application,	as	we	grow	in	maturity	in	Christ,	we	will
grow	to	delight	in	and	rejoice	in	the	God-ordained	and	wisely	created
differences	in	roles	within	the	human	family.	When	we	understand	this
biblical	teaching,	both	men	and	women	should	be	able	to	say	in	their	hearts,
“This	is	what	God	has	planned,	and	it	is	beautiful	and	right,	and	I	rejoice	in
the	way	he	has	made	me	and	the	distinct	role	he	has	given	me.”	There	is
eternal	beauty	and	dignity	and	rightness	in	this	differentiation	in	roles	both
within	the	Trinity	and	within	the	human	family.	With	no	sense	of	“better”	or
“worse,”	and	with	no	sense	of	“more	important”	or	“less	important,”	both
men	and	women	should	be	able	to	rejoice	fully	in	the	way	they	have	been
made	by	God.
3.	Ephesians	5:21–33	and	the	Question	of	Mutual	Submission.
	In
Ephesians	5	we	read:
Wives,	be	subject	to	your	husbands,	as	to	the	Lord.	For	the	husband	is
the	head	of	the	wife	as	Christ	is	the	head	of	the	church,	his	body,	and
is	himself	its	Savior.	As	the	church	is	subject	to	Christ,	so	let	wives
also	be	subject	in	everything	to	their	husbands.	(Eph.	5:22–24)
While	on	the	surface	this	would	seem	to	confirm	what	we	have	argued	above
about	the	creation	order	for	marriage,	in	recent	years	there	has	been	some
debate	over	the	meaning	of	the	verb	“be	subject	to”	(Gk.	
hypotassō
)	in	this
passage.	Some	people	have	understood	it	to	mean	“be	thoughtful	and
considerate;	act	in	love	[toward	one	another].”	If	it	is	understood	in	this	sense,
then	the	text	does	not	teach	that	a	wife	has	any	unique	responsibility	to	submit
to	her	husband’s	authority,	because	both	husband	and	wife	need	to	be
considerate	and	loving	toward	one	another,	and	because	according	to	this
view	submission	to	an	authority	is	not	seen	in	this	passage.
22
However,	this	is	not	a	legitimate	meaning	for	the	term	
hypotassō,	
which
always	implies	a	relationship	of	
submission	to	an	authority.	
It	is	used
elsewhere	in	the	New	Testament	of	the	submission	of	Jesus	to	the	authority	of
his	parents	(Luke	2:51);	of	demons	being	subject	to	the	disciples	(Luke	10:17
—clearly	the	meaning	“act	in	love,	be	considerate”	cannot	fit	here);	of
citizens	being	subject	to	government	authorities	(Rom.	13:1,	5;	Titus	3:1;	1
Peter	2:13);	of	the	universe	being	subject	to	Christ	(1	Cor.	15:27;	Eph.	1:22);
of	unseen	spiritual	powers	being	subject	to	Christ	(1	Peter	3:22);	of	Christ
being	subject	to	God	the	Father	(1	Cor.	15:28);	of	church	members	being
subject	to	church	leaders	(1	Cor.	16:15–16	[see	1	Clem.	42:4];	1	Peter	5:5);	of
wives	being	subject	to	their	husbands	(Col.	3:18;	Titus	2:5;	1	Peter	3:5;	cf.
Eph.	5:22,	24);	of	the	church	being	subject	to	Christ	(Eph.	5:24);	of	servants
being	subject	to	their	masters	(Titus	2:9;	1	Peter	2:18);	and	of	Christians
being	subject	to	God	(Heb.	12:9;	James	4:7).	
None	of	these	relationships	is
ever	reversed;	
that	is,	husbands	are	never	told	to	be	subject	(
hypotassō
)	to
wives,	nor	the	government	to	citizens,	nor	masters	to	servants,	nor	the
disciples	to	demons,	etc.	In	fact,	the	term	is	used	outside	the	New	Testament
to	describe	the	submission	and	obedience	of	soldiers	in	an	army	to	those	of
superior	rank.
23
The	primary	argument	that	has	been	used	in	favor	of	taking	“be	subject	to”	in
the	sense	“be	considerate	of”	is	the	use	of	
hypotassō	
in	Ephesians	5:21.	There
Paul	tells	Christians,	“Be	subject	
to	one	another.”	
Several	writers	have	argued
that	this	means	that	every	Christian	should	be	subject	to	every	other	Christian,
and	wives	and	husbands	especially	should	be	“subject	to	one	another.”	The
phrase	“mutual	submission”	has	often	been	used	to	describe	this	kind	of
relationship,	and	it	has	been	understood	to	imply	that	there	is	no	unique	kind
of	submission	that	a	wife	owes	to	her	husband.
However,	the	following	context	defines	what	Paul	means	by	“be	subject	to
one	another”	in	Ephesians	5:21:	he	means	“Be	subject	
to	others	in	the	church
who	are	in	positions	of	authority	over	you.”	
This	is	explained	by	what
follows:	wives	are	to	be	subject	to	husbands	(Eph.	5:22–24),	but	husbands	are
never	told	to	be	subject	to	wives.	In	fact,	Paul	tells	wives	to	be	subject	“to
your	own	
husbands”	(Eph.	5:22),
24
	not	to	everyone	in	the	church	or	to	all
husbands!	Children	are	to	be	subject	to	their	parents	(to	“obey”	them,	Eph.
6:1–3),	but	parents	are	never	told	to	be	subject	to	or	to	obey	their	children.
Servants	are	to	be	subject	to	(“obey”)	their	masters,	but	not	masters	to
servants.
25
	Therefore,	the	idea	of	mutual	submission	(in	the	sense,	“everyone
should	be	subject	to	everyone”)	is	not	affirmed	in	Ephesians	5:21.
26
	Similarly,
in	Colossians	3:18–19	Paul	says,	“Wives,	be	subject	to	your	husbands,	as	is
fitting	in	the	Lord.	Husbands,	love	your	wives,	and	do	not	be	harsh	with
them”	(see	also	Titus	2:4–5;	1	Peter	3:1–7).
D.	Note	on	Application	to	Marriage
If	our	analysis	is	correct,	then	there	are	some	practical	applications,
particularly	within	marriage,	and	also	with	regard	to	relationships	between
men	and	women	generally.
When	husbands	begin	to	act	in	selfish,	harsh,	domineering,	or	even	abusive
and	cruel	ways,	they	should	realize	that	this	is	a	result	of	sin,	a	result	of	the
fall,	and	is	destructive	and	contrary	to	God’s	purposes	for	them.	To	act	this
way	will	bring	great	destructiveness	in	their	lives,	especially	in	their
marriages.	Husbands	must	rather	fulfill	the	New	Testament	commands	to	love
their	wives,	honor	them,	be	considerate	of	them,	and	put	them	first	in	their
interests.
Similarly,	when	wives	feel	rebellious,	resentful	of	their	husband’s	leadership
in	the	family,	or	when	they	compete	with	their	husbands	for	leadership	in	the
family,	they	should	realize	that	this	is	a	result	of	sin,	a	result	of	the	fall.	They
should	not	act	that	way,	because	to	do	so	will	bring	destructive	consequences
to	their	marriages	as	well.	A	wife	desiring	to	act	in	accordance	with	God’s
pattern	should	rather	be	submissive	to	her	husband	and	agree	that	he	is	the
leader	in	their	home	and	rejoice	in	that.
27
Once	we	have	said	this,	we	must	realize	that	there	are	two	other,	nearly
opposite,	distortions	of	the	biblical	pattern	that	can	occur.	If	tyranny	by	the
husband	and	usurpation	of	authority	by	the	wife	are	
errors	of	aggressiveness,
there	are	two	other	errors,	
errors	of	passivity	
or	laziness.	For	a	husband,	the
other	extreme	from	being	a	domineering	“tyrant”	is	to	be	entirely	passive	and
to	fail	to	take	initiative	in	the	family—in	colloquial	terms,	to	be	a	“wimp.”	In
this	distortion	of	the	biblical	pattern,	a	husband	becomes	so	“considerate”	of
his	wife	that	he	allows	her	to	make	all	the	decisions	and	even	agrees	when	she
urges	him	to	do	wrong	(note	this	behavior	in	Adam,	Ahab,	and	Solomon,
among	others).	Often	such	a	husband	is	increasingly	absent	(either	physically
or	emotionally)	from	the	home	and	occupies	his	time	almost	exclusively	with
other	concerns.
The	corresponding	error	on	the	part	of	the	wife,	opposite	of	attempting	to
domineer	or	usurp	authority	over	her	husband,	is	becoming	entirely	passive,
contributing	nothing	to	the	decision-making	process	of	the	family,	and	being
unwilling	to	speak	words	of	correction	to	her	husband,	even	though	he	is
doing	wrong.	Submission	to	authority	does	not	mean	being	entirely	passive
and	agreeing	with	everything	that	the	person	in	authority	says	or	suggests—it
is	certainly	not	that	way	when	we	are	submissive	to	the	authority	of	an
employer	or	of	government	officials	(we	can	certainly	differ	with	our
government	and	still	be	subject	to	it),	or	even	of	the	authority	of	the	officers
in	a	church	(we	can	be	subject	to	them	even	though	we	may	disagree	with
some	of	their	decisions).	A	wife	can	certainly	be	subject	to	the	authority	of
her	husband	and	still	participate	fully	in	the	decision-making	process	of	the
family.
Husbands,	therefore,	should	aim	for	loving,	considerate,	thoughtful	leadership
in	their	families.	Wives	should	aim	for	active,	intelligent,	joyful	submission	to
their	husbands’	authority.	In	avoiding	both	kinds	of	mistakes	and	following	a
biblical	pattern,	husbands	and	wives	will	discover	true	biblical	manhood	and
womanhood	in	all	of	their	noble	dignity	and	joyful	complementarity,	as	God
created	them	to	be,	and	will	thus	reflect	more	fully	the	image	of	God	in	their
lives.
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
If	you	are	being	honest	about	your	feelings,	do	you	think	it	is	better	to	be
a	man	or	a	woman?	Are	you	happy	with	the	gender	God	gave	you	or
would	you	rather	be	a	member	of	the	opposite	sex?	How	do	you	think
God	wants	you	to	feel	about	that	question?
2
.	
Can	you	honestly	say	that	you	think	members	of	the	opposite	sex	are
equally	valuable	in	God’s	sight?
3
.	
Before	reading	this	chapter,	have	you	thought	of	relationships	in	the
family	as	reflecting	something	of	the	relationships	between	members	of
the	Trinity?	Do	you	think	that	is	a	helpful	way	of	looking	at	the	family?
How	does	that	make	you	feel	about	your	own	family	relationships?	Are
there	ways	in	which	you	might	reflect	God’s	character	more	fully	in	your
own	family?
4
.	
How	does	the	teaching	of	this	chapter	on	differences	in	roles	between
men	and	women	compare	with	some	of	the	attitudes	expressed	in	society
today?	If	there	are	differences	between	what	much	of	society	is	teaching
and	what	Scripture	teaches,	do	you	think	there	will	be	times	when	it	will
be	difficult	to	follow	Scripture?	What	could	your	church	do	to	help	you
in	those	situations?
5
.	
Even	apart	from	the	questions	of	marriage	or	romantic	involvement,	do
you	think	God	intends	us	to	enjoy	times	of	fellowship	with	mixed	groups
of	other	Christian	men	and	women?	Why	do	you	think	God	puts	in	our
heart	the	desire	to	enjoy	such	fellowship?	Does	it	also	reflect	something
of	the	plurality	of	persons	in	the	Trinity,	together	with	the	unity	of	God?
Does	this	help	you	understand	how	it	is	important	that	unmarried	people
be	included	fully	in	the	activities	of	the	church?	Do	you	think	that	in	the
past	some	religious	groups	have	tended	to	neglect	the	importance	of	this
or	even	wrongly	to	forbid	such	mixed	fellowship	among	Christians?
What	are	the	dangers	that	should	be	guarded	against	in	those	situations,
however?
6
.	
If	you	are	a	husband,	are	you	content	with	the	role	God	has	given	you	in
your	marriage?	If	you	are	a	wife,	are	you	content	with	the	role	God	has
given	you	in	your	marriage?
SPECIAL	TERMS
difference	in	role
	
	
	
	
mutual	submission
equality	in	personhood
	
	
	
	
primogeniture
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the	
bibliography	to
chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be	found	
Appendix	4
.)
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
The	topic	of	this	chapter	has	not	commonly	been	treated	as	a	distinct	unit
within	systematic	theologies.	Therefore	our	usual	arrangement	of	listings	is
abbreviated	for	this	chapter.
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1983			Carter,	1:214–20
3.			Baptist
1983–85			Erickson,	545–49
4.			Dispensational
1947			Chafer,	7:233–34,	310–11
5.			Lutheran
1917–24			Pieper,	1:523–27
1934			Mueller,	209
7.			Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988			Williams,	1:203–6
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955			Ott,	460–73	(on	matrimony)
2.			Roman	Catholic:	Post-Vatican	II
1980			McBrien,	2:848–54
Other	Works
[Works	marked	*	agree	in	general	with	the	viewpoint	presented	in	this
chapter,	while	those	marked	**	disagree.]
Bacchiocchi,	Samuele.	
Women	in	the	Church.	
Berrien	Springs,	Mich.:
Biblical	Perspectives,	1987.*
Bilezikian,	Gilbert.	
Beyond	Sex	Roles:	What	the	Bible	Says	About	a
Woman’s	Place	in	Church	and	Family.	
2d	ed.	Grand	Rapids:	Baker,
1985.**
Clark,	Stephen	B.	
Man	and	Woman	in	Christ:	An	Examination	of	the
Roles	of	Men	and	Women	in	Light	of	Scripture	and	the	Social	Sciences.
Ann	Arbor:	Servant,	1980.*
Clouse,	Bonnidell,	and	Robert	G.	Clouse,	eds.	
Women	in	Ministry:	Four
Views.	
Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,	1989.
Colwell,	J.	E.	“Anthropology.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	28–30.
Conn,	H.	M.	“Feminist	Theology.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	255–58.
Cottrell,	Jack.	
Feminism	and	the	Bible;	An	Introduction	to	Feminism	for
Christians.	
Joplin,	Mo.:	College	Press,	1992.*
Evans,	Mary	J.	
Women	in	the	Bible:	An	Overview	of	All	the	Crucial
Passages	on	Women’s	Roles.	
Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,
1983.**
Foh,	Susan.	
Women	and	the	Word	of	God:	A	Response	to	Biblical
Feminism.	
Phillipsburg,	N.J.:	Presbyterian	and	Reformed,	1980.*
Gundry,	Patricia.	
Heirs	Together.	
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1980.**
_____.	
Woman	Be	Free!	The	Clear	Message	of	Scripture.	
Grand	Rapids:
Zondervan,	1988.**
House,	H.	Wayne.	
The	Role	of	Women	in	Ministry	Today.	
Nashville:
Thomas	Nelson,	1990.*
Hurley,	James.	
Man	and	Women	in	Biblical	Perspective.	
Leicester:	Inter-
Varsity	Press,	and	Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1981.*
Jepsen,	Dee.	
Women:	Beyond	Equal	Rights.	
Waco,	Tex.:	Word,	1984.*
Jewett,	Paul	K.	
Man	as	Male	and	Female.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,
1975.**
Kassian,	Mary	A.	
Women,	Creation	and	the	Fall.	
Westchester,	Ill.:
Crossway,	1990.**
_____.	
The	Feminist	Gospel:	The	Movement	to	Unite	Feminism	With	the
Church.	
Wheaton,	Ill.:	Crossway,	1992.*
Knight,	George	W.,	III.	
The	Role	Relationship	of	Man	and	Women:	New
Testament	Teaching.	
Chicago:	Moody,	1985.*
Mickelsen,	Alvera,	ed.	
Women,	Authority,	and	the	Bible.	
Downers	Grove,
Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,	1986.**
Neuer,	Werner.	
Man	and	Woman	in	Christian	Perspective.	
Trans.	by
Gordon	Wenham.	Westchester,	Ill.:	Crossway,	1991.*
Piper,	John.	
What’s	the	Difference?	Manhood	and	Womanhood	Defined
According	to	the	Bible.	
Westchester,	Ill.:	Crossway,	1990.*
_____,	and	Wayne	Grudem,	eds.	
Recovering	Biblical	Manhood	and
Womanhood:	A	Response	to	Evangelical	Feminism.	
Westchester,	Ill.:
Crossway,	1991.*
Spencer,	Aida	Besancon.	
Beyond	the	Curse:	Women	Called	to	Ministry.
Peabody,	Mass.:	Hendrickson,	1985.**
Tucker,	Ruth	A.,	and	Walter	Liefeld.	
Daughters	of	the	Church:	Women	in
Ministry	from	New	Testament	Times	to	the	Present.	
Grand	Rapids:
Zondervan,	1987.**
Van	Leeuwen,	Mary	Stewart.	
Gender	and	Grace:	Love,	Work	and
Parenting	in	a	Changing	World.	
Leicester	and	Downers	Grove,	Ill.:
InterVarsity	Press,	1990.**
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
Colossians	3:18–19:	
Wives,	be	subject	to	your	husbands,	as	is	fitting	in	the
Lord.	Husbands,	love	your	wives,	and	do	not	be	harsh	with	them.
HYMN
“Blest	the	Man	that	Fears	Jehovah”
This	hymn	is	an	older	paraphrase	of	Psalm	128	set	to	music.	It	speaks	about
the	blessings	of	a	family	that	walks	in	God’s	ways.	(Tune	of	“Jesus	Calls
Us.”)
Blest	the	man	that	fears	Jehovah,
walking	ever	in	his	ways;
By	thy	toil	thou	shalt	be	prospered
and	be	happy	all	thy	days.
In	thy	wife	thou	shalt	have	gladness,
She	shall	fill	thy	home	with	good,
Happy	in	her	loving	service
and	the	joys	of	motherhood.
Joyful	children,	sons	and	daughters,
shall	about	thy	table	meet,
Olive	plants,	in	strength	and	beauty,
full	of	hope	and	promise	sweet.
Lo,	on	him	that	fears	Jehovah
shall	this	blessedness	attend,
For	Jehovah	out	of	Zion
shall	to	thee	his	blessing	send.
Thou	shalt	see	God’s	kingdom	prosper
all	thy	days,	till	life	shall	cease,
Thou	shalt	see	thy	children’s	children;
on	thy	people,	Lord,	be	peace.
FROM	
THE	PSALTER,	
1912,	FROM	PSALM	128
NOTES
1
On	the	question	of	whether	to	use	the	English	word	
man	
to	refer	to	human	beings	generally	(both	male	and	female),	see	
chapter
21
.
2
For	a	more	extensive	discussion	of	the	theological	implications	of	male-female	differentiation	in	Genesis	1–3,	see	Raymond	C.
Ortlund,	Jr.,	“Male-Female	Equality	and	Male	Headship:	Genesis	1–3,”	in	
Recovering	Biblical	Manhood	and	Womanhood:	A
Response	to	Evangelical	Feminism,	
ed.	by	John	Piper	and	Wayne	Grudem,	p.	
98.	I	have	depended	on	Dr.	Ortlund’s	analysis	at
several	points	in	this	chapter.
3
In	the	past	decade	news	agencies	have	reported	a	common	practice	in	China	whereby	parents	of	a	newborn	daughter	will	often
leave	her	to	die	in	order	that	they	might	try	again	to	have	a	son	under	China’s	strict	“one	couple,	one	child”	policy.	In	contrast	to
the	biblical	view	of	equality	in	importance	for	men	and	women,	such	a	tragic	practice	not	only	results	in	much	loss	of	innocent
human	life,	but	also	proclaims	loudly	to	every	woman	in	that	society	that	she	is	less	valuable	than	a	man.	(In	other	societies
parents	who	secretly	think	that	it	is	better	to	have	a	baby	boy	than	a	baby	girl	also	show	that	they	have	not	fully	understood	the
biblical	teaching	on	the	fact	that	women	and	men	are	fully	equal	in	value	in	God’s	sight.)
4
Perhaps	the	answer	to	the	questions,	“Who	can	pray	better?”	and	“Who	can	praise	God	better?”	should	be	“both	together.”
Although	there	is	much	value	in	a	men’s	prayer	meeting	or	in	a	gathering	of	women	for	prayer,	there	is	nothing	richer	and	more
complete	than	the	whole	fellowship	of	God’s	people,	both	men	and	women,	and	even	their	children	who	are	old	enough	to
understand	and	participate,	gathered	together	before	God’s	throne	in	prayer:	“When	the	day	of	Pentecost	had	come,	they	
were	all
together	in	one	place”	
(Acts	2:1).	“And	when	they	heard	it,	they	lifted	their	voices	
together	
to	God”	(Acts	4:24).	Peter	“went	to
the	house	of	Mary,	the	mother	of	John	whose	other	name	was	Mark,	where	
many	were	gathered	together	
and	were	praying”	(Acts
12:12).
5
See	
chapter	14
,	on	role	differences	among	the	members	of	the	Trinity.
6
Some	have	suggested	that	the	word	“head”	in	1	Cor.	11:3	means	“source”	and	has	nothing	to	do	with	authority	in	marriage.	For
example,	when	referring	to	Paul’s	use	of	the	word	“head”	to	say	that	“the	head	of	every	man	is	Christ,	the	head	of	woman	is	her
husband,	and	the	head	of	Christ	is	God”	(1	Cor.	11:3),	Gordon	Fee	says	that	“Paul’s	understanding	of	the	metaphor,	therefore,	and
almost	certainly	the	only	one	the	Corinthians	would	have	grasped,	is	‘head’	as	‘source,’	especially	‘source	of	life’	”	(
The	First
Epistle	to	the	Corinthians,	
NIC	[Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1987],	p.	
503).
Similarly,	the	statement,	“Men,	Women	and	Biblical	Equality,”	published	as	an	advertisement	in	
CT,	
April	9,	1990,	pp.	36–37,
says,	“The	husband’s	function	as	‘head’	is	to	be	understood	as	self-giving	love	and	service	within	this	relationship	of	mutual
submission	(Eph.	5:21–33;	Col.	3:19;	1	Pet.	3:7)”	(p.	
1,	para.	11).	Thus	they	understand	“head”	to	mean	“source”	(of	love	and
service),	not	“authority	over.”
For	a	response	to	this	interpretation	and	a	discussion	of	reasons	why	the	word	“head”	here	must	mean	“authority	over”	not
“source,”	see	W.	Grudem,	“Does	
Kephalē	
(‘Head’)	Mean	‘Source’	or	‘Authority	Over’	in	Greek	Literature?	A	Survey	of	2,336
Examples,”	
TrinJ	
6,	n.s.	(Spring	1985),	pp.	38–59,	and	W.	Grudem,	“The	Meaning	of	
Kephale	
(‘Head’):	A	Response	to	Recent
Studies,”	
TrinJ	
11,	n.s.	(Spring	1990),	pp.	3–72	(reprinted	in	
Recovering	Biblical	Manhood	and	Womanhood:	A	Response	to
Evangelical	Feminism,	
pp.	425–68).	See	also	Joseph	Fitzmyer,	“Another	Look	at	
Kephalē	
in	1	Cor.	11:3,”	
NTS	
35	(1989),	pp.
503–11.	Even	the	few	examples	where	people	have	claimed	that	“head”	could	mean	“source”	when	applied	to	a	person,	the	person
is	
always	
one	in	authority.	No	counter-examples	to	this	have	ever	been	found	in	ancient	Greek	literature.
7
The	fact	that	head	coverings	were	the	kind	of	clothing	that	distinguished	women	from	men	in	first-century	Corinth	meant	that
Paul	directed	the	women	to	wear	head	coverings	in	church.	But	this	does	not	mean	that	women	should	wear	head	coverings	in
societies	where	that	is	not	a	distinctive	sign	of	being	a	woman.	The	contemporary	application	would	be	that	women	should	dress
to	look	like	women	and	men	should	dress	to	look	like	men,	in	whatever	form	those	clothing	patterns	are	expressed	in	each	society:
Paul	is	not	in	favor	of	unisex	clothing!	For	further	discussion,	see	Thomas	R.	Schreiner,	“Head	Coverings,	Prophecies	and	the
Trinity:	1	Corinthians	11:2–16,”	in	
Recovering	Biblical	Manhood	and	Womanhood,	
pp.	124–39.
8
Beyond	the	Curse,	
2d	ed.	(Nashville:	Thomas	Nelson,	1985),	pp.	20–42.
9
Beyond	Sex	Roles	
(Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1985),	pp.	21–58.
10
Ibid.,	p.	
58.
11
Some	object	that	this	would	not	be	appropriate	in	the	Genesis	narrative,	for	animals	were	created	before	Adam,	and	this	would
give	animals	the	authority	to	rule	over	humans	(so	Bilezikian,	
Beyond	Sex	Roles,	
p.	257,	n.	13).	But	this	objection	fails	to
understand	that	the	principle	of	primogeniture	only	occurs	among	human	beings	and	is,	in	fact,	limited	to	those	in	the	same
family.	(Bilezikian	raises	other	objections	[pp.	255–57]	but	fails	to	deal	with	the	New	Testament	endorsement	of	this
understanding	of	Gen.	2	in	1	Tim.	2:13.)
12
See	Aida	B.	Spencer,	
Beyond	the	Curse,	
pp.	23–29.
13
David	J.	A.	Clines,	“What	Does	Eve	Do	to	Help?	and	Other	Irredeemably	Androcentric	Orientations	in	Genesis	1–3,”	paper
read	at	Society	of	Biblical	Literature	annual	meeting	Dec.	7,	1987,	in	Boston,	Massachusetts.
14
So	Aida	Spencer,	
Beyond	the	Curse,	
pp.	23–26.	She	says,	“The	Hebrew	text	even	signifies	that	the	woman	is	‘in	front	of’	the
man	or	‘over’	him!”	(p.	
26).
15
Ortlund,	“Male-Female	Equality,”	pp.	103–4;	cf.	BDB,	p.	
617,	2a.
16
See	the	discussion	in	Ortlund,	“Male-Female	Equality,”	pp.	102–3.
17
Gerhard	von	Rad	says,	“Let	us	remind	ourselves	once	more	that	name-giving	in	the	ancient	Orient	was	primarily	an	exercise	of
sovereignty,	of	command”	(
Genesis:	A	Commentary,	
rev.	ed.	[Philadelphia:	Westminster,	1972],	p.	
83).
18
See	Bilezikian,	
Beyond	Sex	Roles,	
pp.	260–61.
19
See	pp.	536–37.
20
See	Susan.	T.	Foh,	“What	is	the	Woman’s	Desire?”	in	
WTJ,	
vol.	37	(1975),	pp.	376–83.	Foh	notes	that	this	same	Hebrew	word
occurs	in	a	closely	parallel	statement	just	a	few	verses	later,	when	God	says	to	Cain,	“Sin	is	crouching	at	the	door,	and	its	
desire	
is
for	you,	but	you	must	master	it”	(Gen.	4:7	NASB).	The	parallelism	in	the	Hebrew	text	between	the	verses	is	quite	remarkable:	six
words	(counting	conjunctions	and	prepositions)	are	exactly	the	same,	and	in	the	same	order.	Another	four	nouns	and	pronouns	are
in	the	same	position	and	have	the	same	function	in	the	sentence,	but	they	differ	only	because	the	parties	involved	are	different.	But
in	that	sentence	the	“desire”	that	sin	has	for	Cain	is	surely	a	
desire	to	overcome	or	conquer	him,	
as	is	evident	from	the	image	of	an
animal	“crouching”	at	the	door	waiting	for	him.	The	only	other	example	of	this	Hebrew	word	is	found	in	Song	of	Sol.	7:10,	where
its	meaning	is	unclear	but	where	the	sense	“desire	to	have	mastery	over”	is	possible	(note	the	progression	in	Song	of	Sol.	2:16;
6:3;	7:10).	I	have	been	unable	to	find	any	other	occurrences	of	this	word	in	ancient	Hebrew	literature,	though	Foh	does	point	to
some	parallels	in	related	Semitic	languages	to	support	her	argument.	(It	is	unlikely	that	the	word	means	“sexual	desire,”	for	that
did	not	begin	with	the	fall,	nor	would	it	be	part	of	God’s	curse.)
21
See	Deut.	15:6,	“You	shall	rule	over	many	nations,	but	they	shall	not	rule	over	you”	Prov.	22:7,	“The	rich	rules	over	the	poor”
Jdg.	14:4;	15:11	(of	the	Philistines	ruling	over	Israel);	also	Gen.	37:8;	Prov.	12:24;	et	al.
22
See,	for	example,	Bilezikian,	
Beyond	Sex	Roles,	
p.	154.
23
See	Josephus,	
War	
2.566,	578;	5.309;	cf.	the	adverb	in	1	Clem.	37:2;	also	
LSJ,	
p.	1897,	which	defines	
hypotassō	
(passive)	to
mean	“be	obedient.”
24
Author’s	literal	translation	of	Greek	
idios,	
“one’s	own.”
25
The	misunderstanding	of	this	verse	has	come	about	through	an	assumption	that	the	term	“one	another”	(
allēlous
)	must	be
completely	reciprocal	(that	it	must	mean	“everyone	to	everyone”).	Yet	there	are	many	cases	where	it	does	not	take	that	sense,	but
rather	means	“some	to	others”:	for	example,	in	Rev.	6:4,	“so	that	men	should	slay	
one	another”	
means	“so	that	some	would	kill
others”;	in	Gal.	6:2,	“Bear	
one	another’s	
burdens”	means	not	“Everyone	should	exchange	burdens	with	everyone	else,”	but	“Some
who	are	more	able	should	help	bear	the	burdens	of	others	who	are	less	able”;	1	Cor.	11:33,	“When	you	come	together	to	eat,	wait
for	
one	another”	
means	“those	who	are	ready	early	should	wait	for	others	who	are	late”;	etc.	(cf.	Luke	2:15;	21:1;	24:32).
Similarly,	both	the	following	context	and	the	meaning	of	
hypotassō	
require	that	in	Eph.	5:21	it	means,	“Those	who	are	under
authority	should	be	subject	to	others	among	you	who	have	authority	over	them.”	(Regarding	the	objection	that	submission	in
marriage	is	like	submission	in	slavery,	and	both	are	wrong,	see	
chapter	47
.)
26
Certainly,	all	Christians	are	to	love	one	another	and	to	be	considerate	of	one	another.	If	that	is	what	is	meant	by	“mutual
submission,”	then	there	should	be	no	objection	to	it—even	though	that	idea	is	not	taught	in	Eph.	5:21,	but	elsewhere	in	the	Bible,
using	words	other	than	
hypotassō.	
But	usually	the	phrase	“mutual	submission”	is	used	in	a	different	sense	than	this,	a	sense	that
obliterates	any	unique	authority	for	the	husband	in	a	marriage.
27
See	the	discussion	of	what	submission	means	and	what	it	does	not	mean	in	W.	Grudem,	“Wives	Like	Sarah,	and	the	Husbands
Who	Honor	Them:	1	Peter	3:1–7,”	in	
Recovering	Biblical	Manhood	and	Womanhood:	A	Response	to	Evangelical	Feminism,
chapter	11
.
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	23
The	Essential	Nature	of	Man
What	does	Scripture	mean	by	“soul”	and	“spirit”?	
Are	they	the	same	thing?
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
A.	Introduction:	Trichotomy,	Dichotomy,	and	Monism
How	many	parts	are	there	to	man?	Everyone	agrees	that	we	have
physical	bodies.	Most	people	(both	Christians	and	non-Christians)
sense	that	they	also	have	an	immaterial	part—a	“soul”	that	will	live
on	after	their	bodies	die.
But	here	the	agreement	ends.	Some	people	believe	that	in	addition
to	“body”	and	“soul”	we	have	a	third	part,	a	“spirit”	that	most
directly	relates	to	God.	The	view	that	man	is	made	of	three	parts
(
body,	soul,	and	spirit
)	is	called	
trichotomy.
1
	Though	this	has	been	a
common	view	in	popular	evangelical	Bible	teaching,	there	are	few
scholarly	defenses	of	it	today.	According	to	many	trichotomists,
man’s	
soul	
includes	his	intellect,	his	emotions,	and	his	will.	They
maintain	that	all	people	have	such	a	soul,	and	that	the	different
elements	of	the	soul	can	either	serve	God	or	be	yielded	to	sin.	They
argue	that	man’s	
spirit	
is	a	higher	faculty	in	man	that	comes	alive
when	a	person	becomes	a	Christian	(see	Rom.	8:10:	“If	Christ	is	in
you,	although	your	bodies	are	dead	because	of	sin,	
your	spirits	are
alive	
because	of	righteousness”).	The	spirit	of	a	person	then	would
be	that	part	of	him	or	her	that	most	directly	worships	and	prays	to
God	(see	John	4:24;	Phil.	3:3).
Others	have	said	that	“spirit”	is	not	a	separate	part	of	man,	but
simply	another	term	for	“soul,”	and	that	both	terms	are	used
interchangeably	in	Scripture	to	talk	about	the	immaterial	part	of
man,	the	part	that	lives	on	after	our	bodies	die.	The	view	that	man	is
made	up	of	
two	parts	
(body	and	soul/spirit)	is	called	
dichotomy.
Those	who	hold	this	view	often	agree	that	Scripture	uses	the	word
spirit	
(Heb.	
rûach,	
and	Gk.	
pneuma
)	more	frequently	when
referring	to	our	relationship	to	God,	but	such	usage	(they	say)	is	not
uniform,	and	the	word	
soul	
is	also	used	in	all	the	ways	that	
spirit
can	be	used.
Outside	the	realm	of	evangelical	thought	we	find	yet	another	view,
the	idea	that	man	cannot	exist	at	all	apart	from	a	physical	body,	and
therefore	there	can	be	no	separate	existence	for	any	“soul”	after	the
body	dies	(although	this	view	can	allow	for	the	resurrection	of	the
whole	person	at	some	future	time).	The	view	that	man	is	only	one
element,	and	that	his	body	is	the	person,	is	called	
monism.
2
According	to	monism,	the	scriptural	terms	
soul	
and	
spirit	
are	just
other	expressions	for	the	“person”	himself,	or	for	the	person’s
“life.”	This	view	has	not	generally	been	adopted	by	evangelical
theologians	because	so	many	scriptural	texts	seem	clearly	to	affirm
that	our	souls	or	spirits	live	on	after	our	bodies	die	(see	Gen.	35:18;
Ps.	31:5;	Luke	23:43,	46;	Acts	7:59;	Phil.	1:23–24;	2	Cor.	5:8;	Heb.
12:23;	Rev.	6:9;	20:4;	and	chapter	42,	on	the	intermediate	state,
below).
But	the	other	two	views	continue	to	be	held	in	the	Christian	world
today.	Although	dichotomy	has	been	held	more	commonly	through
the	history	of	the	church	and	is	far	more	common	among
evangelical	scholars	today,	trichotomy	has	also	had	many
supporters.
3
This	chapter	will	support	the	dichotomist	view	that	man	is	two
parts,	body	and	soul	(or	spirit),	but	we	shall	also	examine	the
arguments	for	trichotomy.
B.	Biblical	Data
Before	asking	whether	Scripture	views	“soul”	and	“spirit”	as
distinct	parts	of	man,	we	must	at	the	outset	make	it	clear	that	the
emphasis	of	Scripture	is	on	the	overall	unity	of	man	as	created	by
God.	When	God	made	man	he	“breathed	into	his	nostrils	the	breath
of	life;	and	man	became	a	living	being”	(Gen.	2:7).	Here	Adam	is	a
unified	person	with	body	and	soul	living	and	acting	together.	This
original	harmonious	and	unified	state	of	man	will	occur	again	when
Christ	returns	and	we	are	fully	redeemed	in	our	bodies	as	well	as
our	souls	to	live	with	him	forever	(see	1	Cor.	15:51–54).	Moreover,
we	are	to	grow	in	holiness	and	love	for	God	in	every	aspect	of	our
lives,	in	our	bodies	as	well	as	in	our	spirits	or	souls	(cf.	1	Cor.
7:34).	We	are	to	“cleanse	ourselves	from	every	defilement	
of	body
and	spirit,	
and	make	holiness	perfect	in	the	fear	of	God”	(2	Cor.
7:1).
But	once	we	have	emphasized	the	fact	that	God	created	us	to	have	a
unity	between	body	and	soul,	and	that	every	action	we	take	in	this
life	is	an	act	of	our	whole	person,	involving	to	some	extent	both
body	and	soul,	then	we	can	go	on	to	point	out	that	Scripture	quite
clearly	teaches	that	there	is	an	immaterial	part	of	man’s	nature.	And
we	can	investigate	what	that	part	is	like.
1.
	Scripture	Uses	“Soul”	and	“Spirit”	Interchangeably.
	When	we	look	at
the	usage	of	the	biblical	words	translated	“soul”	(Heb.	
nephesh	
and	Gk.
psychē
)	and	“spirit”	(Heb.	
rûach	
and	Gk.	
pneuma
),
4
	it	appears	that	they	are
sometimes	used	interchangeably.	For	example,	in	John	12:27,	Jesus	says,
“Now	is	my	
soul	
troubled,”	whereas	in	a	very	similar	context	in	the	next
chapter	John	says	that	Jesus	was	“troubled	in	
spirit”	
(John	13:21).	Similarly,
we	read	Mary’s	words	in	Luke	1:46–47:	“My	
soul	
magnifies	the	Lord,	and
my	
spirit	
rejoices	in	God	my	Savior.”	This	seems	to	be	quite	an	evident
example	of	Hebrew	parallelism,	the	poetic	device	in	which	the	same	idea	is
repeated	using	different	but	synonymous	words.	This	interchangeability	of
terms	also	explains	why	people	who	have	died	and	gone	to	heaven	or	hell	can
be	called	either	“spirits”	(Heb.	12:23,	“the	
spirits	
of	just	men	made	perfect”;
also	1	Peter	3:19,	“
spirits	
in	prison”)	or	“souls”	(Rev.	6:9,	“the	
souls	
of	those
who	had	been	slain	for	the	word	of	God	and	for	the	witness	they	had	borne”;
20:4,	“the	souls	of	those	who	had	been	beheaded	for	their	testimony	to
Jesus”).
2.	At	Death,	Scripture	Says	Either	That	the	“Soul”	Departs	or	the
“Spirit”	Departs.
	When	Rachel	died,	Scripture	says,	“Her	
soul	
was	departing
(for	she	died)”	(Gen.	35:18).	Elijah	prays	that	the	dead	child’s	“soul”	would
come	into	him	again	(1	Kings	17:21),	and	Isaiah	predicts	that	the	Servant	of
the	Lord	would	“pour	out	his	
soul	
[Heb.	
nephesh
]	to	death”	(Isa.	53:12).	In
the	New	Testament	God	tells	the	rich	fool,	“This	night	your	soul	[Gk.	
psychē
]
is	required	of	you”	(Luke	12:20).	On	the	other	hand,	sometimes	death	is
viewed	as	the	returning	of	the	spirit	to	God.	So	David	can	pray,	in	words	later
quoted	by	Jesus	on	the	cross,	“Into	your	hand	I	commit	my	
spirit”	
(Ps.	31:5;
cf.	Luke	23:46).	At	death,	“the	
spirit	
returns	to	God	who	gave	it”	(Eccl.
12:7).
5
	In	the	New	Testament,	when	Jesus	was	dying,	“he	bowed	his	head	and
gave	up	his	spirit”	(John	19:30),	and	likewise	Stephen	before	dying	prayed,
“Lord	Jesus,	receive	my	spirit”	(Acts	7:59).
In	response	to	these	passages,	a	trichotomist	might	argue	that	they
are	talking	about	different	things,	for	when	a	person	dies	both	his
soul	and	his	spirit	do	in	fact	go	to	heaven.	But	it	should	be	noted
that	Scripture	nowhere	says	that	a	person’s	“soul	and	spirit”
departed	or	went	to	heaven	or	were	yielded	up	to	God.	If	soul	and
spirit	were	separate	and	distinct	things,	we	would	expect	that	such
language	would	be	affirmed	somewhere,	if	only	to	assure	the	reader
that	no	essential	part	of	the	person	is	left	behind.	Yet	we	find	no
such	language:	the	biblical	authors	do	not	seem	to	care	whether
they	say	that	the	soul	departs	or	the	spirit	departs	at	death,	for	both
seem	to	mean	the	same	thing.
We	should	also	note	that	these	Old	Testament	verses	quoted	above
indicate	that	it	is	not	correct,	as	some	have	claimed,	to	say	that	the
Old	Testament	so	emphasizes	the	unity	of	man	that	it	has	no
conception	of	the	existence	of	the	soul	apart	from	the	body.
Certainly	several	of	these	Old	Testament	passages	imply	that	the
authors	recognize	that	a	person	continues	to	exist	after	his	or	her
body	dies.
3.	Man	Is	Said	to	Be	Either	“Body	and	Soul”	or	“Body	and	Spirit.”
	Jesus
tells	us	not	to	fear	those	who	“kill	the	body	but	cannot	kill	the	soul,”	but	that
we	should	rather	“fear	him	who	can	destroy	both	soul	and	body	in	hell”	(Matt.
10:28).	Here	the	word	“soul”	clearly	must	refer	to	the	part	of	a	person	that
exists	after	death.	It	cannot	mean	“person”	or	“life,”	for	it	would	not	make
sense	to	speak	of	those	who	“kill	the	body	but	cannot	kill	the	person,”	or	who
“kill	the	body	but	cannot	kill	the	life,”	unless	there	is	some	aspect	of	the
person	that	lives	on	after	the	body	is	dead.	Moreover,	when	Jesus	talks	about
“soul	and	body”	he	seems	quite	clearly	to	be	talking	about	the	entire	person
even	though	he	does	not	mention	“spirit”	as	a	separate	component.	The	word
“soul”	seems	to	stand	for	the	entire	nonphysical	part	of	man.
On	the	other	hand,	man	is	sometimes	said	to	be	“body	and	spirit.”
Paul	wants	the	Corinthian	church	to	deliver	an	erring	brother	to
Satan	“for	the	destruction	of	the	flesh,	that	his	spirit	may	be	saved
in	the	day	of	the	Lord	Jesus”	(1	Cor.	5:5).	It	is	not	that	Paul	has
forgotten	the	salvation	of	the	man’s	soul	as	well;	he	simply	uses	the
word	“spirit”	to	refer	to	the	whole	of	the	person’s	immaterial
existence.	Similarly,	James	says	that	“the	body	apart	from	the	spirit
is	dead”	(James	2:26),	but	mentions	nothing	about	a	separate	soul.
Moreover,	when	Paul	speaks	of	growth	in	personal	holiness,	he
approves	the	woman	who	is	concerned	with	“how	to	be	holy	in
body	and	spirit”	(1	Cor.	7:34),	and	he	suggests	that	this	covers	the
whole	of	the	person’s	life.	Even	more	explicit	is	2	Corinthians	7:1,
where	he	says,	“let	us	cleanse	ourselves	from	every	defilement	of
body	and	spirit,	and	make	holiness	perfect	in	the	fear	of	God.”
6
Cleansing	ourselves	from	defilement	of	the	“soul”	or	of	the	“spirit”
covers	the	whole	immaterial	side	of	our	existence	(see	also	Rom.
8:10;	1	Cor.	5:3;	Col.	2:5).
4.	The	“Soul”	Can	Sin	or	the	“Spirit”	Can	Sin.
	Those	who	hold	to
trichotomy	will	usually	agree	that	the	“soul”	can	sin	since	they	think	that	the
soul	includes	the	intellect,	the	emotions,	and	the	will.	(We	see	the	fact	that	our
souls	can	sin	implied	in	verses	such	as	1	Peter	1:22;	Rev.	18:14.)
The	trichotomist,	however,	generally	thinks	of	the	“spirit”	as	purer
than	the	soul,	and,	when	renewed,	as	free	from	sin	and	responsive
to	the	prompting	of	the	Holy	Spirit.	This	understanding	(which
sometimes	finds	its	way	into	popular	Christian	preaching	and
writing)	is	not	really	supported	by	the	biblical	text.	When	Paul
encourages	the	Corinthians	to	cleanse	themselves	“from	every
defilement	of	body	and	
spirit”	
(2	Cor.	7:1),	he	clearly	implies	that
there	can	be	defilement	(or	sin)	in	our	spirits.	Similarly,	he	speaks
of	the	unmarried	woman	who	is	concerned	with	how	to	be	holy	“in
body	and	
spirit”	
(1	Cor.	7:34).	Other	verses	speak	in	similar	ways.
For	example,	the	Lord	hardened	the	“spirit”	of	Sihon	the	king	of
Heshbon	(Deut.	2:30).	Psalm	78	speaks	of	the	rebellious	people	of
Israel	“whose	
spirit	
was	not	faithful	to	God”	(Ps.	78:8).	A	“haughty
spirit”	
goes	before	a	fall	(Prov.	16:18),	and	it	is	possible	for	sinful
people	to	be	“proud	in	spirit”	(Eccl.	7:8).	Isaiah	speaks	of	those
“who	err	in	spirit”	(Isa.	29:24).	Nebuchadnezzar’s	“spirit	was
hardened	so	that	he	dealt	proudly”	(Dan.	5:20).	The	fact	that	“All
the	ways	of	a	man	are	pure	in	his	own	eyes,	but	the	L
ORD
	weighs
the	spirit”	(Prov.	16:2)	implies	that	it	is	possible	for	our	spirits	to	be
wrong	in	God’s	sight.	Other	verses	imply	a	possibility	of	sin	in	our
spirits	(see	Ps.	32:2;	51:10).	Finally,	the	fact	that	Scripture	approves
of	one	“who	
rules	his	spirit”	
(Prov.	16:32)	implies	that	our	spirits
are	not	simply	the	spiritually	pure	parts	of	our	lives	that	are	to	be
followed	in	all	cases,	but	that	they	can	have	sinful	desires	or
directions	as	well.
5.	Everything	That	the	Soul	Is	Said	to	Do,	the	Spirit	Is	Also	Said	to	Do,
and	Everything	That	the	Spirit	Is	Said	to	Do	the	Soul	Is	Also	Said	to	Do.
Those	who	advocate	trichotomy	face	a	difficult	problem	defining	clearly	just
what	the	difference	is	between	the	soul	and	the	spirit	(from	their	perspective).
If	Scripture	gave	clear	support	to	the	idea	that	our	spirit	is	the	part	of	us	that
directly	relates	to	God	in	worship	and	prayer,	while	our	soul	includes	our
intellect	(thinking),	our	emotions	(feeling),	and	our	will	(deciding),	then
trichotomists	would	have	a	strong	case.	However,	Scripture	appears	not	to
allow	such	a	distinction	to	be	made.
On	the	one	hand,	the	activities	of	thinking,	feeling,	and	deciding
things	are	not	said	to	be	done	by	our	souls	only.	Our	spirits	can	also
experience	emotions,	for	example,	as	when	Paul’s	“spirit	was
provoked	within	him”	(Acts	17:16),	or	when	Jesus	was	“troubled	in
spirit”	(John	13:21).	It	is	also	possible	to	have	a	“downcast	spirit,”
which	is	the	opposite	of	a	“cheerful	heart”	(Prov.	17:22).
Moreover,	the	functions	of	knowing,	perceiving,	and	thinking	are
also	said	to	be	done	by	our	spirits.	For	instance,	Mark	speaks	of
Jesus	“perceiving	[Gk.	
epiginōskō,	
‘knowing’]	in	his	spirit”	(Mark
2:8).	When	the	Holy	Spirit	“bears	witness	with	our	spirit	that	we
are	children	of	God”	(Rom.	8:16),	our	spirits	receive	and
understand	that	witness,	which	is	certainly	a	function	of	knowing
something.	In	fact,	our	spirits	seem	to	know	our	thoughts	quite
deeply,	for	Paul	asks,	“What	person	knows	a	man’s	thoughts	except
the	spirit	of	the	man	which	is	in	him?”	(1	Cor.	2:11).	(Cf.	Isa.	29:24,
speaking	of	those	who	now	“err	in	spirit”	but	“will	come	to
understanding.”)
The	point	of	these	verses	is	not	to	say	that	it	is	the	spirit	rather	than
the	soul	that	feels	and	thinks	things,	but	rather	that	“soul”	and
“spirit”	are	both	terms	used	of	the	immaterial	side	of	people
generally,	and	it	is	difficult	to	see	any	real	distinction	between	the
use	of	the	terms.
In	fact,	we	should	not	slip	into	the	mistake	of	thinking	that	certain
activities	(such	as	thinking,	feeling,	or	deciding	things)	are	done	by
only	one	part	of	us.	Rather,	these	activities	are	done	by	the	whole
person.	When	we	think	or	feel	things,	certainly	our	physical	bodies
are	involved	at	every	point	as	well.	Whenever	we	think	we	use	the
physical	brain	God	has	given	us.	Similarly,	our	brain	and	our	entire
nervous	system	are	involved	when	we	feel	emotion,	and	sometimes
those	emotions	are	involved	in	physical	sensations	in	other	parts	of
our	bodies.	This	is	just	to	reemphasize	what	was	said	at	the
beginning	of	our	discussion,	that	the	overall	focus	of	Scripture	is
primarily	on	man	as	a	unity,	with	our	physical	bodies	and	the
nonphysical	part	of	our	persons	functioning	together	as	a	unity.
On	the	other	hand,	the	trichotomist	claim	that	our	spirit	is	that
element	of	us	that	relates	most	directly	to	God	in	worship	and	in
prayer	does	not	seem	to	be	borne	out	by	Scripture.	We	often	read
about	our	
soul	
worshiping	God	and	relating	to	him	in	other	kinds	of
spiritual	activity.	“To	you,	O	L
ORD
,	I	lift	up	my	
soul”	
(Ps.	25:1).
“For	God	alone	my	soul	waits	in	silence”	(Ps.	62:1).	“Bless	the
L
ORD
,	O	my	
soul;	
and	all	that	is	within	me,	bless	his	holy	name!”
(Ps.	103:1).	“Praise	the	L
ORD
,	O	my	soul!”	(Ps.	146:1).	“My	soul
magnifies	the	Lord”	(Luke	1:46).
These	passages	indicate	that	our	souls	can	worship	God,	praise	him,
and	give	thanks	to	him.	Our	souls	can	pray	to	God,	as	Hannah
implies	when	she	says,	“I	have	been	pouring	out	my	soul	before	the
L
ORD
”	(1	Sam.	1:15).	In	fact,	the	great	commandment	is	to	“love
the	L
ORD
	your	God	with	all	your	heart,	and	with	all	your	soul,	and
with	all	your	might”	(Deut.	6:5;	cf.	Mark	12:30).	Our	souls	can
long	for	God	and	thirst	for	him	(Ps.	42:1,	2),	and	can	“hope	in	God”
(Ps.	42:5).	Our	souls	can	rejoice	and	delight	in	God,	for	David	says,
“My	soul	shall	rejoice	in	the	L
ORD
,	exulting	in	his	deliverance”	(Ps.
35:9;	cf.	Isa.	61:10).	The	psalmist	says,	“My	soul	is	consumed	with
longing	for	your	ordinances	at	all	times”	(Ps.	119:20),	and,	“My
soul	keeps	your	testimonies;	I	love	them	exceedingly”	(Ps.
119:167).	There	seems	to	be	no	area	of	life	or	relationship	to	God	in
which	Scripture	says	our	spirits	are	active	rather	than	our	souls.
Both	terms	are	used	to	speak	of	all	of	the	aspects	of	our	relationship
to	God.
However,	it	would	be	wrong,	in	the	light	of	these	passages,	to
suggest	that	only	our	souls	(or	spirits)	worship	God,	for	our	bodies
are	involved	in	worship	as	well.	We	are	a	unity	of	body	and
soul/spirit.	Our	physical	brains	think	about	God	when	we	worship
and	when	we	love	him	with	all	of	our	“minds”	(Mark	12:30).
David,	longing	to	be	in	God’s	presence,	can	say,	“My	flesh	faints
for	you,	as	in	a	dry	and	weary	land	where	no	water	is”	(Ps.	63:1).
Again,	we	read,	“My	heart	and	flesh	sing	for	joy	to	the	living	God”
(Ps.	84:2).	It	is	obvious	that	when	we	pray	aloud	or	sing	praise	to
God,	our	lips	and	our	vocal	cords	are	involved,	and	sometimes
worship	and	prayer	in	Scripture	involves	clapping	of	hands	(Ps.
47:1)	or	lifting	of	hands	to	God	(Pss.	28:2;	63:4;	134:2;	143:6;	1
Tim.	2:8).	Moreover,	the	playing	of	musical	instruments	in	praise	to
God	is	an	act	that	involves	our	physical	bodies	as	well	as	the
physical	materials	of	which	the	musical	instruments	are	made	(see
Ps.	150:3–5).	We	worship	him	as	whole	persons.
In	conclusion,	Scripture	does	not	seem	to	support	any	distinction
between	soul	and	spirit.	There	does	not	seem	to	be	a	satisfactory
answer	to	the	questions	that	we	may	address	to	a	trichotomist,
“What	can	the	spirit	do	that	the	soul	cannot	do?	What	can	the	soul
do	that	the	spirit	cannot	do?”
C.	Arguments	for	Trichotomy
Those	who	adopt	the	trichotomist	position	have	appealed	to	a
number	of	Scripture	passages	in	support	of	it.	We	list	here	the	ones
that	are	most	commonly	used.
1.
	1	Thessalonians	5:23.
	“May	the	God	of	peace	himself	sanctify	you
wholly;	and	may	your	
spirit	and	soul	and	body	
be	kept	sound	and	blameless
at	the	coming	of	our	Lord	Jesus	Christ”	(1	Thess.	5:23).	Does	not	this	verse
clearly	speak	of	three	parts	to	man?
2.	Hebrews	4:12.
	“The	word	of	God	is	living	and	active,	sharper	than	any
two-edged	sword,	piercing	to	the	
division	of	soul	and	spirit,	
of	joints	and
marrow,	and	discerning	the	thoughts	and	intentions	of	the	heart”	(Heb.	4:12).
If	the	sword	of	Scripture	divides	soul	and	spirit,	then	are	these	not	two
separate	parts	of	man?
3.	1	Corinthians	2:14–3:4.
	This	passage	speaks	of	different	kinds	of	people,
those	who	are	“of	the	flesh”	(Gk.	
sarkinos,	
1	Cor.	3:1);	those	who	are
“unspiritual”	(Gk.	
psychikos,	
lit.	“soul-ish,”	1	Cor.	2:14);	and	those	who	are
“spiritual”	(Gk.	
pneumatikos,	
1	Cor.	2:15).	Do	not	these	categories	suggest
that	there	are	different	sorts	of	people,	the	non-Christians	who	are	“of	the
flesh,”	“unspiritual”	Christians	who	follow	the	desires	of	their	souls,	and
more	mature	Christians	who	follow	the	desires	of	their	spirits?	Would	this	not
suggest	that	soul	and	spirit	are	different	elements	of	our	nature?
4.	1	Corinthians	14:14.
	When	Paul	says,	“If	I	pray	in	a	tongue,	my	spirit
prays	but	my	mind	is	unfruitful”	(1	Cor.	14:14),	is	he	not	implying	that	his
mind	does	something	different	from	his	spirit,	and	would	not	this	support	the
trichotomist’s	argument	that	our	mind	and	our	thinking	are	to	be	assigned	to
our	souls,	not	to	our	spirit?
5.	The	Argument	From	Personal	Experience.
	Many	trichotomists	say	that
they	have	a	spiritual	perception,	a	spiritual	awareness	of	God’s	presence
which	affects	them	in	a	way	that	they	know	to	be	different	from	their	ordinary
thinking	processes	and	different	from	their	emotional	experiences.	They	ask,
“If	I	do	not	have	a	spirit	that	is	distinct	from	my	thoughts	and	my	emotions,
then	what	exactly	is	it	that	I	feel	that	is	different	from	my	thoughts	and	my
emotions,	something	that	I	can	only	describe	as	worshiping	God	in	my	spirit
and	sensing	his	presence	in	my	spirit?	Isn’t	there	something	in	me	that	is
more	than	just	my	intellect	and	my	emotions	and	my	will,	and	shouldn’t	this
be	called	my	spirit?”
6.	Our	Spirit	Is	What	Makes	Us	Different	From	Animals.
	Some
trichotomists	argue	that	both	humans	and	animals	have	souls,	but	maintain
that	it	is	the	presence	of	a	spirit	that	makes	us	different	from	animals.
7.	Our	Spirit	Is	What	Comes	Alive	at	Regeneration.
	Trichotomists	also
argue	that	when	we	become	Christians	our	spirits	come	alive:	“But	if	Christ	is
in	you,	although	your	bodies	are	dead	because	of	sin,	your	spirits	are	alive
because	of	righteousness”	(Rom.	8:10).
Now	we	can	consider	the	seven	points	given	above:
D.	Responses	to	Arguments	for	Trichotomy
1.
	1	Thessalonians	5:23.
	The	phrase	“your	spirit	and	soul	and	body”	is	by
itself	inconclusive.	Paul	could	be	simply	piling	up	synonyms	for	emphasis,	as
is	sometimes	done	elsewhere	in	Scripture.	For	example,	Jesus	says,	“You
shall	love	the	Lord	your	God	with	all	your	
heart,	
and	with	all	your	
soul,	
and
with	all	your	
mind”	
(Matt.	22:37).	Does	this	mean	that	the	soul	is	different
from	the	mind	or	from	the	heart?
7
	The	problem	is	even	greater	in	Mark	12:30:
“You	shall	love	the	Lord	your	God	with	all	your	
heart,	
and	with	all	your	
soul,
and	with	all	your	
mind,	
and	with	all	your	
strength.”	
If	we	go	on	the	principle
that	such	lists	of	terms	tell	us	about	more	parts	to	man,	then	if	we	also	add
spirit	to	this	list	(and	perhaps	body	as	well),	we	would	have	five	or	six	parts	to
man!	But	that	is	certainly	a	false	conclusion.	It	is	far	better	to	understand
Jesus	as	simply	piling	up	roughly	synonymous	terms	for	emphasis	to
demonstrate	that	we	must	love	God	with	all	of	our	being.
Likewise,	in	1	Thessalonians	5:23	Paul	is	not	saying	that	soul	and
spirit	are	distinct	entities,	but	simply	that,	whatever	our	immaterial
part	is	called,	he	wants	God	to	continue	to	sanctify	us	wholly	to	the
day	of	Christ.
2.	Hebrews	4:12.
	This	verse,	which	talks	about	the	Word	of	God	“piercing	to
the	division	of	soul	and	spirit,	of	joints	and	marrow,”	is	best	understood	in	a
way	similar	to	1	Thessalonians	5:23.	The	author	is	not	saying	that	the	Word	of
God	can	divide	“soul	
from	
spirit,”	but	he	is	using	a	number	of	terms	(soul,
spirit,	joints,	marrow,	thoughts	and	intentions	of	the	heart)	that	speak	of	the
deep	inward	parts	of	our	being	that	are	not	hidden	from	the	penetrating	power
of	the	Word	of	God.	If	we	wish	to	call	these	our	“soul,”	then	Scripture	pierces
into	the	midst	of	it	and	divides	it	and	discovers	its	inmost	intentions.	If	we
wish	to	call	this	inmost	nonphysical	side	of	our	being	our	“spirit,”	then
Scripture	penetrates	into	the	midst	of	it	and	divides	it	and	knows	its	deepest
intentions	and	thoughts.	Or	if	we	wish	to	think	metaphorically	of	our	inmost
being	as	hidden	in	our	joints	and	in	the	marrow,	then	we	can	think	of
Scripture	being	like	a	sword	that	divides	our	joints	or	that	pierces	deeply	into
our	bones	and	even	divides	the	marrow	in	the	midst	of	the	bones.
8
	In	all	of
these	cases	the	Word	of	God	is	so	powerful	that	it	will	search	out	and	expose
all	disobedience	and	lack	of	submission	to	God.	In	any	case,	soul	and	spirit
are	not	thought	of	as	separate	parts;	they	are	simply	additional	terms	for	our
inmost	being.
3.	1	Corinthians	2:14–3:4.
	Paul	certainly	distinguishes	a	person	who	is
“natural”	(
psychikos,	
“soul-ish”)	from	one	that	is	“spiritual”	(
pneumatikos,
“spiritual”)	in	1	Corinthians	2:14–3:4.	But	in	this	context	“spiritual”	seems	to
mean	“influenced	by	the	Holy	Spirit,”	since	the	entire	passage	is	talking	about
the	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in	revealing	truth	to	believers.	In	this	context,
“spiritual”	might	almost	be	translated	“Spiritual.”	But	the	passage	does	not
imply	that	Christians	have	a	spirit	whereas	non-Christians	do	not,	or	that	the
spirit	of	a	Christian	is	alive	while	the	spirit	of	a	non-Christian	is	not.	Paul	is
not	talking	about	different	parts	of	man	at	all,	but	about	coming	under	the
influence	of	the	Holy	Spirit.
4.	1	Corinthians	14:14.
	When	Paul	says,	“My	
spirit	
prays	but	my	mind	is
unfruitful,”	he	means	he	does	not	understand	the	content	of	what	he	is
praying.	He	does	imply	that	there	is	a	nonphysical	component	to	his	being,	a
“spirit”	within	him	that	can	pray	to	God.	But	nothing	in	this	verse	suggests
that	he	regards	his	spirit	as	different	from	his	soul.	Such	a	misunderstanding
results	only	if	it	is	assumed	that	“mind”	is	part	of	the	soul—a	trichotomist
claim	that,	as	we	noted	above,	is	very	difficult	to	substantiate	from	Scripture.
Paul	probably	could	equally	have	said,	“My	soul	prays	but	my	mind	is
unfruitful.”
9
	The	point	is	simply	that	there	is	a	nonphysical	element	to	our
existence	that	can	at	times	function	apart	from	our	conscious	awareness	of
how	it	is	functioning.
5.	The	Argument	From	Personal	Experience.
	Christians	have	a	“spiritual
perception,”	an	inner	awareness	of	the	presence	of	God	experienced	in
worship	and	in	prayer.	At	this	deep	inward	level	we	can	also	at	times	feel
spiritually	troubled,	or	depressed,	or	perhaps	have	a	sense	of	the	presence	of
hostile	demonic	forces.	Often	this	perception	is	distinct	from	our	conscious,
rational	thought	processes.	Paul	realizes	that	at	times	his	spirit	prays	but	his
mind	does	not	understand	(1	Cor.	14:14).	But	does	inward	spiritual	perception
occur	in	something	other	than	what	the	Bible	calls	our	“soul”?	If	we	were
using	the	vocabulary	of	Mary,	we	would	be	happy	to	say,	“My	soul	magnifies
the	Lord”	(Luke	1:46).	David	would	say,	“Bless	the	L
ORD
,	O	my	soul”	(Ps.
103:1).	Jesus	would	tell	us	to	love	God	with	all	our	soul	(Mark	12:30).	The
apostle	Paul	uses	the	word	
spirit,	
but	it	is	simply	a	difference	in	terminology
and	does	not	point	to	a	different	part	of	man.	There	is	a	“spirit”	within	us	that
can	perceive	things	in	the	spiritual	realm	(note	Rom.	8:16;	also	Acts	17:16),
but	we	could	just	as	well	speak	of	it	as	our	“soul”	and	mean	the	same	thing,
for	Scripture	uses	both	terms.
6.	What	Makes	Us	Different	From	Animals?
	It	is	true	that	we	have	spiritual
abilities	that	make	us	different	from	animals:
10
	we	are	able	to	relate	to	God	in
worship	and	prayer,	and	we	enjoy	spiritual	life	in	fellowship	with	God	who	is
spirit.	But	we	should	not	assume	that	we	have	a	distinct	element	called
“spirit”	that	allows	us	to	do	this,	for	with	our	minds	we	can	love	God,	read
and	understand	his	words,	and	believe	his	Word	to	be	true.	Our	souls	can
worship	God	and	rejoice	in	him	(see	above).	Our	bodies	will	also	be
resurrected	and	live	with	God	forever.	Therefore	we	do	not	have	to	say	that
we	have	a	part	distinct	from	our	souls	and	bodies	that	makes	us	different	from
animals,	for	our	souls	and	bodies	(including	our	minds)	relate	to	God	in	ways
animals	never	can.	Rather,	what	makes	us	different	from	animals	is	the
spiritual	abilities	that	God	has	given	to	both	our	bodies	and	souls	(or	spirits).
The	question	of	whether	an	animal	has	a	“soul”	simply	depends	on
how	we	define	soul.	If	we	define	“soul”	to	mean	“the	intellect,
emotions,	and	will,”	then	we	will	have	to	conclude	that	at	least	the
higher	animals	have	a	soul.	But	if	we	define	our	“soul”	as	we	have
in	this	chapter,	to	mean	the	immaterial	element	of	our	nature	that
relates	to	God	(Ps.	103:1;	Luke	1:46;	et	al.)	and	lives	forever	(Rev.
6:9),	then	animals	do	not	have	a	soul.	The	fact	that	the	Hebrew
word	
nephesh,	
“soul,”	is	sometimes	used	of	animals	(Gen.	1:21;
9:4)	shows	that	the	word	can	sometimes	simply	mean	“life”;	it	does
not	mean	that	animals	have	the	same	kind	of	soul	as	man.
11
7.	Does	Our	Spirit	Come	Alive	at	Regeneration?
	The	human	spirit	is	not
something	that	is	dead	in	an	unbeliever	but	comes	to	life	when	someone	trusts
in	Christ,	because	the	Bible	talks	about	unbelievers	having	a	spirit	that	is
obviously	alive	but	is	in	rebellion	against	God—whether	Sihon,	King	of
Heshbon	(Deut.	2:30:	the	Lord	“hardened	his	spirit”),	or	Nebuchadnezzar
(Dan.	5:20:	“his	spirit	was	hardened	so	that	he	dealt	proudly”),	or	the
unfaithful	people	of	Israel	(Ps.	78:8:	their	“spirit	was	not	faithful	to	God”).
When	Paul	says,	“Your	spirits	are	alive	because	of	righteousness”	(Rom.
8:10),	he	apparently	means	“alive	to	God,”	but	he	does	not	imply	that	our
spirits	were	completely	“dead”	before,	only	that	they	were	living	out	of
fellowship	with	God	and	were	dead	in	that	sense.
12
	In	the	same	way,	we	as
whole	persons	were	“dead”	in	“trespasses	and	sins”	(Eph.	2:1),	but	we	were
made	alive	to	God,	and	we	now	must	consider	ourselves	“dead	to	sin	and
alive	to	God”	(Rom.	6:11).	It	is	not	just	that	one	part	of	us	(called	the	spirit)
has	been	made	alive;	we	as	whole	persons	are	a	“new	creation”	in	Christ	(2
Cor.	5:17).
8.	Conclusion.
	Although	the	arguments	for	trichotomy	do	have	some	force,
none	of	them	provides	conclusive	evidence	that	would	overcome	the	wide
testimony	of	Scripture	showing	that	the	terms	
soul	
and	
spirit	
are	frequently
interchangeable	and	are	in	many	cases	synonymous.
We	might	also	note	the	observation	of	Louis	Berkhof	on	the	origin
of	trichotomy:
The	tripartite	conception	of	man	originated	in	Greek	philosophy,
which	conceived	of	the	relation	of	the	body	and	the	spirit	of	man	to
each	other	after	the	analogy	of	the	mutual	relation	between	the
material	universe	and	God.	It	was	thought	that,	just	as	the	latter	could
enter	into	communion	with	each	other	only	by	means	of	a	third
substance	or	an	intermediate	being,	so	the	former	could	enter	into
mutual	vital	relationships	only	by	means	of	a	third	or	intermediate
element,	namely,	the	soul.
13
Some	trichotomists	today	have	a	tendency	to	adopt	a	related	error
that	also	was	found	in	Greek	philosophy—the	idea	that	the	material
world,	including	our	bodies,	is	essentially	evil	and	something	to	be
escaped	from.	The	danger	is	to	say	that	the	realm	of	the	“spirit”	is
the	only	thing	that	is	really	important,	with	a	resultant	depreciation
of	the	value	of	our	physical	bodies	as	created	by	God	and	“very
good”	(Gen.	1:31),	and	therefore	as	something	to	be	presented	to
God	in	service	for	him	(Rom.	12:1).
Trichotomy	can	also	have	an	anti-intellectual	tendency.	If	we	think
of	the	spirit	as	that	element	of	us	that	relates	most	directly	to	God,
and	if	we	think	that	the	spirit	is	something	distinct	from	our
intellect,	emotions,	and	will,	we	can	easily	fall	into	an	anti-
intellectual	kind	of	Christianity	that	thinks	that	vigorous	academic
work	is	somehow	“unspiritual”—a	view	that	contradicts	Jesus’
command	to	love	God	with	all	our	“mind”	(Mark	12:30)	and	Paul’s
desire	to	“take	every	thought	captive	to	obey	Christ”	(2	Cor.	10:5).
Such	a	separation	of	the	realm	of	the	“spirit”	from	the	realm	of	the
intellect	can	too	easily	lead	to	a	neglect	of	sound	doctrine	or	of	the
need	for	extensive	teaching	and	knowledge	of	the	Word	of	God—in
contradiction	to	Paul’s	goal	that	he	would	work	among	God’s
people	to	further	both	their	“faith”	and	their	“knowledge	of	the
truth	which	accords	with	godliness”	(Titus	1:1;	cf.	v.	
9).	Similarly,
if	we	think	of	our	spirits	as	a	distinct	part	of	us	that	relates	most
directly	to	God,	we	can	easily	begin	to	neglect	the	role	of	Bible
study	and	mature	wisdom	in	making	decisions,	and	place	too	much
reliance	on	“spiritual”	discernment	in	the	realm	of	guidance,	an
emphasis	that	has,	through	the	history	of	the	church,	led	many
zealous	Christians	astray	into	false	teaching	and	unwise	practices.
Finally,	trichotomy	can	subtlely	influence	us	to	think	that	our
emotions	are	not	important	or	not	really	spiritual,	since	they	are
thought	to	be	part	of	our	soul,	not	part	of	out	spirit.
By	contrast,	if	we	hold	to	a	view	of	dichotomy	that	upholds	the
overall	unity	of	man,	it	will	be	much	easier	to	avoid	the	error	of
depreciating	the	value	of	our	intellects,	emotions,	or	physical
bodies.	We	will	not	think	of	our	bodies	as	inherently	evil	or
unimportant.	Such	a	view	of	dichotomy	within	unity	will	also	help
us	to	remember	that,	in	this	life,	there	is	a	continual	interaction
between	our	body	and	our	spirit,	and	that	they	affect	each	other:	“A
cheerful	heart	is	good	medicine,	but	a	downcast	spirit	dries	up	the
bones”	(Prov.	17:22).
14
Moreover,	a	healthy	emphasis	on	dichotomy	within	an	overall	unity
reminds	us	that	Christian	growth	must	include	all	aspects	of	our
lives.	We	are	continually	to	“cleanse	ourselves	from	every
defilement	of	body	and	spirit,	and	make	holiness	perfect	in	the	fear
of	God”	(2	Cor.	7:1).	We	are	to	be	“increasing	in	the	knowledge	of
God”	(Col.	1:10),	and	our	emotions	and	desires	are	to	conform
increasingly	to	the	“desires	of	the	Spirit”	(Gal.	5:17),	including	an
increase	in	godly	emotions	such	as	peace,	joy,	love,
15
	and	so	forth
(Gal.	5:22).
E.	Scripture	Does	Speak	of	an	Immaterial	Part	of	Man	
That	Can	Exist	Without	His	Body
A	number	of	non-Christian	philosophers	have	vigorously
challenged	the	idea	that	man	has	any	immaterial	part	at	all	such	as	a
soul	or	spirit.
16
	Perhaps	partially	in	response	to	such	criticism,
some	evangelical	theologians	have	seemed	hesitant	to	affirm
dichotomy	in	human	existence.
17
	They	have	instead	affirmed
repeatedly	that	the	Bible	views	man	as	a	unity—a	fact	which	is	true
but	should	not	be	used	to	deny	that	Scripture	also	views	man’s
unified	nature	as	made	up	of	two	distinct	elements.	Of	course,
philosophers	who	assume	that	there	is	no	spiritual	realm	beyond	the
reach	of	our	sense	perception,	and	who	then	go	from	that
assumption	to	argue	on	the	basis	of	our	sense	perception	that	there
is	no	God,	or	heaven,	or	angels,	or	demons,	will	use	similar
arguments	to	deny	the	existence	of	a	distinct	soul	within	human
beings.	The	perception	that	we	have	a	spirit	or	soul	belongs	to	the
invisible,	spiritual	realm,	and	is,	even	in	Christians,	generally	only	a
faint,	subjective	perception.	Therefore,	our	knowledge	of	the
existence	of	the	human	soul	must	be	primarily	based	on	Scripture,
in	which	God	clearly	testifies	to	the	existence	of	this	immaterial
aspect	of	our	beings.	The	fact	that	this	truth	about	our	existence
cannot	be	clearly	known	apart	from	the	testimony	of	Scripture
should	not	cause	us	to	shrink	from	affirming	it.
Scripture	is	very	clear	that	we	do	have	a	soul	that	is	distinct	from
our	physical	bodies,	which	not	only	can	function	somewhat
independently	of	our	ordinary	thought	processes	(1	Cor.	14:14;
Rom.	8:16),	but	also,	when	we	die,	is	able	to	go	on	consciously
acting	and	relating	to	God	apart	from	our	physical	bodies.	Jesus
told	the	dying	thief,	“Today	you	will	be	with	me	in	Paradise”	(Luke
23:43),	even	though,	for	both	of	them,	their	physical	bodies	were
soon	to	die.	When	Stephen	was	dying,	he	knew	he	would
immediately	pass	into	the	presence	of	the	Lord,	for	he	prayed,
“Lord	Jesus,	receive	my	
spirit”	
(Acts	7:59).	Paul	does	not	fear
death,	for	he	says,	“My	desire	is	to	depart	and	be	with	Christ,	for
that	is	far	better”	(Phil.	1:23).	He	contrasts	that	with	remaining	in
this	life,	which	he	calls	“to	remain	in	the	flesh”	(Phil.	1:24).	In	fact,
he	says,	“We	would	rather	be	
away	from	the	body	
and	at	home	with
the	Lord”	(2	Cor.	5:8),	indicating	a	confidence	that	if	he	were	to	die
physically	his	spirit	would	go	into	the	Lord’s	presence	and	there
enjoy	fellowship	with	the	Lord	at	once.	The	book	of	Revelation
reminds	us	that	“the	
souls	
of	those	who	had	been	slain	for	the	word
of	God	and	for	the	witness	they	had	borne”	(Rev.	6:9)	are	in	heaven
and	are	able	to	cry	out	to	God	to	bring	justice	on	the	earth	(Rev.
6:10;	cf.	also	20:4).
Therefore,	although	we	must	agree	that,	in	this	life,	Scripture	views
us	as	a	unity	in	which	body	and	spirit	act	together	as	one	person,
nonetheless,	there	will	be	a	time	between	our	death	and	the	day
Christ	returns	when	our	spirits	will	temporarily	exist	apart	from	our
physical	bodies.
18
F.	Where	Do	Our	Souls	Come	From?
What	is	the	origin	of	our	individual	souls?	Two	views	have	been
common	in	the	history	of	the	church.
Creationism	
is	the	view	that	God	creates	a	new	soul	for	each	person
and	sends	it	to	that	person’s	body	sometime	between	conception
and	birth.	
Traducianism,	
on	the	other	hand,	holds	that	the	soul	as
well	as	the	body	of	a	child	are	inherited	from	the	baby’s	mother	and
father	at	the	time	of	conception.	Both	views	have	had	numerous
defenders	in	the	history	of	the	church,	with	creationism	eventually
becoming	the	prevailing	view	in	the	Roman	Catholic	Church.
Luther	was	in	favor	of	traducianism,	while	Calvin	favored
creationism.	On	the	other	hand,	there	are	some	later	Calvinist
theologians	such	as	Jonathan	Edwards	and	A.	H.	Strong	who
favored	traducianism	(as	do	most	Lutherans	today).	Creationism
has	had	many	modern	evangelical	advocates	as	well.
19
There	is	one	other	popular	view	called	
pre-existentianism,	
namely,
that	the	souls	of	people	exist	in	heaven	long	before	their	bodies	are
conceived	in	the	wombs	of	their	mothers,	and	that	God	then	brings
the	soul	to	earth	to	be	joined	with	the	baby’s	body	as	he	or	she
grows	in	the	womb.	But	this	view	is	not	held	by	either	Roman
Catholic	or	Protestant	theologians	and	is	dangerously	akin	to	ideas
of	reincarnation	found	in	Eastern	religions.	Moreover,	there	is	no
support	for	this	view	in	Scripture.	Before	we	were	conceived	in	the
wombs	of	our	mothers,	we	simply	did	not	exist.	We	were	not.	Of
course,	God	looked	forward	into	the	future	and	knew	that	we	would
exist,	but	that	is	far	removed	from	saying	that	we	actually	did	exist
at	some	previous	time.	Such	an	idea	would	tend	to	make	us	view
this	present	life	as	transitional	or	unimportant	and	make	us	think	of
life	in	the	body	as	less	desirable	and	the	bearing	and	raising	of
children	as	less	important.
In	favor	of	traducianism	it	may	be	argued	that	God	created	man	in
his	own	image	(Gen.	1:27),	and	this	includes	a	likeness	to	God	in
the	amazing	ability	to	“create”	other	human	beings	like	ourselves.
Therefore,	just	as	the	rest	of	the	animal	and	plant	world	bears
descendants	“according	to	their	kinds”	(Gen.	1:24),	so	Adam	and
Eve	also	were	able	to	bear	children	who	were	like	themselves,	with
a	spiritual	nature	as	well	as	a	physical	body.	This	would	imply	that
the	spirits	or	souls	of	Adam	and	Eve’s	children	were	derived	from
Adam	and	Eve	themselves.	Moreover,	Scripture	sometimes	can
speak	of	descendants	being	somehow	present	in	the	body	of
someone	in	the	previous	generation,	as	when	the	author	of	Hebrews
says	that	when	Melchizedek	met	Abraham,	“Levi	.	.	.	was	still	in
the	loins	of	his	ancestor”	(Heb.	7:10).	Finally,	traducianism	could
explain	how	the	sins	of	the	parents	can	be	passed	on	to	the	children
without	making	God	directly	responsible	for	the	creation	of	a	soul
that	is	sinful	or	has	a	disposition	that	would	tend	toward	sin.
However,	the	biblical	arguments	in	favor	of	creationism	seem	to
speak	more	directly	to	the	issue	and	give	quite	strong	support	for
this	view.	First,	Psalm	127	says	that	“sons	are	a	heritage	from	the
L
ORD
,	the	fruit	of	the	womb	a	reward”	(Ps.	127:3).	This	indicates
that	not	only	the	soul,	but	also	the	entire	person	of	the	child,
including	his	or	her	body,	is	a	gift	from	God.	From	this	standpoint,
it	seems	strange	to	think	of	the	mother	and	father	as	being
responsible	by	themselves	for	any	aspect	of	the	child’s	existence.
Was	it	not	the	Lord	who,	David	says,	“knit	me	together	in	my
mother’s	womb”	(Ps.	139:13)?	Isaiah	says	that	God	gives	breath	to
the	people	on	the	earth	and	“spirit	to	those	who	walk	in	it”	(Isa.
42:5).
20
	Zechariah	talks	of	God	as	the	one	“who	forms	the	spirit	of
man	within	him”	(Zech.	12:1	NIV).	The	author	of	Hebrews	speaks
of	God	as	“the	Father	of	spirits”	(Heb.	12:9).	It	is	hard	to	escape	the
conclusion	from	these	passages	that	God	is	the	one	who	creates	our
spirits	or	souls.
Yet	we	must	be	cautious	in	drawing	conclusions	from	this	data.	Our
discussion	of	the	doctrine	of	God’s	providence	in	chapter	16
demonstrated	that	God	usually	acts	through	secondary	causes.	God
often	brings	about	the	results	he	seeks	through	the	actions	of	human
beings.	Certainly	this	is	so	in	the	conception	and	bearing	of
children.	Even	if	we	say	that	God	does	create	individual	souls	for
human	beings	before	they	are	born,	and	that	he	is	the	one	who
allows	children	to	be	conceived	and	born,	we	must	also	recognize
that	apart	from	the	physical	union	of	man	and	woman	in	the
conception	of	a	child,	no	children	are	born!	So	we	must	not	make
the	mistake	of	saying	that	the	father	and	mother	have	no	role	in	the
creation	of	the	child.	Even	if	we	say	that	God	is	the	“Father	of
spirits”	and	the	Creator	of	every	human	soul,	just	as	he	is	the	Maker
and	Creator	of	each	of	us,	we	must	still	also	affirm	that	God	carries
out	this	creative	activity	through	the	amazing	process	of	human
procreation.	Whether	God	involves	the	human	mother	and	father	to
some	degree	in	the	process	of	the	creation	of	a	soul	as	well	as	of	a
physical	body,	is	impossible	for	us	to	say.	It	is	something	that
occurs	in	the	invisible	realm	of	the	spirit,	which	we	do	not	have
information	about	except	from	Scripture.	And	on	this	point
Scripture	simply	does	not	give	us	enough	information	to	decide.
However,	the	arguments	listed	above	in	favor	of	traducianism	must
be	said	not	to	be	very	compelling	ones.	The	fact	that	Adam	and	Eve
bear	children	in	their	own	image	(see	Gen.	5:3)	could	suggest	that
children	somehow	inherit	a	soul	from	their	parents,	but	it	might	also
indicate	that	God	gives	an	individually	created	soul	to	the	child	and
that	that	soul	is	consistent	with	the	hereditary	traits	and	personality
characteristics	that	God	allowed	the	child	to	have	through	its
descent	from	its	parents.	The	idea	that	Levi	was	still	in	the	body	of
Abraham	(Heb.	7:10)	is	best	understood	in	a	representative,	or
figurative,	sense,	not	in	a	literal	sense.	Moreover,	it	is	not	simply
Levi’s	soul	that	is	talked	about	in	any	case,	but	Levi	himself,	as	a
whole	person,	including	body	and	soul—yet	Levi’s	body	was
certainly	not	physically	present	in	any	meaningful	sense	in
Abraham’s	body,	for	there	was	no	distinct	combination	of	genes	at
that	time	that	could	be	said	to	be	Levi	and	no	one	else.	Finally,
since	God	brings	about	events	in	the	physical	world	that	are
consistent	with	the	voluntary	activities	of	human	beings,	there	does
not	seem	to	be	any	real	theological	difficulty	in	saying	that	God
gives	each	child	a	human	soul	that	has	tendencies	to	sin	that	are
similar	to	the	tendencies	found	in	the	parents.	In	fact,	we	read	in	the
Ten	Commandments	of	God	“visiting	the	iniquity	of	the	fathers
upon	the	children	to	the	third	and	the	fourth	generation	of	those
who	hate	[him]”	(Ex.	20:5),	and,	quite	apart	from	the	question	of
the	human	soul,	we	know	from	human	experience	that	children	do
in	fact	tend	to	imitate	both	the	good	and	bad	traits	in	their	parents’
lives,	not	only	as	a	result	of	imitation	but	also	because	of	hereditary
disposition.	For	God	to	give	each	child	a	human	soul	that	accords
with	the	imitation	of	parents	that	we	see	in	the	lives	of	children
would	simply	be	an	indication	that	God,	in	creating	a	human	soul,
acts	consistently	with	the	way	he	acts	in	relation	to	the	human	race
in	other	matters	as	well.
In	conclusion,	it	seems	hard	to	avoid	the	testimony	of	Scripture	to
the	effect	that	God	actively	creates	each	human	soul,	just	as	he	is
active	in	all	the	events	of	his	creation.	But	the	degree	to	which	he
allows	the	use	of	intermediate	or	secondary	causes	(that	is,
inheritance	from	parents)	is	simply	not	explained	for	us	in
Scripture.	Therefore,	it	does	not	seem	profitable	for	us	to	spend	any
more	time	speculating	on	this	question.
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
In	your	own	Christian	experience,	are	you	aware	that	you	are	more	than
just	a	physical	body,	that	you	have	a	nonphysical	part	that	might	be
called	a	soul	or	spirit?	At	what	times	do	you	especially	become	aware	of
the	existence	of	your	spirit?	Can	you	describe	what	it	is	like	to	know	the
witness	of	the	Holy	Spirit	with	your	spirit	that	you	are	God’s	child	(Rom.
8:16),	or	to	have	in	your	spirit	a	consciousness	of	God’s	presence	(John
4:23;	Phil.	3:3),	or	to	be	troubled	in	your	spirit	(John	12:27;	13:21;	Acts
17:16;	2	Cor.	2:13),	or	to	have	your	spirit	worship	God	(Luke	1:47;	Ps.
103:1),	or	to	love	God	with	all	your	soul	(Mark	12:30)?	By	contrast,	are
there	times	when	you	feel	spiritually	dull	or	insensitive?	Do	you	think
that	one	aspect	of	Christian	growth	might	include	an	increasing
sensitivity	to	the	state	of	your	soul	or	spirit?
2
.	
Before	reading	this	chapter,	did	you	hold	to	dichotomy	or	trichotomy?
Now	what	is	your	view?	If	you	have	changed	to	an	acceptance	of
dichotomy	after	reading	this	chapter,	do	you	think	you	will	have	a	higher
appreciation	for	the	activities	of	your	body,	your	mind,	and	your
emotions?	If	you	hold	to	trichotomy,	how	can	you	guard	against	some	of
the	dangers	mentioned	in	this	chapter?
3
.	
When	you	are	praying	or	singing	praise	to	God,	is	it	enough	simply	to
sing	or	speak	words,	without	being	aware	of	what	you	are	saying?	Is	it
enough	to	be	aware	of	what	you	are	saying	without	really	meaning	it?	If
you	really	mean	the	words	with	your	whole	being,	then	what	aspects	of
your	person	would	be	involved	in	genuine	prayer	and	worship?	Do	you
think	you	tend	to	neglect	one	or	another	aspect	at	times?
4
.	
Since	Scripture	encourages	us	to	grow	in	holiness	in	our	bodies	as	well
as	our	spirits	(2	Cor.	7:1),	what	specifically	would	it	mean	for	you	to	be
more	obedient	to	that	command?
SPECIAL	TERMS
creationism
	
	
	
	
	
spirit
dichotomy
	
	
	
	
	
traducianism
monism
	
	
	
	
	
trichotomy
soul
	
	
	
	
	
	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the
bibliography	to	chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be
found	in	
Appendix	4
.)
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92			Litton,	113–16,	122–25
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1875–76			Pope,	1:435–36
1892–94			Miley,	1:397–403
1940			Wiley,	2:15–19
1960			Purkiser,	215–20
3.			Baptist
1887			Boyce,	194–212
1907			Strong,	483–513
1917			Mullins,	256–57,	262–64
1983–85			Erickson,	519–40
4.			Dispensational
1947			Chafer,	2:144–99
1949			Thiessen,	158–67
1986			Ryrie,	193–200
5.			Lutheran
1917–24			Pieper,	1:94,	476–77
1934			Mueller,	58,	184
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1871–73			Hodge,	2:42–77,	78–91
1878			Dabney,	317–21
1937–66			Murray,	
CW,	
2:23–33
1938			Berkhof,	191–201
1962			Buswell,	1:237–52
7.			Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988–92			Williams,	1:208–14
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955			Ott,	96–101
2.			Roman	Catholic:	Post-Vatican	II
1980			McBrien	(no	explicit	treatment)
Other	Works
Note:	Several	of	the	books	listed	in	the	bibliography	for	chapter	21,	on	the
creation	of	man	in	the	image	of	God,	also	have	sections	on	the	essential
nature	of	man	and	the	origin	of	the	soul.
Colwell,	J.	E.	“Anthropology.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	28–30.
Cooper,	John	W.	
Body,	Soul,	and	Life	Everlasting:	Biblical	Anthropology
and	the	Monism-Dualism	Debate.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1989.
Delitzsch,	F.	
A	System	of	Biblical	Psychology.	
Trans.	by	R.	E.	Wallis.	2d
ed.	Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1966.
Gundry,	Robert	H.	
Sōma	in	Biblical	Theology	With	Emphasis	on	Pauline
Anthropology.	
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1987.
Heard,	J.	B.	
The	Tripartite	Nature	of	Man.	
5th	ed.	Edinburgh:	T.	&	T.
Clark,	1882.
Hoekema,	Anthony	A.	“The	Whole	Person.”	In	
Created	in	God’s	Image.
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	and	Exeter:	Paternoster,	1986,	pp.	203–26.
Ladd,	George	Eldon.	“The	Pauline	Psychology.”	In	
A	Theology	of	the
New	Testament.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1974,	pp.	457–78.
Laidlaw,	John.	
The	Bible	Doctrine	of	Man.	
2d	ed.	Edinburgh:	T.	&	T.
Clark,	1905.
McDonald,	H.	D.	“Man,	Doctrine	of.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	676–80.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
2	Corinthians	7:1:	
Since	we	have	these	promises,	beloved,	let	us	cleanse
ourselves	from	every	defilement	of	body	and	spirit,	and	make	holiness	perfect
in	the	fear	of	God.
HYMN
“Be	Still,	My	Soul”
Be	still,	my	soul:	the	Lord	is	on	thy	side;
Bear	patiently	the	cross	of	grief	or	pain;
Leave	to	thy	God	to	order	and	provide;
In	ev’ry	change	he	faithful	will	remain.
Be	still,	my	soul:	thy	best,	thy	heav’nly	friend
Through	thorny	ways	leads	to	a	joyful	end.
Be	still,	my	soul:	thy	God	doth	undertake
To	guide	the	future	as	he	has	the	past.
Thy	hope,	thy	confidence	let	nothing	shake;
All	now	mysterious	shall	be	bright	at	last.
Be	still,	my	soul:	the	waves	and	winds	still	know
His	voice	who	ruled	them	while	he	dwelt	below.
Be	still,	my	soul:	when	dearest	friends	depart,
And	all	is	darkened	in	the	vale	of	tears,
Then	shalt	thou	better	know	his	love,	his	heart,
Who	comes	to	soothe	thy	sorrow	and	thy	fears.
Be	still,	my	soul:	thy	Jesus	can	repay
From	his	own	fullness	all	he	takes	away.
Be	still,	my	soul:	the	hour	is	hast’ning	on
When	we	shall	be	forever	with	the	Lord,
When	disappointment,	grief,	and	fear	are	gone,
Sorrow	forgot,	love’s	purest	joys	restored.
Be	still,	my	soul:	when	change	and	tears	are	past,
All	safe	and	blessed	we	shall	meet	at	last.
AUTHOR:	KATHARINA	VON	SCHLEGEL,	BORN	1697
NOTES
1
For	a	defense	of	trichotomy,	see	Franz	Delitzsch,	
A	System	of	Biblical	Psychology,	
trans.	R.	E.	Wallis,	2d	ed.	(Grand	Rapids:
Baker,	1966).
2
For	further	information,	see	Millard	Erickson,	
Christian	Theology,	
pp.	524–27,	and	his	notes	regarding	the	view	of	J.	A.	T.
Robinson.
3
See	Louis	Berkhof,	
Systematic	Theology,	
pp.	191–92,	for	a	survey	of	views	held	in	the	history	of	the	church.
4
Throughout	this	chapter	it	is	important	to	keep	in	mind	that	several	recent	Bible	translations	(especially	the	NIV)	do	not
consistently	translate	the	Hebrew	and	Greek	terms	noted	above	as	“soul”	and	“spirit,”	but	sometimes	substitute	other	terms	such
as	“life,”	“mind,”	“heart,”	or	“person.”	The	RSV,	which	I	quote	unless	another	version	is	specified,	tends	to	be	more	literal	in
translating	these	words	in	most	cases.
In	certain	contexts	these	terms	can	of	course	be	used	to	refer	to	the	person’s	life	or	to	the	whole	person,	but	they	are	also	used
many	times	to	refer	to	a	distinct	part	of	a	person’s	nature	(see	BDB,	pp.	659–61,	924–25;	and	BAGD,	pp.	674–75,	893–94,	for
many	examples).
5
George	Ladd,	
A	Theology	of	the	New	Testament	
(Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1974),	says	that	in	the	Old	Testament	neither	soul	nor
spirit	“is	conceived	of	as	a	part	of	man	capable	of	surviving	the	death	of	
basar	
[flesh]”	(p.	
459).	This	statement	is	not	accurate	in
the	light	of	the	Old	Testament	verses	just	cited	in	this	paragraph.	Ladd’s	analysis	in	this	section	is	heavily	dependent	on	the	work
of	W.	D.	Stacey,	
The	Pauline	View	of	Man	
(London:	Macmillan,	1956),	whom	Ladd	cites	fourteen	times	on	pp.	458–59.	Yet
Stacey	himself	thinks	that	death	means	extinction	for	human	beings	(Ladd,	p.	
463).	Ladd	also	notes	that	Rudolf	Bultmann
vigorously	denied	that	man	has	an	invisible	soul	or	spirit,	but	Ladd	himself	rejects	Bultmann’s	view	when	dealing	with	the	New
Testament	data	(see	p.	
460,	n.	17,	and	p.	
464).
6
The	verse	is	perhaps	better	translated,	“making	holiness	perfect	in	the	view	of	God,”	since	the	present	participle	
epitelountes
suggests	actions	simultaneous	with	the	main	verb	“cleanse,”	and	the	verse	thus	gives	the	idea	that	the	way	in	which	we	make
holiness	perfect	is	by	cleansing	ourselves	from	every	defilement	of	body	and	spirit	(grammatically	this	would	then	be	a	modal
participle).
7
The	“heart”	in	Scripture	is	an	expression	for	the	deepest,	inmost	thoughts	and	feelings	of	a	person	(see	Gen.	6:5,	6;	Lev.	19:17;
Pss.	14:1;	15:2;	37:4;	119:10;	Prov.	3:5;	Acts	2:37;	Rom.	2:5;	10:9;	1	Cor.	4:5;	14:25;	Heb.	4:12;	1	Peter	3:4;	Rev.	2:23;	et	al.).
8
Note	that	we	do	not	divide	joints	from	marrow,	for	joints	are	the	places	where	bones	meet,	not	the	places	where	joints	meet
marrow.
9
However,	it	is	much	more	characteristic	of	Paul’s	terminology	to	use	the	word	“spirit”	to	talk	about	our	relationship	to	God	in
worship	and	in	prayer.	Paul	does	not	use	the	word	“soul”	(Gk.	
psychē
)	very	frequently	(14	times,	compared	with	101	occurrences
in	the	New	Testament	as	a	whole),	and	when	he	does,	he	often	uses	it	simply	to	refer	to	a	person’s	“life,”	or	as	a	synonym	for	a
person	himself,	as	in	Rom.	9:3;	13:1;	16:4;	Phil.	2:30.	Use	of	the	word	“soul”	to	refer	to	the	non-physical	side	of	man	is	more
characteristic	of	the	gospels,	and	of	many	passages	in	the	Old	Testament.
10
See	
chapter	21
,	on	the	numerous	differences	between	human	beings	and	animals.
11
In	fact,	one	passage	even	speculates	about	“the	spirit	of	the	beast”	in	contrast	with	“the	spirit	of	man,”	(Eccl.	3:21),	but	the
context	(vv.	18–22)	is	one	expressing	a	worldly,	cynical	perspective	that	shows	the	vanity	of	life	and	argues	that	man	is	but	a	beast
(v.	
18):	in	the	overall	context	of	the	book	it	is	not	clear	that	this	is	something	the	author	is	encouraging	his	readers	to	believe.
12
Another	common	view	of	Rom.	8:10	is	that	Paul	is	not	referring	to	our	human	spirits	at	all	but	that	
pneuma	
here	means	the
Holy	Spirit,	as	in	vv.	9	and	11,	so	that	the	phrase	means,	“The	Spirit	is	life	[for	you]	because	of	righteousness”:	see	Douglas	Moo,
Romans	1–8,	
Wycliffe	Exegetical	Commentary	
(Chicago:	Moody,	1991),	p.	
525;	John	Murray,	
The	Epistle	to	the	Romans,	
NIC,	2
vols.	(Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1959,	1965),	1:289–91.
13
Berkhof,	
Systematic	Theology,	
p.	191.
14
Although	many	passages	of	Scripture	remind	us	that	our	bodies	and	our	spirits	do	interact	with	each	other	and	affect	one
another,	Scripture	does	not	tell	us	very	much	about	how	they	interact.	Berkhof	wisely	says,	“Body	and	soul	are	distinct
substances,	which	do	interact,	though	their	mode	of	interaction	escapes	human	scrutiny	and	remains	a	mystery	for	us”	(
Systematic
Theology,	
p.	195).
15
Some	people	will	object	that	love	is	not	merely	an	emotion,	because	it	shows	itself	in	actions	and	often	we	can	will	to	perform
loving	actions	toward	others	even	when	we	do	not	feel	love	toward	them.	I	agree	with	this,	but	there	certainly	is	an	emotional
component	to	love—we	can	feel	love	toward	others—and	we	would	lose	much	of	the	richness	of	our	relationship	to	God	and
others	if	we	tried	to	deny	this.
16
See	the	discussion	in	Millard	Erickson,	
Christian	Theology,	
pp.	530–36,	with	notes	to	some	literature.
17
See,	for	example,	G.	C.	Berkouwer,	
Man,	the	Image	of	God,	
pp.	194–233.
18
See	further	discussion	of	“the	intermediate	state”	between	death	and	Christ’s	return	in	
chapter	41
.
19
See,	for	example,	Berkhof,	
Systematic	Theology,	
pp.	196–201.
20
Instead	of	“spirit”	the	NIV	translates	“life,”	but	the	word	is	
rûach,	
the	common	Hebrew	word	for	“spirit.”
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	24
Sin
What	is	sin?	Where	did	it	come	from?	Do	we	inherit	a	sinful
nature	from	Adam?	Do	we	inherit	guilt	from	Adam?
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
A.	The	Definition	of	Sin
The	history	of	the	human	race	as	presented	in	Scripture	is	primarily	a	history
of	man	in	a	state	of	sin	and	rebellion	against	God	and	of	God’s	plan	of
redemption	to	bring	man	back	to	himself.	Therefore,	it	is	appropriate	now	to
consider	the	nature	of	the	sin	that	separates	man	from	God.
We	may	define	sin	as	follows:	
Sin	is	any	failure	to	conform	to	the	moral	law
of	God	in	act,	attitude,	or	nature.	
Sin	is	here	defined	in	relation	to	God	and
his	moral	law.	Sin	includes	not	only	individual	
acts	
such	as	stealing	or	lying
or	committing	murder,	but	also	
attitudes	
that	are	contrary	to	the	attitudes	God
requires	of	us.	We	see	this	already	in	the	Ten	Commandments,	which	not	only
prohibit	sinful	actions	but	also	wrong	attitudes:	“You	shall	not	covet	your
neighbor’s	house.	You	shall	not	covet	your	neighbor’s	wife,	or	his	manservant
or	maidservant,	his	ox	or	donkey,	or	anything	that	belongs	to	your	neighbor”
(Ex.	20:17	NIV).	Here	God	specifies	that	a	desire	to	steal	or	to	commit
adultery	is	also	sin	in	his	sight.	The	Sermon	on	the	Mount	also	prohibits	sinful
attitudes	such	as	anger	(Matt.	5:22)	or	lust	(Matt.	5:28).	Paul	lists	attitudes
such	as	jealousy,	anger,	and	selfishness	(Gal.	5:20)	as	things	that	are	works	of
the	flesh	opposed	to	the	desires	of	the	Spirit	(Gal.	5:20).	Therefore	a	life	that
is	pleasing	to	God	is	one	that	has	moral	purity	not	only	in	its	actions,	but	also
in	its	desires	of	heart.	In	fact,	the	greatest	commandment	of	all	requires	that
our	heart	be	filled	with	an	attitude	of	love	for	God:	“You	shall	love	the	Lord
your	God	with	all	your	heart,	and	with	all	your	soul,	and	with	all	your	mind,
and	with	all	your	strength”	(Mark	12:30).
The	definition	of	sin	given	above	specifies	that	sin	is	a	failure	to	conform	to
God’s	moral	law	not	only	in	
action	
and	in	
attitude,	
but	also	in	our	
moral
nature.	
Our	very	nature,	the	internal	character	that	is	the	essence	of	who	we
are	as	persons,	can	also	be	sinful.	Before	we	were	redeemed	by	Christ,	not
only	did	we	do	sinful	acts	and	have	sinful	attitudes,	we	were	also	sinners	by
nature.	So	Paul	can	say	that	“while	
we	were	yet	sinners	
Christ	died	for	us”
(Rom.	5:8),	or	that	previously	“we	were	
by	nature	
children	of	wrath,	like	the
rest	of	mankind”	(Eph.	2:3).	Even	while	asleep,	an	unbeliever,	though	not
committing	sinful	actions	or	actively	nurturing	sinful	attitudes,	is	still	a
“sinner”	in	God’s	sight;	he	or	she	still	has	a	sinful	nature	that	does	not
conform	to	God’s	moral	law.
Other	definitions	of	the	essential	character	of	sin	have	been	suggested.
Probably	the	most	common	definition	is	to	say	that	the	essence	of	sin	is
selfishness.
1
	However,	such	a	definition	is	unsatisfactory	because	(1)
Scripture	itself	does	not	define	sin	this	way.	(2)	Much	self-interest	is	good	and
approved	by	Scripture,	as	when	Jesus	commands	us	to	“lay	up	for	yourselves
treasures	in	heaven”	(Matt.	6:20),	or	when	we	seek	to	grow	in	sanctification
and	Christian	maturity	(1	Thess.	4:3),	or	even	when	we	come	to	God	through
Christ	for	salvation.	God	certainly	appeals	to	the	self-interest	of	sinful	people
when	he	says,	“Turn	back,	turn	back	from	your	evil	ways;	for	why	will	you
die,	O	house	of	Israel?”	(Ezek.	33:11).	To	define	the	essential	character	of	sin
as	selfishness	will	lead	many	people	to	think	that	they	should	abandon	all
desire	for	their	own	personal	benefit,	which	is	certainly	contrary	to	Scripture.
2
(3)	Much	sin	is	not	selfishness	in	the	ordinary	sense	of	the	term—people	can
show	
selfless	
devotion	to	a	false	religion	or	to	secular	and	humanistic
educational	or	political	goals	that	are	contrary	to	Scripture,	yet	these	would
not	be	due	to	“selfishness”	in	any	ordinary	sense	of	the	word.	Moreover,
hatred	of	God,	idolatry,	and	unbelief	are	not	generally	due	to	selfishness,	but
they	are	very	serious	sins.	(4)	Such	a	definition	could	suggest	that	there	was
wrongdoing	or	sinfulness	even	on	God’s	part,	since	God’s	highest	goal	is	to
seek	his	own	glory	(Isa.	42:8;	43:7,	21;	Eph.	1:12).
3
	But	such	a	conclusion	is
clearly	wrong.
It	is	far	better	to	define	sin	in	the	way	Scripture	does,	in	relationship	to	God’s
law	and	his	moral	character.	John	tells	us	that	“sin	is	lawlessness”	(1	John
3:4).	When	Paul	seeks	to	demonstrate	the	universal	sinfulness	of	mankind,	he
appeals	to	the	law	of	God,	whether	the	written	law	given	to	the	Jew	(Rom.
2:17–29)	or	the	unwritten	law	that	operates	in	the	consciences	of	Gentiles
who,	by	their	behavior,	“show	that	what	the	law	requires	is	written	on	their
hearts”	(Rom.	2:15).	In	each	case	their	sinfulness	is	demonstrated	by	their
lack	of	conformity	to	the	moral	law	of	God.
Finally,	we	should	note	that	this	definition	emphasizes	the	seriousness	of	sin.
We	realize	from	experience	that	sin	is	harmful	to	our	lives,	that	it	brings	pain
and	destructive	consequences	to	us	and	to	others	affected	by	it.	But	to	define
sin	as	failure	to	conform	to	the	moral	law	of	God,	is	to	say	that	sin	is	more
than	simply	painful	and	destructive—it	is	also	
wrong	
in	the	deepest	sense	of
the	word.	In	a	universe	created	by	God,	
sin	ought	not	to	be.	
Sin	is	directly
opposite	to	all	that	is	good	in	the	character	of	God,	and	just	as	God
necessarily	and	eternally	delights	in	himself	and	in	all	that	he	is,	so	God
necessarily	and	eternally	hates	sin.	It	is,	in	essence,	the	contradiction	of	the
excellence	of	his	moral	character.	It	contradicts	his	holiness,	and	he	must	hate
it.
B.	The	Origin	of	Sin
Where	did	sin	come	from?	How	did	it	come	into	the	universe?	First,	we	must
clearly	affirm	that	God	himself	did	not	sin,	and	God	is	not	to	be	blamed	for
sin.	It	was	man	who	sinned,	and	it	was	angels	who	sinned,	and	in	both	cases
they	did	so	by	willful,	voluntary	choice.	To	blame	God	for	sin	would	be
blasphemy	against	the	character	of	God.	“His	work	is	perfect;	for	all	his	ways
are	justice.	A	God	of	faithfulness	and	without	iniquity,	just	and	right	is	he”
(Deut.	32:4).	Abraham	asks	with	truth	and	force	in	his	words,	“Shall	not	the
Judge	of	all	the	earth	do	right?”	(Gen.	18:25).	And	Elihu	rightly	says,	“Far	be
it	from	God	that	he	should	do	wickedness,	and	from	the	Almighty	that	he
should	do	wrong”	(Job	34:10).	In	fact,	it	is	impossible	for	God	even	to	desire
to	do	wrong:	“God	cannot	be	tempted	with	evil	and	he	himself	tempts	no	one”
(James	1:13).
Yet,	on	the	other	hand,	we	must	guard	against	an	opposite	error:	it	would	be
wrong	for	us	to	say	there	is	an	eternally	existing	evil	power	in	the	universe
similar	to	or	equal	to	God	himself	in	power.	To	say	this	would	be	to	affirm
what	is	called	an	ultimate	“dualism”	in	the	universe,	the	existence	of	two
equally	ultimate	powers,	one	good	and	the	other	evil.
4
	Also,	we	must	never
think	that	sin	surprised	God	or	challenged	or	overcame	his	omnipotence	or	his
providential	control	over	the	universe.	Therefore,	even	though	we	must	never
say	that	God	himself	sinned	or	he	is	to	be	blamed	for	sin,	yet	we	must	also
affirm	that	the	God	who	“accomplishes	all	things	according	to	the	counsel	of
his	will”	(Eph.	1:11),	the	God	who	“does	according	to	his	will	in	the	host	of
heaven	and	among	the	inhabitants	of	the	earth;	and	none	can	stay	his	hand	or
say	to	him,	‘What	are	you	doing?’	”	(Dan.	4:35)	did	ordain	that	sin	would
come	into	the	world,	even	though	he	does	not	delight	in	it	and	even	though	he
ordained	that	it	would	come	about	through	the	voluntary	choices	of	moral
creatures.
5
Even	before	the	disobedience	of	Adam	and	Eve,	sin	was	present	in	the	angelic
world	with	the	fall	of	Satan	and	demons.
6
	But	with	respect	to	the	human	race,
the	first	sin	was	that	of	Adam	and	Eve	in	the	Garden	of	Eden	(Gen.	3:1–19).
Their	eating	of	the	fruit	of	the	tree	of	the	knowledge	of	good	and	evil	is	in
many	ways	typical	of	sin	generally.	First,	their	sin	struck	at	the	basis	for
knowledge,	for	it	gave	a	different	answer	to	the	question,	“What	is	true?”
Whereas	God	had	said	that	Adam	and	Eve	would	die	if	they	ate	from	the	tree
(Gen.	2:17),	the	serpent	said,	“You	will	not	die”	(Gen.	3:4).	Eve	decided	to
doubt	the	veracity	of	God’s	word	and	conduct	an	experiment	to	see	whether
God	spoke	truthfully.
Second,	their	sin	struck	at	the	basis	for	moral	standards,	for	it	gave	a	different
answer	to	the	question	“What	is	right?”	God	had	said	that	it	was	morally	right
for	Adam	and	Eve	not	to	eat	from	the	fruit	of	that	one	tree	(Gen.	2:17).	But
the	serpent	suggested	that	it	would	be	right	to	eat	of	the	fruit,	and	that	in
eating	it	Adam	and	Eve	would	become	“like	God”	(Gen.	3:5).	Eve	trusted	her
own	evaluation	of	what	was	right	and	what	would	be	good	for	her,	rather	than
allowing	God’s	words	to	define	right	and	wrong.	She	“saw	that	the	tree	was
good	for	food,	and	that	it	was	a	delight	to	the	eyes,	and	that	the	tree	was	to	be
desired	to	make	one	wise,”	and	therefore	she	“took	of	its	fruit	and	ate”	(Gen.
3:6).
Third,	their	sin	gave	a	different	answer	to	the	question,	“Who	am	I?”	The
correct	answer	was	that	Adam	and	Eve	were	creatures	of	God,	dependent	on
him	and	always	to	be	subordinate	to	him	as	their	Creator	and	Lord.	But	Eve,
and	then	Adam,	succumbed	to	the	temptation	to	“be	like	God”	(Gen.	3:5),
thus	attempting	to	put	themselves	in	the	place	of	God.
It	is	important	to	insist	on	the	historical	truthfulness	of	the	narrative	of	the	fall
of	Adam	and	Eve.	Just	as	the	account	of	the	creation	of	Adam	and	Eve	is	tied
in	with	the	rest	of	the	historical	narrative	in	the	book	of	Genesis,
7
	so	also	this
account	of	the	fall	of	man,	which	follows	the	history	of	man’s	creation,	is
presented	by	the	author	as	straightforward,	narrative	history.	Moreover,	the
New	Testament	authors	look	back	on	this	account	and	affirm	that	“sin	came
into	the	world	through	one	man”	(Rom.	5:12)	and	insist	that	“the	judgment
following	one	trespass	brought	condemnation”	(Rom.	5:16)	and	that	“the
serpent	deceived	Eve	by	his	cunning”	(2	Cor.	11:3;	cf.	1	Tim.	2:14).	The
serpent	was	no	doubt,	a	real,	physical	serpent,	but	one	that	was	talking
because	of	the	empowerment	of	Satan	speaking	through	it	(cf.	Gen.	3:15	with
Rom.	16:20;	also	Num.	22:28–30;	Rev.	12:9;	20:2).
Finally,	we	should	note	that	all	sin	is	ultimately	irrational.	It	really	did	not
make	sense	for	Satan	to	rebel	against	God	in	the	expectation	of	being	able	to
exalt	himself	above	God.	Nor	did	it	make	sense	for	Adam	and	Eve	to	think
that	there	could	be	any	gain	in	disobeying	the	words	of	their	Creator.	These
were	foolish	choices.	The	persistence	of	Satan	in	rebelling	against	God	even
today	is	still	a	foolish	choice,	as	is	the	decision	on	the	part	of	any	human
being	to	continue	in	a	state	of	rebellion	against	God.	It	is	not	the	wise	man	but
“the	fool”	who	“says	in	his	heart,	‘There	is	no	God’	”	(Ps.	14:1).	It	is	the
“fool”	in	the	book	of	Proverbs	who	recklessly	indulges	in	all	kinds	of	sins
(see	Prov.	10:23;	12:15;	14:7,	16;	15:5;	18:2;	et	al.).	Though	people
sometimes	persuade	themselves	that	they	have	good	reasons	for	sinning,
when	examined	in	the	cold	light	of	truth	on	the	last	day,	it	will	be	seen	in
every	case	that	sin	ultimately	just	does	not	make	sense.
C.	The	Doctrine	of	Inherited	Sin
8
How	does	the	sin	of	Adam	affect	us?	Scripture	teaches	that	we	inherit	sin
from	Adam	in	two	ways.
1.
	Inherited	Guilt:	We	Are	Counted	Guilty	Because	of	Adam’s	Sin.
	Paul
explains	the	effects	of	Adam’s	sin	in	the	following	way:	“Therefore	.	.	.	sin
came	into	the	world	through	one	man	and	death	through	sin,	and	so	death
spread	to	all	men	because	all	men	sinned”	(Rom.	5:12).	The	context	shows
that	Paul	is	not	talking	about	actual	sins	that	people	commit	every	day	of	their
lives,	for	the	entire	paragraph	(Rom.	5:12–21)	is	taken	up	with	the
comparison	between	Adam	and	Christ.	And	when	Paul	says,	“so	[Gk.	
houtōs,
“thus,	in	this	way”;	that	is,	through	Adam’s	sin]	death	spread	to	all	men
because	all	men	sinned,”	he	is	saying	that	through	the	sin	of	Adam	“all	men
sinned.”
9
This	idea,	that	“all	men	sinned”	means	that	God	thought	of	us	all	as	having
sinned	when	Adam	disobeyed,	is	further	indicated	by	the	next	two	verses,
where	Paul	says:
Sin	indeed	was	in	the	world	before	the	law	was	given,	but	sin	is	not
counted	where	there	is	no	law.	Yet	death	reigned	from	Adam	to
Moses,	even	over	those	whose	sins	were	not	like	the	transgression	of
Adam,	who	was	a	type	of	the	one	who	was	to	come.	(Rom.	5:13–14)
Here	Paul	points	out	that	from	the	time	of	Adam	to	the	time	of	Moses,	people
did	not	have	God’s	written	laws.	Though	their	sins	were	“not	counted”	(as
infractions	of	the	law),	they	still	died.	The	fact	that	they	died	is	very	good
proof	that	God	counted	people	guilty	on	the	basis	of	Adam’s	sin.
The	idea	that	God	counted	us	guilty	because	of	Adam’s	sin	is	further	affirmed
in	Romans	5:18–19:
Then	as	one	man’s	trespass	led	to	condemnation	for	all	men,	so	one
man’s	act	of	righteousness	leads	to	acquittal	and	life	for	all	men.	For
as	
by	one	man’s	disobedience	many	were	made	sinners,	
so	by	one
man’s	obedience	many	will	be	made	righteous.
Here	Paul	says	explicitly	that	through	the	trespass	of	one	man	“many	were
made	[Gk.	
katestathēsan,	
also	an	aorist	indicative	indicating	completed	past
action]	sinners.”	When	Adam	sinned,	God	thought	of	all	who	would	descend
from	Adam	as	sinners.	Though	we	did	not	yet	exist,	God,	looking	into	the
future	and	knowing	that	we	would	exist,	began	thinking	of	us	as	those	who
were	guilty	like	Adam.	This	is	also	consistent	with	Paul’s	statement	that
“while	we	were	yet	sinners	Christ	died	for	us”	(Rom.	5:8).	Of	course,	some	of
us	did	not	even	exist	when	Christ	died.	But	God	nevertheless	regarded	us	as
sinners	in	need	of	salvation.
The	conclusion	to	be	drawn	from	these	verses	is	that	all	members	of	the
human	race	were	represented	by	Adam	in	the	time	of	testing	in	the	Garden	of
Eden.	As	our	representative,	Adam	sinned,	and	God	counted	us	guilty	as	well
as	Adam.	(A	technical	term	that	is	sometimes	used	in	this	connection	is
impute,	
meaning	“to	think	of	as	belonging	to	someone,	and	therefore	to	cause
it	to	belong	to	that	person.”)	God	counted	Adam’s	guilt	as	belonging	to	us,
and	since	God	is	the	ultimate	judge	of	all	things	in	the	universe,	and	since	his
thoughts	are	always	true,	Adam’s	guilt	does	in	fact	belong	to	us.	God	rightly
imputed	Adam’s	guilt	to	us.
Sometimes	the	doctrine	of	inherited	sin	from	Adam	is	termed	the	doctrine	of
“original	sin.”	As	explained	above,
10
	I	have	not	used	this	expression.	If	this
term	is	used,	it	should	be	remembered	that	the	sin	spoken	of	does	not	refer	to
Adam’s	first	sin,	but	to	the	guilt	and	tendency	to	sin	with	which	we	are	born.
It	is	“original”	in	that	it	comes	from	Adam,	and	it	is	also	original	in	that	we
have	it	from	the	beginning	of	our	existence	as	persons,	but	it	is	still	our	sin,
not	Adam’s	sin,	that	is	meant.	Parallel	to	the	phrase	“original	sin”	is	the
phrase	“original	guilt.”	This	is	that	aspect	of	inherited	sin	from	Adam	that	we
have	been	discussing	above,	namely,	the	idea	that	we	inherit	the	guilt	from
Adam.
When	we	first	confront	the	idea	that	we	have	been	counted	guilty	because	of
Adam’s	sin,	our	tendency	is	to	protest	because	it	seems	unfair.	We	did	not
actually	decide	to	sin,	did	we?	Then	how	can	we	be	counted	guilty?	Is	it	just
for	God	to	act	this	way?
In	response,	three	things	may	be	said:	(1)	Everyone	who	protests	that	this	is
unfair	has	also	voluntarily	committed	many	actual	sins	for	which	God	also
holds	us	guilty.	These	will	constitute	the	primary	basis	of	our	judgment	on	the
last	day,	for	God	“will	render	to	every	man	
according	to	his	works”	
(Rom.
2:6),	and	“the	wrongdoer	will	be	paid	back	
for	the	wrong	he	has	done”	
(Col.
3:25).	(2)	Moreover,	some	have	argued,	“If	any	one	of	us	were	in	Adam’s
place,	we	also	would	have	sinned	as	he	did,	and	our	subsequent	rebellion
against	God	demonstrates	that.”	I	think	this	is	probably	true,	but	it	does	not
seem	to	be	a	conclusive	argument,	for	it	assumes	too	much	about	what	would
or	would	not	happen.	Such	uncertainty	may	not	help	very	much	to	lessen
someone’s	sense	of	unfairness.
(3)	The	most	persuasive	answer	to	the	objection	is	to	point	out	that	if	we	think
it	is	unfair	for	us	to	be	represented	by	Adam,	then	we	should	also	think	it	is
unfair	for	us	to	be	represented	by	Christ	and	to	have	his	righteousness
imputed	to	us	by	God.	For	the	procedure	that	God	used	was	just	the	same,	and
that	is	exactly	Paul’s	point	in	Romans	5:12–21:	“As	by	one	man’s
disobedience	many	were	made	sinners,	so	by	one	man’s	obedience	many	will
be	made	righteous”	(Rom.	5:19).	Adam,	our	first	representative	sinned—and
God	counted	us	guilty.	But	Christ,	the	representative	of	all	who	believe	in
him,	obeyed	God	perfectly—and	God	counted	us	righteous.	That	is	simply	the
way	in	which	God	set	up	the	human	race	to	work.	God	regards	the	human
race	as	an	organic	whole,	a	unity,	represented	by	Adam	as	its	head.	And	God
also	thinks	of	the	new	race	of	Christians,	those	who	are	redeemed	by	Christ,
as	an	organic	whole,	a	unity	represented	by	Christ	as	head	of	his	people.
Not	all	evangelical	theologians,	however,	agree	that	we	are	counted	guilty
because	of	Adam’s	sin.	Some,	especially	Arminian	theologians,	think	this	to
be	unfair	of	God	and	do	not	believe	that	it	is	taught	in	Romans	5.
11
	However,
evangelicals	of	all	persuasions	do	agree	that	we	receive	a	sinful	disposition	or
a	tendency	to	sin	as	an	inheritance	from	Adam,	a	subject	we	shall	now
consider.
2.	Inherited	Corruption:	We	Have	a	Sinful	Nature	Because	of	Adam’s
Sin.
	In	addition	to	the	legal	guilt	that	God	imputes	to	us	because	of	Adam’s
sin,	we	also	inherit	a	sinful	nature	because	of	Adam’s	sin.	This	inherited
sinful	nature	is	sometimes	simply	called	“original	sin”	and	sometimes	more
precisely	called	“original	pollution.”	I	have	used	instead	the	term	“inherited
corruption”	because	it	seems	to	express	more	clearly	the	specific	idea	in	view.
David	says,	“Behold,	I	was	brought	forth	in	iniquity,	and	in	sin	did	my	mother
conceive	me”	(Ps.	51:5).	Some	have	mistakenly	thought	that	the	sin	of
David’s	mother	is	in	view	here,	but	this	is	incorrect,	for	the	entire	context	has
nothing	to	do	with	David’s	mother.	David	is	confessing	his	own	personal	sin
throughout	this	section.	He	says:
Have	mercy	on	
me,	
O	God
.	.	.	blot	out	
my	
transgressions.
Wash	
me	
thoroughly	from	
my	
iniquity
.	.	.	I	know	
my	
transgressions.
.	.	.	Against	you	.	.	.	have	
I	
sinned.	(Ps.	51:1–4)
David	is	so	overwhelmed	with	the	consciousness	of	his	own	sin	that	as	he
looks	back	on	his	life	he	realizes	that	he	was	sinful	from	the	beginning.	As	far
back	as	he	can	think	of	himself,	he	realizes	that	he	has	had	a	sinful	nature.	In
fact,	when	he	was	born	or	“brought	forth”	from	his	mother’s	womb,	he	was
“
brought	forth	
in	iniquity”	(Ps.	51:5).	Moreover,	even	before	he	was	born,	he
had	a	sinful	disposition:	he	affirms	that	at	the	moment	of	conception	he	had	a
sinful	nature,	for	“in	sin	did	my	mother	
conceive	
me”	(Ps.	51:5).	Here	is	a
strong	statement	of	the	inherent	tendency	to	sin	that	attaches	to	our	lives	from
the	very	beginning.	A	similar	idea	is	affirmed	in	Psalm	58:3,	“The	wicked	go
astray	from	the	womb,	they	err	from	their	birth,	speaking	lies.”
Therefore,	our	nature	includes	a	disposition	to	sin	so	that	Paul	can	affirm	that
before	we	were	Christians	“we	were	by	nature	children	of	wrath,	like	the	rest
of	mankind”	(Eph.	2:3).	Anyone	who	has	raised	children	can	give	experiential
testimony	to	the	fact	that	we	are	all	born	with	a	tendency	to	sin.	Children	do
not	have	to	be	taught	how	to	do	wrong;	they	discover	that	by	themselves.
What	we	have	to	do	as	parents	is	to	teach	them	how	to	do	right,	to	“bring
them	up	in	the	discipline	and	instruction	of	the	Lord”	(Eph.	6:4).
This	inherited	tendency	to	sin	does	not	mean	that	human	beings	are	all	as	bad
as	they	could	be.	The	constraints	of	civil	law,	the	expectations	of	family	and
society,	and	the	conviction	of	human	conscience	(Rom.	2:14–15)	all	provide
restraining	influences	on	the	sinful	tendencies	in	our	hearts.	Therefore,	by
God’s	“common	grace”	(that	is,	by	his	undeserved	favor	that	is	given	to	all
human	beings),	people	have	been	able	to	do	much	good	in	the	areas	of
education,	the	development	of	civilization,	scientific	and	technological
progress,	the	development	of	beauty	and	skill	in	the	arts,	the	development	of
just	laws,	and	general	acts	of	human	benevolence	and	kindness	to	others.
12
	In
fact,	the	more	Christian	influence	there	is	in	a	society	in	general,	the	more
clearly	the	influence	of	“common	grace”	will	be	seen	in	the	lives	of
unbelievers	as	well.	But	in	spite	of	the	ability	to	do	good	in	many	senses	of
that	word,	our	inherited	corruption,	our	tendency	to	sin,	which	we	received
from	Adam,	means	that	as	far	as	God	is	concerned	we	are	not	able	to	do
anything	that	pleases	him.	This	may	be	seen	in	two	ways:
a.	In	Our	Natures	We	Totally	Lack	Spiritual	Good	Before	God:
	It	is	not
just	that	some	parts	of	us	are	sinful	and	others	are	pure.	Rather,	every	part	of
our	being	is	affected	by	sin—our	intellects,	our	emotions	and	desires,	our
hearts	(the	center	of	our	desires	and	decision-making	processes),	our	goals
and	motives,	and	even	our	physical	bodies.	Paul	says,	“I	know	that	nothing
good	dwells	within	me,	that	is,	in	my	flesh”	(Rom.	7:18),	and,	“to	the	corrupt
and	unbelieving	nothing	is	pure;	their	very	minds	and	consciences	are
corrupted”	(Titus	1:15).	Moreover,	Jeremiah	tells	us	that	“the	heart	is
deceitful	above	all	things,	and	desperately	corrupt;	who	can	understand	it?”
(Jer.	17:9).	In	these	passages	Scripture	is	not	denying	that	unbelievers	can	do
good	in	human	society	
in	some	senses.	
But	it	is	denying	that	they	can	do	any
spiritual	
good	or	be	good	
in	terms	of	a	relationship	with	God.	
Apart	from	the
work	of	Christ	in	our	lives,	we	are	like	all	other	unbelievers	who	are
“darkened	in	their	understanding,	alienated	from	the	life	of	God	because	of
the	ignorance	that	is	in	them,	due	to	their	hardness	of	heart”	(Eph.	4:18).
13
b.	In	Our	Actions	We	Are	Totally	Unable	to	Do	Spiritual	Good	Before
God:
	This	idea	is	related	to	the	previous	one.	Not	only	do	we	as	sinners	lack
any	spiritual	good	in	ourselves,	but	we	also	lack	the	ability	to	do	anything	that
will	in	itself	please	God	and	the	ability	to	come	to	God	in	our	own	strength.
Paul	says	that	“those	who	are	in	the	flesh	
cannot	please	God”	
(Rom.	8:8).
Moreover,	in	terms	of	bearing	fruit	for	God’s	kingdom	and	doing	what
pleases	him,	Jesus	says,	“Apart	from	me	you	can	do	nothing”	(John	15:5).	In
fact,	unbelievers	are	not	pleasing	to	God,	if	for	no	other	reason,	simply
because	their	actions	do	not	proceed	from	faith	in	God	or	from	love	to	him,
and	“without	faith	it	is	impossible	to	please	him”	(Heb.	11:6).	When	Paul’s
readers	were	unbelievers,	he	tells	them,	“You	were	dead	through	the
trespasses	and	sins	in	which	you	once	walked”	(Eph.	2:1–2).	Unbelievers	are
in	a	state	of	bondage	or	enslavement	to	sin,	because	“every	one	who	commits
sin	is	a	slave	to	sin”	(John	8:34).	Though	from	a	human	standpoint	people
might	be	able	to	do	much	good,	Isaiah	affirms	that	“all	our	righteous	deeds
are	like	a	polluted	garment”	(Isa.	64:6;	cf.	Rom.	3:9–20).	Unbelievers	are	not
even	able	to	understand	the	things	of	God	correctly,	for	the	“natural	man	does
not	receive	the	gifts	[lit.	‘things’]	of	the	Spirit	of	God,	for	they	are	folly	to
him,	and	he	is	not	able	to	understand	them	because	they	are	spiritually
discerned”	(1	Cor.	2:14	RSV	mg.).	Nor	can	we	come	to	God	in	our	own
power,	for	Jesus	says,	“No	one	can	come	to	me	unless	the	Father	who	sent	me
draws	him”	(John	6:44).
But	if	we	have	a	total	inability	to	do	any	spiritual	good	in	God’s	sight,	then	do
we	still	have	any	freedom	of	choice?	Certainly,	those	who	are	outside	of
Christ	do	still	make	voluntary	choices—that	is,	they	decide	what	they	want	to
do,	then	they	do	it.	In	this	sense	there	is	still	a	kind	of	“freedom”	in	the
choices	that	people	make.
14
	Yet	because	of	their	inability	to	do	good	and	to
escape	from	their	fundamental	rebellion	against	God	and	their	fundamental
preference	for	sin,	unbelievers	do	not	have	freedom	in	the	most	important
sense	of	freedom—that	is,	the	freedom	to	do	right,	and	to	do	what	is	pleasing
to	God.
The	application	to	our	lives	is	quite	evident:	if	God	gives	anyone	a	desire	to
repent	and	trust	in	Christ,	he	or	she	should	not	delay	and	should	not	harden
his	or	her	heart	(cf.	Heb.	3:7–8;	12:17).	This	ability	to	repent	and	desire	to
trust	in	God	is	not	naturally	ours	but	is	given	by	the	prompting	of	the	Holy
Spirit,	and	it	will	not	last	forever.	“Today,	when	you	hear	his	voice,	do	not
harden	your	hearts”	(Heb.	3:15).
D.	Actual	Sins	in	Our	Lives
1.
	All	People	Are	Sinful	Before	God.
	Scripture	in	many	places	testifies	to
the	universal	sinfulness	of	mankind.	“They	have	all	gone	astray,	they	are	all
alike	corrupt;	there	is	none	that	does	good,	no,	not	one”	(Ps.	14:3).	David
says,	“No	man	living	is	righteous	before	you”	(Ps.	143:2).	And	Solomon	says,
“There	is	no	man	who	does	not	sin”	(1	Kings	8:46;	cf.	Prov.	20:9).
In	the	New	Testament,	Paul	has	an	extensive	argument	in	Romans	1:18–3:20
showing	that	all	people,	both	Jews	and	Greeks,	stand	guilty	before	God.	He
says,	“All	men,	both	Jews	and	Greeks,	are	under	the	power	of	sin,	as	it	is
written:	‘None	is	righteous,	no,	not	one’	”	(Rom.	3:9–10).	He	is	certain	that
“all	have	sinned	and	fall	short	of	the	glory	of	God”	(Rom.	3:23).	James,	the
Lord’s	brother,	admits,	“We	all	make	many	mistakes”	(James	3:2),	and	if	he,
as	a	leader	and	an	apostle
15
	in	the	early	church,	could	admit	that	he	made
many	mistakes,	then	we	also	should	be	willing	to	admit	that	of	ourselves.
John,	the	beloved	disciple,	who	was	especially	close	to	Jesus,	said:
If	we	say	we	have	no	sin,	we	deceive	ourselves,	and	the	truth	is	not	in
us.	If	we	confess	our	sins,	he	is	faithful	and	just,	and	will	forgive	our
sins	and	cleanse	us	from	all	unrighteousness.	If	we	say	we	have	not
sinned,	we	make	him	a	liar,	and	his	word	is	not	in	us.	(1	John	1:8–10)
16
2.	Does	Our	Ability	Limit	Our	Responsibility?
	Pelagius,	a	popular
Christian	teacher	active	in	Rome	about	A.D.	383–410	and	then	later	(until
A.D.	424)	in	Palestine,	taught	that	God	holds	man	responsible	only	for	those
things	that	man	is	
able	
to	do.	Since	God	warns	us	to	do	good,	therefore,	we
must	have	the	ability	to	do	the	good	that	God	commands.	The	Pelagian
position	rejects	the	doctrine	of	“inherited	sin”	(or	“original	sin”)	and
maintains	that	sin	consists	only	in	separate	sinful	acts.
17
However,	the	idea	that	we	are	responsible	before	God	only	for	what	we	are
able	to	do	is	contrary	to	the	testimony	of	Scripture,	which	affirms	both	that
we	“were	
dead	
through	the	trespasses	and	sins”	in	which	we	once	walked
(Eph.	2:1),	and	thus	unable	to	do	any	spiritual	good,	and	also	that	we	are	all
guilty	before	God.	Moreover,	if	our	responsibility	before	God	were	limited	by
our	ability,	then	extremely	hardened	sinners,	who	are	in	great	bondage	to	sin,
could	be	less	guilty	before	God	than	mature	Christians	who	were	striving
daily	to	obey	him.	And	Satan	himself,	who	is	eternally	able	to	do	only	evil,
would	have	no	guilt	at	all—surely	an	incorrect	conclusion.
The	true	measure	of	our	responsibility	and	guilt	is	not	our	own	ability	to	obey
God,	but	rather	the	absolute	perfection	of	God’s	moral	law	and	his	own
holiness	(which	is	reflected	in	that	law).	“You,	therefore,	must	be	perfect,	as
your	heavenly	Father	is	perfect”	(Matt.	5:48).
3.	Are	Infants	Guilty	Before	They	Commit	Actual	Sins?
	Some	maintain
that	Scripture	teaches	an	“age	of	accountability”	before	which	young	children
are	not	held	responsible	for	sin	and	are	not	counted	guilty	before	God.
18
However,	the	passages	noted	above	in	Section	C	about	“inherited	sin”
indicate	that	even	before	birth	children	have	a	guilty	standing	before	God	and
a	sinful	nature	that	not	only	gives	them	a	tendency	to	sin	but	also	causes	God
to	view	them	as	“sinners.”	“Behold,	I	was	brought	forth	in	iniquity,	and	in	sin
did	my	mother	conceive	me”	(Ps.	51:5).	The	passages	that	speak	of	final
judgment	in	terms	of	actual	sinful	deeds	that	have	been	done	(e.g.,	Rom.	2:6–
11)	do	not	say	anything	about	the	basis	of	judgment	when	there	have	been	no
individual	actions	of	right	or	wrong,	as	with	children	dying	in	early	infancy.
In	such	cases	we	must	accept	the	Scriptures	that	talk	about	ourselves	as
having	a	sinful	nature	from	before	the	time	of	birth.	Furthermore,	we	must
realize	that	a	child’s	sinful	nature	manifests	itself	very	early,	certainly	within
the	first	two	years	of	a	child’s	life,	as	anyone	who	has	raised	children	can
affirm.	(David	says,	in	another	place,	“The	wicked	go	astray	
from	the	womb,
they	err	
from	their	birth,”	
Ps.	58:3.)
But	then	what	do	we	say	about	infants	who	die	before	they	are	old	enough	to
understand	and	believe	the	gospel?	Can	they	be	saved?
Here	we	must	say	that	if	such	infants	are	saved,	it	cannot	be	on	their	own
merits,	or	on	the	basis	of	their	own	righteousness	or	innocence,	but	it	must	be
entirely	on	the	basis	of	Christ’s	redemptive	work	and	regeneration	by	the
work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	within	them.	“There	is	one	God,	and	there	is	one
mediator	between	God	and	men,	the	man	Christ	Jesus”	(1	Tim.	2:5).	“Unless
one	is	born	anew,	he	cannot	see	the	kingdom	of	God”	(John	3:3).
Yet	it	certainly	is	possible	for	God	to	bring	regeneration	(that	is,	new	spiritual
life)	to	an	infant	even	before	he	or	she	is	born.	This	was	true	of	John	the
Baptist,	for	the	angel	Gabriel,	before	John	was	born,	said,	“He	will	be	filled
with	the	Holy	Spirit,	
even	from	his	mother’s	womb”	
(Luke	1:15).	We	might
say	that	John	the	Baptist	was	“born	again”	before	he	was	born!	There	is	a
similar	example	in	Psalm	22:10:	David	says,	“Since	my	mother	bore	me	you
have	been	my	God.”	It	is	clear,	therefore,	that	God	is	able	to	save	infants	in	an
unusual	way,	apart	from	their	hearing	and	understanding	the	gospel,	by
bringing	regeneration	to	them	very	early,	sometimes	even	before	birth.	This
regeneration	is	probably	also	followed	at	once	by	a	nascent,	intuitive
awareness	of	God	and	trust	in	him	at	an	extremely	early	age,	but	this	is
something	we	simply	cannot	understand.
19
We	must,	however,	affirm	very	clearly	that	this	is	not	the	usual	way	for	God
to	save	people.	Salvation	usually	occurs	when	someone	hears	and	understands
the	gospel	and	then	places	trust	in	Christ.	But	in	unusual	cases	like	John	the
Baptist,	God	brought	salvation	before	this	understanding.	And	this	leads	us	to
conclude	that	it	certainly	is	possible	that	God	would	also	do	this	where	he
knows	the	infant	will	die	before	hearing	the	gospel.
How	many	infants	does	God	save	in	this	way?	Scripture	does	not	tell	us,	so
we	simply	cannot	know.	Where	Scripture	is	silent,	it	is	unwise	for	us	to	make
definitive	pronouncements.	However,	we	should	recognize	that	it	is	God’s
frequent	pattern	throughout	Scripture	to	save	the	children	of	those	who
believe	in	him	(see	Gen.	7:1;	cf.	Heb.	11:7;	Josh.	2:18;	Ps.	103:17;	John	4:53;
Acts	2:39;	11:14(?);	16:31;	18:8;	1	Cor.	1:16;	7:14;	Titus	1:6).	These	passages
do	not	show	that	God	automatically	saves	the	children	of	all	believers	(for	we
all	know	of	children	of	godly	parents	who	have	grown	up	and	rejected	the
Lord,	and	Scripture	also	gives	such	examples	as	Esau	and	Absalom),	but	they
do	indicate	that	God’s	ordinary	pattern,	the	“normal”	or	expected	way	in
which	he	acts,	is	to	bring	the	children	of	believers	to	himself.	With	regard	to
believers’	children	who	die	very	young,	we	have	no	reason	to	think	that	it
would	be	otherwise.
Particularly	relevant	here	is	the	case	of	the	first	child	Bathsheba	bore	to	King
David.	When	the	infant	child	had	died,	David	said,	“
I	shall	go	to	him,	
but	he
will	not	return	to	me”	(2	Sam.	12:23).	David,	who	through	his	life	had	such
great	confidence	that	he	would	live	forever	in	the	Lord’s	presence	(see	Ps.
23:6,	and	many	of	David’s	psalms),	also	had	confidence	that	he	would	see	his
infant	son	again	when	he	died.	This	can	only	imply	that	he	would	be	with	his
son	in	the	presence	of	the	Lord	forever.
20
	This	passage,	together	with	the
others	mentioned	above,	should	be	of	similar	assurance	to	all	believers	who
have	lost	children	in	their	infancy,	that	they	will	one	day	see	them	again	in	the
glory	of	the	heavenly	kingdom.
Regarding	the	children	of	unbelievers	who	die	at	a	very	early	age	Scripture	is
silent.	We	simply	must	leave	that	matter	in	the	hands	of	God	and	trust	him	to
be	both	just	and	merciful.	If	they	are	saved,	it	will	not	be	on	the	basis	of	any
merit	of	their	own	or	any	innocence	that	we	might	presume	that	they	have.	If
they	are	saved,	it	will	be	on	the	basis	of	Christ’s	redeeming	work;	and	their
regeneration,	like	that	of	John	the	Baptist	before	he	was	born,	will	be	by
God’s	mercy	and	grace.	Salvation	is	always	because	of	his	mercy,	not	because
of	our	merits	(see	Rom.	9:14–18).	Scripture	does	not	allow	us	to	say	more
than	that.
4.	Are	There	Degrees	of	Sin?
	Are	some	sins	worse	than	others?	The	question
may	be	answered	either	yes	or	no,	depending	on	the	sense	in	which	it	is
intended.
a.	Legal	Guilt:
	In	terms	of	our	legal	standing	before	God,	any	one	sin,	even
what	may	seem	to	be	a	very	small	one,	makes	us	legally	guilty	before	God
and	therefore	worthy	of	eternal	punishment.	Adam	and	Eve	learned	this	in	the
Garden	of	Eden,	where	God	told	them	that	one	act	of	disobedience	would
result	in	the	penalty	of	death	(Gen.	2:17).	And	Paul	affirms	that	“the	judgment
following	one	trespass	brought	condemnation”	(Rom.	5:16).	This	one	sin
made	Adam	and	Eve	sinners	before	God,	no	longer	able	to	stand	in	his	holy
presence.
This	truth	remains	valid	through	the	history	of	the	human	race.	Paul	(quoting
Deut.	27:26)	affirms	it:	“Cursed	be	every	one	who	does	not	abide	by	
all
things	
written	in	the	book	of	the	law,	and	do	them”	(Gal.	3:10).	And	James
declares:
Whoever	keeps	the	whole	law	but	fails	
in	one	point	
has	become	guilty
of	all	of	it.	For	he	who	said,	“Do	not	commit	adultery,”	said	also,	“Do
not	kill.”	If	you	do	not	commit	adultery	but	do	kill,	you	have	become
a	transgressor	of	the	law.	(James	2:10–11)
21
Therefore,	in	terms	of	legal	guilt,	all	sins	are	equally	bad	because	they	make
us	legally	guilty	before	God	and	constitute	us	as	sinners.
b.	Results	in	Life	and	in	Relationship	With	God:
	On	the	other	hand,	some
sins	are	worse	than	others	in	that	they	have	more	harmful	consequences	in	our
lives	and	in	the	lives	of	others,	and,	in	terms	of	our	personal	relationship	to
God	as	Father,	they	arouse	his	displeasure	more	and	bring	more	serious
disruption	to	our	fellowship	with	him.
Scripture	sometimes	speaks	of	degrees	of	seriousness	of	sin.	When	Jesus
stood	before	Pontius	Pilate,	he	said,	“he	who	delivered	me	to	you	has	the
greater	sin”	
(John	19:11).	The	reference	is	apparently	to	Judas,	who	had
known	Jesus	intimately	for	three	years	and	yet	willfully	betrayed	him	to
death.	Though	Pilate	had	authority	over	Jesus	by	virtue	of	his	governmental
office	and	was	wrong	to	allow	an	innocent	man	to	be	condemned	to	death,	the
sin	of	Judas	was	far	“greater,”	probably	because	of	the	far	greater	knowledge
and	malice	connected	with	it.
When	God	showed	Ezekiel	visions	of	sins	in	the	temple	of	Jerusalem,	he	first
showed	Ezekiel	certain	things,	then	said,	“But	you	will	see	
still	greater
abominations”	(Ezek.	8:6).	Next	he	showed	Ezekiel	the	secret	sins	of	some	of
the	elders	of	Israel	and	said,	“You	will	see	
still	greater	
abominations	which
they	commit”	(Ezek.	8:13).	Then	the	Lord	showed	Ezekiel	a	picture	of
women	weeping	for	a	Babylonian	deity	and	said,	“Have	you	seen	this,	O	son
of	man?	You	will	see	
still	greater	
abominations	than	these”	(Ezek.	8:15).
Finally,	he	showed	Ezekiel	twenty-five	men	in	the	temple,	with	their	backs	to
the	Lord	and	worshiping	the	sun	instead.	Here	clearly	we	have	degrees	of
increasing	sin	and	hatefulness	before	God.
In	the	Sermon	of	the	Mount,	when	Jesus	says,	“Whoever	then	relaxes	one	of
the	least	of	these	commandments	
and	teaches	men	so,	shall	be	called	least	in
the	kingdom	of	heaven”	(Matt.	5:19),	he	implies	that	there	are	lesser	and
greater	commandments.	Similarly,	though	he	agrees	that	it	is	appropriate	to
give	a	tithe	even	on	the	household	spices	that	people	use,	he	pronounces	woes
on	the	Pharisees	for	neglecting	
“the	weightier	matters	of	the	law,	
justice	and
mercy	and	faith”	(Matt.	23:23).	In	both	cases	Jesus	distinguishes	between
lesser	and	greater	commandments,	thus	implying	that	some	sins	are	worse
than	other	sins	in	terms	of	God’s	own	evaluation	of	their	importance.
In	general,	we	may	say	that	some	sins	have	more	harmful	consequences	than
others	if	they	bring	more	dishonor	to	God	or	if	they	cause	more	harm	to
ourselves,	to	others,	or	to	the	church.	Moreover,	those	sins	that	are	done
willfully,	repeatedly,	and	knowingly,	with	a	calloused	heart,	are	more
displeasing	to	God	than	those	that	are	done	out	of	ignorance	and	are	not
repeated,	or	are	done	with	a	mixture	of	good	and	impure	motives	and	are
followed	by	remorse	and	repentance.	Thus	the	laws	that	God	gave	to	Moses
in	Leviticus	make	provisions	for	cases	where	people	sin	“unwittingly”	(Lev.
4:2,	13,	22).	Unintentional	sin	is	still	sin:	“If	any	one	sins,	doing	any	of	the
things	which	the	L
ORD
	has	commanded	not	to	be	done,	though	he	does	not
know	it,	yet	he	is	guilty	and	shall	bear	his	iniquity”	(Lev.	5:17).	Nonetheless,
the	penalties	required	and	the	degree	of	God’s	displeasure	that	results	from
the	sin	are	less	than	in	the	case	of	intentional	sin.
On	the	other	hand,	sins	committed	with	“a	high	hand,”	that	is,	with	arrogance
and	disdain	for	God’s	commandments,	were	viewed	very	seriously:	“But	the
person	who	does	anything	with	a	high	hand,	whether	he	is	native	or	a
sojourner,	reviles	the	L
ORD
,	and	that	person	shall	be	cut	off	from	among	his
people”	(Num.	15:30;	cf.	vv.	27–29).
We	can	readily	see	how	some	sins	have	much	more	harmful	consequences	for
ourselves	and	others	and	for	our	relationship	with	God.	If	I	were	to	covet	my
neighbor’s	car,	that	would	be	sin	before	God.	But	if	my	coveting	led	me	to
actually	steal	the	car,	that	would	be	more	serious	sin.	If	in	the	course	of
stealing	the	car	I	also	fought	with	my	neighbor	and	injured	him	or	recklessly
injured	someone	else	as	I	drove	the	car,	that	would	be	even	more	serious	sin.
Similarly,	if	a	new	Christian,	who	previously	had	a	tendency	to	lose	his
temper	and	get	into	fights,	begins	witnessing	to	his	unbelieving	friends	and,
one	day,	is	so	provoked	he	loses	his	temper	and	actually	strikes	someone,	that
is	certainly	sin	in	God’s	sight.	But	if	a	mature	pastor	or	other	prominent
Christian	leader	were	to	lose	his	temper	publicly	and	strike	someone,	that
would	be	even	more	serious	in	God’s	sight,	both	because	of	the	harm	that
would	come	to	the	reputation	of	the	gospel	and	because	those	in	leadership
positions	are	held	to	a	higher	standard	of	accountability	by	God:	“We	who
teach	shall	be	judged	with	greater	strictness”	(James	3:1;	cf.	Luke	12:48).	Our
conclusion,	then,	is	that	in	terms	of	
results	
and	in	terms	of	the	
degree	of	God’s
displeasure,	
some	sins	are	certainly	worse	than	others.
However,	the	distinction	between	degrees	of	seriousness	of	sin	does	not	imply
an	endorsement	of	the	Roman	Catholic	teaching	that	sins	can	be	put	into	the
two	categories	of	“venial”	and	“mortal.”
22
	In	Roman	Catholic	teaching,	a
venial	sin	can	be	forgiven,	but	often	after	punishments	in	this	life	or	in
Purgatory	(after	death,	but	before	entrance	into	heaven).	A	mortal	sin	is	a	sin
that	causes	spiritual	death	and	cannot	be	forgiven;	it	excludes	people	from	the
kingdom	of	God.
According	to	Scripture,	however,	all	sins	are	“mortal”	in	that	even	the
smallest	sin	makes	us	legally	guilty	before	God	and	worthy	of	eternal
punishment.	Yet	even	the	most	serious	of	sins	are	forgiven	when	one	comes	to
Christ	for	salvation	(note	the	combination	of	a	list	of	sins	that	exclude	from
the	kingdom	of	God	and	the	affirmation	that	the	Corinthians	who	had
committed	them	have	been	saved	by	Christ	in	1	Cor.	6:9–11).	Thus,	in	that
sense,	all	sins	are	“venial.”
23
	The	Roman	Catholic	separation	of	sins	into	the
category	of	“mortal”	and	“venial,”	calling	some	sins	(such	as	suicide)
“mortal,”	while	calling	others	(such	as	dishonesty,	anger,	or	lust)	“venial”	sins
can	very	easily	lead	either	to	carelessness	with	respect	to	some	sins	that
greatly	hinder	sanctification	and	effectiveness	in	the	Lord’s	work,	or,	with
respect	to	other	sins,	to	excessive	fear,	despair,	and	inability	ever	to	have
assurance	of	forgiveness.	And	we	should	realize	that	the	same	exact	action
(such	as	losing	one’s	temper	and	striking	someone	in	the	example	above)	can
be	more	or	less	serious,	depending	on	the	person	and	circumstances	involved.
It	is	much	better	simply	to	recognize	that	sins	can	vary	in	terms	of	their
results	and	in	terms	of	the	degree	to	which	they	disrupt	our	relationship	with
God	and	incur	his	displeasure,	and	leave	it	at	that.	Then	we	do	not	go	beyond
the	general	teaching	of	Scripture	on	this	subject.
The	distinction	that	Scripture	makes	in	degrees	of	sin	does	have	positive
value.	First,	it	helps	us	to	know	where	we	should	put	more	effort	in	our	own
attempts	to	grow	in	personal	holiness.	Second,	it	helps	us	to	decide	when	we
should	simply	overlook	a	minor	fault	in	a	friend	or	family	member	and	when
it	would	be	appropriate	to	talk	with	an	individual	about	some	evident	sin	(see
James	5:19–20).	Third,	it	may	help	us	decide	when	church	discipline	is
appropriate,	and	it	provides	an	answer	to	the	objection	that	is	sometimes
raised	against	exercising	church	discipline,	in	which	it	is	said	that	“we	are	all
guilty	of	sin,	so	we	have	no	business	meddling	in	anyone	else’s	life.”	Though
we	are	all	indeed	guilty	of	sin,	nonetheless,	there	are	some	sins	that	so
evidently	harm	the	church	and	relationships	within	the	church	that	they	must
be	dealt	with	directly.	Fourth,	this	distinction	may	also	help	us	realize	that
there	is	some	basis	for	civil	governments	to	have	laws	and	penalties
prohibiting	certain	kinds	of	wrongdoing	(such	as	murder	or	stealing),	but	not
other	kinds	of	wrongdoing	(such	as	anger,	jealousy,	greed,	or	selfish	use	of
one’s	possessions).	It	is	not	inconsistent	to	say	that	some	kinds	of	wrongdoing
require	civil	punishment	but	not	all	kinds	of	wrongdoing	require	it.
5.	What	Happens	When	a	Christian	Sins?
a.	Our	Legal	Standing	Before	God	Is	Unchanged:
	Though	this	subject
could	be	treated	later	in	relation	to	adoption	or	sanctification	within	the
Christian	life,	it	is	quite	appropriate	to	treat	it	at	this	point.
When	a	Christian	sins,	his	or	her	legal	standing	before	God	is	unchanged.	He
or	she	is	still	forgiven,	for	“there	is	therefore	now	no	condemnation	for	those
who	are	in	Christ	Jesus”	(Rom.	8:1).	Salvation	is	not	based	on	our	merits	but
is	a	free	gift	of	God	(Rom.	6:23),	and	Christ’s	death	certainly	paid	for	all	our
sins—past,	present,	and	future—Christ	died	“for	our	sins”	(1	Cor.	15:3),
without	distinction.	In	theological	terms,	we	still	keep	our	“justification.”
24
Moreover,	we	are	still	children	of	God	and	we	still	retain	our	membership	in
God’s	family.	In	the	same	epistle	in	which	John	says,	“If	we	say	we	have	no
sin,	we	deceive	ourselves,	and	the	truth	in	not	in	us”	(1	John	1:8),	he	also
reminds	his	readers,	“Beloved,	we	are	God’s	children	now”	(1	John	3:2).	The
fact	that	we	have	sin	remaining	in	our	lives	does	not	mean	that	we	lose	our
status	as	God’s	children.	In	theological	terms,	we	keep	our	“adoption.”
25
b.	Our	Fellowship	With	God	Is	Disrupted	and	Our	Christian	Life	Is
Damaged:
	When	we	sin,	even	though	God	does	not	cease	to	love	us,	he	is
displeased	with	us.	(Even	among	human	beings,	it	is	possible	to	love	someone
and	be	displeased	with	that	person	at	the	same	time,	as	any	parent	will	attest,
or	any	wife,	or	any	husband.)	Paul	tells	us	that	it	is	possible	for	Christians	to
“grieve	the	Holy	Spirit	of	God”	(Eph.	4:30);	when	we	sin,	we	cause	him
sorrow	and	he	is	displeased	with	us.	The	author	of	Hebrews	reminds	us	that
“the	Lord	disciplines	him	whom	he	loves”	(Heb.	12:6,	quoting	Prov.	3:11–
12),	and	that	“the	Father	of	spirits	.	.	.	disciplines	us	for	our	good,	that	we	may
share	his	holiness”	(Heb.	12:9–10).	When	we	disobey,	God	the	Father	is
grieved,	much	as	an	earthly	father	is	grieved	with	his	children’s	disobedience,
and	he	disciplines	us.	A	similar	theme	is	found	in	Revelation	3,	where	the
risen	Christ	speaks	from	heaven	to	the	church	of	Laodicea,	saying,	“Those
whom	I	
love,	
I	
reprove	
and	
chasten;	
so	be	zealous	and	repent”	(Rev.	3:19).
Here	again	love	and	reproof	of	sin	are	connected	in	the	same	statement.	Thus,
the	New	Testament	attests	to	the	displeasure	of	all	three	members	of	the
Trinity	when	Christians	sin.	(See	also	Isa.	59:1–2;	1	John	3:21.)
The	Westminster	Confession	of	Faith	wisely	says,	concerning	Christians,
Although	they	never	can	fall	from	the	state	of	justification,	yet	they
may,	by	their	sins,	fall	under	God’s	
fatherly	displeasure,	
and	not	have
the	light	of	His	countenance	restored	unto	them,	until	they	humble
themselves,	confess	their	sins,	beg	pardon,	and	renew	their	faith	and
repentance.	(
chap.	11,	sec.	5
)
Hebrews	12,	together	with	many	historical	examples	in	Scripture,	shows	that
God’s	
fatherly	displeasure	
often	leads	to	discipline	in	our	Christian	lives:	“He
disciplines	us	for	our	good,	that	we	may	share	his	holiness”	(Heb.	12:10).
Regarding	the	need	for	regular	confession	and	repentance	of	sin,	Jesus
reminds	us	that	we	are	to	pray	each	day,	“Forgive	us	our	sins,	as	we	also	have
forgiven	those	who	sin	against	us”	(Matt.	6:12,	author’s	translation;	cf.	1	John
1:9).
When	we	sin	as	Christians,	it	is	not	only	our	personal	relationship	with	God
that	is	disrupted.	Our	Christian	life	and	fruitfulness	in	ministry	are	also
damaged.	Jesus	warns	us,	“As	the	branch	cannot	bear	fruit	by	itself,	unless	it
abides	in	the	vine,	neither	can	you,	unless	you	abide	in	me”	(John	15:4).
When	we	stray	from	fellowship	with	Christ	because	of	sin	in	our	lives,	we
diminish	the	degree	to	which	we	are	abiding	in	Christ.
The	New	Testament	writers	frequently	speak	of	the	destructive	consequences
of	sin	in	the	lives	of	believers.	In	fact,	many	sections	of	the	epistles	are	taken
up	with	rebuking	and	discouraging	Christians	from	sin	that	they	are
committing.	Paul	says	that	if	Christians	yield	themselves	to	sin,	they
increasingly	become	“slaves”	of	sin	(Rom.	6:16),	whereas	God	wants
Christians	to	progress	upward	on	a	path	of	ever-increasing	righteousness	in
life.	If	our	goal	is	to	grow	in	increasing	fullness	of	life	until	the	day	we	die
and	pass	into	the	presence	of	God	in	heaven,	to	sin	is	to	do	an	about-face	and
begin	to	walk	downhill	away	from	the	goal	of	likeness	to	God;	it	is	to	go	in	a
direction	that	“leads	to	death”	(Rom.	6:16)	and	eternal	separation	from	God,
the	direction	from	which	we	were	rescued	when	we	became	Christians.
26
Peter	says	that	sinful	desires	that	remain	in	our	hearts	
“wage	war	
against	your
soul”	(1	Peter	2:11)—the	military	language	correctly	translates	Peter’s
expression	and	conveys	the	imagery	that	sinful	desires	within	us	are	like
soldiers	in	a	battle	and	their	target	is	our	spiritual	well-being.	To	give	in	to
such	sinful	desires,	to	nurture	and	cherish	them	in	our	hearts,	is	to	give	food,
shelter,	and	welcome	to	the	enemy’s	troops.	If	we	yield	to	the	desires	that
“wage	war”	against	our	souls,	we	will	inevitably	feel	some	loss	of	spiritual
strength,	some	diminution	of	spiritual	power,	some	loss	of	effectiveness	in	the
work	of	God’s	kingdom.
Moreover,	when	we	sin	as	Christians	we	suffer	a	loss	of	heavenly	reward.	A
person	who	has	built	on	the	work	of	the	church	not	with	gold,	silver,	and
precious	stones,	but	with	“wood,	hay,	stubble”	(1	Cor.	3:12)	will	have	his
work	“burned	up”	on	the	day	of	judgment	and	“he	will	suffer	loss,	though	he
himself	will	be	saved,	but	only	as	through	fire”	(1	Cor.	3:15).	Paul	realizes
that	“we	must	all	appear	before	the	judgment	seat	of	Christ,	so	that	each	one
may	receive	good	or	evil,	according	to	what	he	has	done	in	the	body”	(2	Cor.
5:10).	Paul	implies	that	there	are	degrees	of	reward	in	heaven,
27
	and	that	sin
has	negative	consequences	in	terms	of	loss	of	heavenly	reward.
c.	The	Danger	of	“Unconverted	Evangelicals”:
	While	a	genuine	Christian
who	sins	does	not	lose	his	or	her	justification	or	adoption	before	God	(see
above),	there	needs	to	be	a	clear	warning	that	mere	association	with	an
evangelical	church	and	outward	conformity	to	accepted	“Christian”	patterns
of	behavior	does	not	guarantee	salvation.	Particularly	in	societies	and	cultures
where	it	is	easy	(or	even	expected)	for	people	to	profess	to	be	Christians,
there	is	a	real	possibility	that	some	will	associate	with	the	church	who	are	not
genuinely	born	again.	If	such	people	then	become	more	and	more	disobedient
to	Christ	in	their	pattern	of	life,	they	should	not	be	lulled	into	complacency	by
assurances	that	they	still	have	justification	or	adoption	in	God’s	family.	A
consistent	pattern	of	disobedience	to	Christ	coupled	with	a	lack	of	the
elements	of	the	fruit	of	the	Holy	Spirit	such	as	love,	joy,	peace,	and	so	forth
(see	Gal.	5:22–23)	is	a	warning	signal	that	the	person	is	probably	not	a	true
Christian	inwardly,	that	there	probably	has	been	no	genuine	heart-faith	from
the	beginning	and	no	regenerating	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit.	Jesus	warns	that
he	will	say	to	some	who	have	prophesied,	cast	out	demons,	and	done	many
mighty	works	in	his	name,	“I	never	knew	you;	depart	from	me,	you	evildoers”
(Matt.	7:23).	And	John	tells	us	that	“he	who	says	‘I	know	him’	but	disobeys
his	commandments	is	a	liar,	and	the	truth	is	not	in	him”	(1	John	2:4;	here	John
speaks	of	a	persistent	pattern	of	life).	A	long-term	pattern	of	increasing
disobedience	to	Christ	should	be	taken	as	evidence	to	doubt	that	the	person	in
question	is	really	a	Christian	at	all.
6.	What	Is	the	Unpardonable	Sin?
	Several	passages	of	Scripture	speak
about	a	sin	that	will	not	be	forgiven.	Jesus	says:
Therefore	I	tell	you,	every	sin	and	blasphemy	will	be	forgiven	men,
but	the	blasphemy	against	the	Spirit	will	not	be	forgiven.	And
whoever	says	a	word	against	the	Son	of	man	will	be	forgiven;	but
whoever	speaks	against	the	Holy	Spirit	will	not	be	forgiven,	either	in
this	age	or	in	the	age	to	come.	(Matt.	12:31–32)
A	similar	statement	occurs	in	Mark	3:29–30,	where	Jesus	says	that	“whoever
blasphemes	against	the	Holy	Spirit	never	has	forgiveness”	(Mark	3:29;	cf.
Luke	12:10).	Similarly,	Hebrews	6	says:
For	it	is	impossible	to	restore	again	to	repentance	those	who	have
once	been	enlightened,	who	have	tasted	the	heavenly	gift,	and	have
become	partakers	of	the	Holy	Spirit,	and	have	tasted	the	goodness	of
the	word	of	God	and	the	powers	of	the	age	to	come,	if	they	then
commit	apostasy,	since	they	crucify	the	son	of	God	on	their	own
account	and	hold	him	up	to	contempt.	(Heb.	6:4–6;	cf.	10:26–27;	also
the	discussion	of	the	sin	“that	leads	to	death”	[NIV]	in	1	John	5:16–
17)
These	passages	could	be	talking	about	the	same	or	different	sins;	a	decision
about	this	will	have	to	be	made	from	an	examination	of	the	passages	in
context.
Several	different	views	of	this	sin	have	been	taken.
28
1.	Some	have	thought	that	it	was	a	sin	that	could	only	be	committed	while
Christ	was	on	earth.	But	Jesus’	statement	that	“every	sin	and	blasphemy	will
be	forgiven	men”	(Matt.	12:31)	is	so	general	that	it	seems	unwarranted	to	say
it	is	only	referring	to	something	that	could	only	happen	during	his	lifetime—
the	texts	in	question	do	not	specify	such	a	restriction.	Moreover,	Hebrews
6:4–6	is	speaking	of	apostasy	that	has	occurred	a	number	of	years	after	Jesus
returned	to	heaven.
2.	Some	have	held	that	the	sin	is	unbelief	that	continues	until	the	time	of
death;	therefore,	everyone	who	dies	in	unbelief	(or	at	least	everyone	who	has
heard	of	Christ	and	then	dies	in	unbelief)	has	committed	this	sin.	It	is	true,	of
course,	that	those	who	persist	in	unbelief	until	death	will	not	be	forgiven,	but
the	question	is	whether	that	fact	is	what	is	being	discussed	in	these	verses.	On
close	reading	of	the	verses,	that	explanation	does	not	seem	to	fit	the	language
of	the	texts	cited,	for	they	do	not	talk	of	unbelief	in	general	but	specifically	of
someone	who	“speaks	against	the	Holy	Spirit”	(Matt.	12:32),	“blasphemes
against	the	Holy	Spirit”	(Mark	3:29)	or	commits	“apostasy”	(Heb.	6:6).	They
have	in	view	a	specific	sin—willful	rejection	of	the	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit
and	speaking	evil	about	it,	or	willful	rejection	of	the	truth	of	Christ	and
holding	Christ	up	to	“contempt”	(Heb.	6:6).	Moreover,	the	idea	that	this	sin	is
unbelief	that	persists	until	death	does	not	fit	well	with	the	context	of	a	rebuke
to	the	Pharisees	for	what	they	were	saying	in	both	Matthew	and	Mark	(see
discussion	of	context	below).
3.	Some	hold	that	this	sin	is	serious	apostasy	by	genuine	believers,	and	that
only	those	who	are	truly	born	again	could	commit	this	sin.	They	base	their
view	on	their	understanding	of	the	nature	of	the	“apostasy”	that	is	mentioned
in	Hebrews	6:4–6	(that	it	is	a	rejection	of	Christ	and	loss	of	salvation	by	a	true
Christian).	But	that	does	not	seem	to	be	the	best	understanding	of	Hebrews	4–
6.
29
	Moreover,	though	this	view	could	perhaps	be	sustained	with	respect	to
Hebrews	6,	it	does	not	explain	blasphemy	against	the	Holy	Spirit	in	the
gospel	passages,	in	which	Jesus	is	responding	to	the	Pharisees’	hard-hearted
denial	of	the	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	through	him.
4.	A	fourth	possibility	is	that	this	sin	consists	of	unusually	malicious,	willful
rejection	and	slander	against	the	Holy	Spirit’s	work	attesting	to	Christ,	and
attributing	that	work	to	Satan.	A	closer	look	at	the	context	of	Jesus’	statement
in	Matthew	and	Mark	shows	that	Jesus	was	speaking	in	response	to	the
accusation	of	the	Pharisees	that	“it	is	only	by	Beelzebul,	the	prince	of
demons,	that	this	man	casts	out	demons”	(Matt.	12:24).	The	Pharisees	had
seen	Jesus’	works	repeatedly.	He	had	just	healed	a	blind	and	dumb	demoniac
so	that	he	could	see	and	speak	(Matt.	12:22).	The	people	were	amazed	and
were	following	Jesus	in	large	numbers,	and	the	Pharisees	themselves	had
repeatedly	seen	clear	demonstrations	of	the	amazing	power	of	the	Holy	Spirit
working	through	Jesus	to	bring	life	and	health	to	many	people.	But	the
Pharisees,	in	spite	of	clear	demonstrations	of	the	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in
front	of	their	eyes,	willfully	rejected	Jesus’	authority	and	his	teaching	and
attributed	it	to	the	devil.	Jesus	then	told	them	clearly	that	“no	city	or	house
divided	against	itself	will	stand;	and	if	Satan	casts	out	Satan,	he	is	divided
against	himself;	how	then	will	his	kingdom	stand?”	(Matt.	12:25–26).	So	it
was	irrational	and	foolish	for	the	Pharisees	to	attribute	Jesus’	exorcisms	to	the
power	of	Satan—it	was	a	classic,	willful,	malicious	lie.
After	explaining,	“If	it	is	
by	the	Spirit	of	God	
that	I	cast	out	demons,	then	the
kingdom	of	God	has	come	upon	you”	(Matt.	12:28),	Jesus	declares	this
warning:	“He	who	is	not	with	me	is	against	me,	and	he	who	does	not	gather
with	me	scatters”	(Matt.	12:30).	He	warns	that	there	is	no	neutrality,	and
certainly	those	who,	like	the	Pharisees,	oppose	his	message	are	against	him.
Then	he	immediately	adds,	“Therefore	I	tell	you,	every	sin	and	blasphemy
will	be	forgiven	men,	but	the	blasphemy	against	the	Spirit	will	not	be
forgiven”	(Matt.	12:31).	The	willful,	malicious	slander	of	the	work	of	the
Holy	Spirit	through	Jesus,	in	which	the	Pharisees	attributed	it	to	Satan,	would
not	be	forgiven.
The	context	indicates	that	Jesus	is	speaking	about	a	sin	that	is	not	simply
unbelief	or	rejection	of	Christ,	but	one	that	includes	(1)	a	clear	knowledge	of
who	Christ	is	and	of	the	power	of	the	Holy	Spirit	working	through	him,	(2)	a
willful	rejection	of	the	facts	about	Christ	that	his	opponents	knew	to	be	true,
and	(3)	slanderously	attributing	the	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in	Christ	to	the
power	of	Satan.	In	such	a	case	the	hardness	of	heart	would	be	so	great	that
any	ordinary	means	of	bringing	a	sinner	to	repentance	would	already	have
been	rejected.	Persuasion	of	the	truth	will	not	work,	for	these	people	have
already	known	the	truth	and	have	willfully	rejected	it.	Demonstration	of	the
power	of	the	Holy	Spirit	to	heal	and	bring	life	will	not	work,	for	they	have
seen	it	and	rejected	it.	In	this	case	it	is	not	that	the	sin	itself	is	so	horrible	that
it	could	not	be	covered	by	Christ’s	redemptive	work,	but	rather	that	the
sinner’s	hardened	heart	puts	him	or	her	beyond	the	reach	of	God’s	ordinary
means	of	bringing	forgiveness	through	repentance	and	trusting	Christ	for
salvation.	The	sin	is	unpardonable	because	it	cuts	off	the	sinner	from
repentance	and	saving	faith	through	belief	in	the	truth.
Berkhof	wisely	defines	this	sin	in	the	following	way:
This	sin	consists	in	the	conscious,	malicious,	and	wilful	rejection	and
slander,	against	evidence	and	conviction,	of	the	testimony	of	the	Holy
Spirit	respecting	the	grace	of	God	in	Christ,	attributing	it	out	of	hatred
and	enmity	to	the	Prince	of	Darkness.	.	.	.	in	committing	that	sin	man
wilfully,	maliciously,	and	intentionally	attributes	what	is	clearly
recognized	as	the	work	of	God	to	the	influence	and	operation	of
Satan.
30
Berkhof	explains	that	the	sin	itself	consists	“not	in	doubting	the	truth,	nor	in	a
sinful	denial	of	it	but	in	a	contradiction	of	it	that	goes	contrary	to	the
conviction	of	the	mind,	to	the	illumination	of	the	conscience,	and	even	to	the
verdict	of	the	heart.”
31
The	fact	that	the	unpardonable	sin	involves	such	extreme	hardness	of	heart
and	lack	of	repentance	indicates	that	those	who	fear	they	have	committed	it,
yet	still	have	sorrow	for	sin	in	their	heart	and	desire	to	seek	after	God,
certainly	do	not	fall	in	the	category	of	those	who	are	guilty	of	it.	Berkhof	says
that	“we	may	be	reasonably	sure	that	those	who	fear	that	they	have	committed
it	and	worry	about	this,	and	desire	the	prayers	of	others	for	them,	have	not
committed	it.”
32
This	understanding	of	the	unpardonable	sin	also	fits	well	with	Hebrews	6:4–6.
There	the	persons	who	“commit	apostasy”	have	had	all	sorts	of	knowledge
and	conviction	of	the	truth:	they	have	“been	enlightened”	and	have	“tasted	the
heavenly	gift”;	they	have	participated	in	some	ways	in	the	work	of	the	Holy
Spirit	and	“have	tasted	the	goodness	of	the	word	of	God	and	the	powers	of	the
age	to	come,”	yet	they	then	willfully	turn	away	from	Christ	and	“hold	him	up
to	contempt”	(Heb.	6:6).	They	too	have	put	themselves	beyond	the	reach	of
God’s	ordinary	means	of	bringing	people	to	repentance	and	faith.	Knowing
and	being	convinced	of	the	truth,	they	willfully	reject	it.
First	John	5:16–17,	however,	seems	to	fall	in	another	category.	That	passage
does	not	speak	of	a	sin	that	can	never	be	forgiven,	but	rather	about	a	sin	that,
if	persisted	in,	will	lead	to	death.	This	sin	seems	to	involve	the	teaching	of
serious	doctrinal	error	about	Christ.	In	the	context	of	asking	in	faith	according
to	God’s	will	(1	John	5:14–15)	John	simply	tells	us	that	he	does	not	say	that
we	can	pray	in	faith	for	God	simply	to	forgive	that	sin	unless	the	person
repents—but	he	certainly	does	not	prohibit	praying	that	the	heretical	teachers
would	turn	from	their	heresy	and	repent	and	thereby	find	forgiveness.	Many
people	who	teach	serious	doctrinal	error	have	still	not	gone	so	far	as	to
commit	the	unpardonable	sin	and	bring	on	themselves	the	impossibility	of
repentance	and	faith	by	their	own	hardness	of	heart.
E.	The	Punishment	of	Sin
Although	God’s	punishment	of	sin	does	serve	as	a	
deterrent	
against	further
sinning	and	as	a	
warning	
to	those	who	observe	it,	this	is	not	the	primary
reason	why	God	punishes	sin.	The	primary	reason	is	that	
God’s	righteousness
demands	it,	
so	that	he	might	be	glorified	in	the	universe	that	he	has	created.
He	is	the	Lord	who	practices	“steadfast	love,	justice,	and	righteousness	in	the
earth;	for	in	these	things	I	delight,	says	the	L
ORD
”	(Jer.	9:24).
Paul	speaks	of	Christ	Jesus	“whom	God	put	forward	as	a	propitiation	by	his
blood,	through	faith”	(Rom.	3:25,	author’s	translation).	Paul	then	explains
why	God	put	forward	Jesus	as	a	“propitiation”	(that	is,	a	sacrifice	that	bears
the	wrath	of	God	against	sin	and	thereby	turns	God’s	wrath	into	favor):	“This
was	
to	show	God’s	righteousness,	
because	in	his	divine	forbearance	he	had
passed	over	former	sins”	(Rom.	3:25).	Paul	realizes	that	if	Christ	had	not
come	to	pay	the	penalty	for	sins,	God	could	not	be	shown	to	be	righteous.
Because	he	had	passed	over	sins	and	not	punished	them	in	the	past,	people
could	rightly	accuse	God	of	unrighteousness,	the	assumption	being	that	a	God
who	does	not	punish	sins	is	not	a	righteous	God.	Therefore,	when	God	sent
Christ	to	die	and	pay	the	penalty	for	our	sins,	he	showed	how	he	could	still	be
righteous—he	had	stored	up	the	punishment	due	to	previous	sins	(those	of
Old	Testament	saints)	and	then,	in	perfect	righteousness,	he	gave	that	penalty
to	Jesus	on	the	cross.	The	propitiation	of	Calvary	thereby	clearly
demonstrated	that	God	is	perfectly	righteous:	“it	was	to	prove	at	the	present
time	
that	he	himself	is	righteous	
and	that	he	justifies	him	who	has	faith	in
Jesus”	(Rom.	3:26).
Therefore	in	the	cross	we	have	a	clear	demonstration	of	the	reason	God
punishes	sin:	if	he	did	not	punish	sin	he	would	not	be	a	righteous	God,	and
there	would	be	no	ultimate	justice	in	the	universe.	But	when	sin	is	punished,
God	is	showing	himself	to	be	a	righteous	judge	over	all,	and	justice	is	being
done	in	his	universe.
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
Has	reading	this	chapter	increased	your	awareness	of	the	sin	remaining
in	your	own	life?	Are	you	able	to	mention	any	specific	ways	in	which
this	was	true?	Did	the	chapter	increase	in	you	any	sense	of	the
hatefulness	of	sin?	Why	do	you	not	feel	more	often	a	deeper	sense	of	the
hatefulness	of	sin?	What	do	you	think	the	overall	effect	of	this	chapter
will	be	on	your	personal	relationship	with	God?
2
.	
Would	it	ultimately	be	more	comforting	to	you	to	think	that	sin	came
into	the	world	because	God	ordained	that	it	would	come	through
secondary	agents,	or	because	he	could	not	prevent	it,	even	though	it	was
against	his	will?	How	would	you	feel	about	the	universe	and	your	place
in	it	if	you	thought	that	evil	had	always	existed	and	there	was	an	ultimate
“dualism”	in	the	universe?
3
.	
Can	you	name	some	parallels	between	the	temptation	faced	by	Eve	and
temptations	that	you	face	even	now	in	your	Christian	life?
4
.	
Do	you	feel	a	sense	of	unfairness	that	you	are	counted	guilty	because	of
Adam’s	sin	(if	you	agree	that	Rom.	5:12–21	teaches	this)?	How	can	you
deal	with	this	sense	of	unfairness	to	keep	it	from	becoming	a	hindrance
in	your	relationship	with	God?	At	a	level	of	deep	conviction,	do	you
really	think	that,	before	being	a	Christian,	you	were	totally	unable	to	do
any	spiritual	good	before	God?	Similarly,	are	you	deeply	convinced	that
this	is	true	of	all	unbelievers,	or	do	you	think	that	this	is	just	a	doctrine
that	may	or	may	not	be	true,	or	at	least	one	that	you	do	not	find	deeply
convincing	as	you	look	at	the	lives	of	the	unbelievers	whom	you	know?
5
.	
What	kind	of	freedom	of	choice	do	the	unbelievers	whom	you	know
actually	have?	Apart	from	the	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit,	are	you	convinced
that	they	will	not	change	their	fundamental	rebellion	against	God?
6
.	
How	can	the	biblical	teaching	of	degrees	of	seriousness	of	sin	help	your
Christian	life	at	this	point?	Have	you	known	a	sense	of	God’s	“fatherly
displeasure”	when	you	have	sinned?	What	is	your	response	to	that	sense?
7
.	
Do	you	think	that	Christians	today	have	lost	sight	of	the	hatefulness	of
sin	to	a	large	extent?	Have	unbelievers	also	lost	sight	of	this?	Do	you
think	that	we	as	Christians	have	lost	sight	of	the	thoroughgoing
pervasiveness	of	sin	in	unbelievers,	of	the	truth	that	the	greatest	problem
of	the	human	race,	and	of	all	societies	and	civilizations,	is	not	lack	of
education	or	lack	of	communication	or	lack	of	material	well-being,	but
sin	against	God?
SPECIAL	TERMS
age	of	accountability
	
mortal	sin
	
sin
dualism
	
original	guilt
	
total	depravity
impute
	
original	pollution
	
total	inability
inherited	corruption
	
original	sin
	
unpardonable	sin
inherited	guilt
	
Pelagius
	
venial	sin
inherited	sin
	
propitiation
	
	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the	
bibliography	to
chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be	found	in	
Appendix	4
.)
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92			Litton,	136–77
1930			Thomas,	155–75,	210–14,	234–35,	501–6
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1847			Finney,	180–214,	228–58
1875–76			Pope,	2:1–86
1892–94			Miley,	1:423–533;	2:505–24
1940			Wiley,	2:51–140
1960			Purkiser,	223–42
1983			Carter,	1:27–86
3.			Baptist
1767			Gill,	1:451–90
1887			Boyce,	230–47
1907			Strong,	533–664
1917			Mullins,	281–302
1976–83			Henry,	6:229–50,	269–304
1983–85			Erickson,	561–658
1987–94			Lewis/Demarest,	2:183–245
4.			Dispensational
1947			Chafer,	2:200–373
1949			Thiessen,	188–98
1986			Ryrie,	201–34
5.			Lutheran
1917–24			Pieper,	1:527–77
1934			Mueller,	210–41
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1559			Calvin,	1:239–309	(2.1–3)
1724–58			Edwards,	1:143–233
1861			Heppe,	301–70
1871–73			Hodge,	2:122–279
1878			Dabney,	36–51
1887–1921			Warfield,	
BTS,	
262–69
1889			Shedd,	2a:115–257
1937–66			Murray,	
CW,	
2:67–89;	
IAS,	
5–95
1938			Berkhof,	219–61
1962			Buswell,	1:255–307
7.			Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988–92		Williams,	1:221–74
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955			Ott,	106–14
2.			Roman	Catholic:	Post-Vatican	II
1980			McBrien,	1:123,	162–68;	2:953–60
Other	Works
Berkouwer,	G.	C.	
Sin.	
Trans.	by	Philip	C.	Holtrop.	Grand	Rapids:
Eerdmans,	1971.
Bloesch,	D.	G.	“Sin.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	1012–16.
Carson,	D.	A.	
How	Long,	O	Lord?	Reflections	on	Suffering	and	Evil.
Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1990.
Colwell,	J.	E.	“Anthropology.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	28–30.
_____.	“Fall.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	249–51.
_____.	“Sin.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	641–43.
Demarest,	B.	A.	“Fall	of	Man.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	403–5.
Feinberg,	J.	S.	
The	Many	Faces	of	Evil:	Theological	Systems	and	the
Problem	of	Evil.	
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1994.
_____.	
Theologies	and	Evil.	
Washington,	D.C.:	University	Press	of
America,	1979.
Geisler,	Norman.	
The	Roots	of	Evil.	
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1978.
Hoekema,	Anthony	A.	
Created	in	God’s	Image.	
Grand	Rapids:
Eerdmans,	and	Exeter:	Paternoster,	1986,	pp.	112–86.
Hughes,	Philip	Edgcumbe.	
The	True	Image:	The	Origin	and	Destiny	of
Man	in	Christ.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	and	Leicester:	Inter-Varsity
Press,	1989,	pp.	71–210.
Johnson,	R.	K.	“Imputation.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	554–55.
Lewis,	C.	S.	
The	Problem	of	Pain.	
New	York:	Macmillan,	1962.
Murray,	John.	
The	Imputation	of	Adam’s	Sin.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,
1959.
Peterson,	Michael	L.	
Evil	and	the	Christian	God.	
Grand	Rapids:	Baker,
1982.
Pink,	Arthur	Walkington.	
Gleanings	From	the	Scriptures:	Man’s	Total
Depravity.	
Chicago:	Moody,	1970.
Plantinga,	Alvin.	
God,	Freedom	and	Evil.	
New	York:	Harper	and	Row,
1974.
Ramm,	Bernard.	
Offense	to	Reason:	The	Theology	of	Sin.	
San	Francisco:
Harper	and	Row,	1985.
Ryrie,	C.	C.	“Depravity,	Total.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	312–13.
Thomas,	R.	L.	“Sin,	Conviction	of.”	In	
EDT,	
p.	1016.
Wenham,	J.	W.	
The	Enigma	of	Evil.	
Formerly	published	as	
The	Goodness
of	God.	
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1985.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
Psalm	5
1:1
–4:
Have	mercy	on	me,	O	God,	according	to	your	steadfast	love;
according	to	your	abundant	mercy	blot	out	my	transgressions.
Wash	me	thoroughly	from	my	iniquity,
and	cleanse	me	from	my	sin!
For	I	know	my	transgressions,
and	my	sin	is	ever	before	me.
Against	you,	you	only,	have	I	sinned,
and	done	that	which	is	evil	in	your	sight,
so	that	you	are	justified	in	your	sentence
and	blameless	in	your	judgment.
HYMN
“God,	Be	Merciful	to	Me”
This	is	an	excellent	example	of	the	words	of	a	psalm	set	to	music.	The	psalm
was	originally	King	David’s	heartfelt	confession	of	great	sin	before	God,	but
even	today	it	is	an	excellent	pattern	of	confession	that	we	ourselves	might
speak	to	God.
God,	be	merciful	to	me;
on	thy	grace	I	rest	my	plea;
Plenteous	in	compassion	thou,
blot	out	my	transgressions	now;
Wash	me,	make	me	pure	within,
cleanse,	O	cleanse	me	from	my	sin.
My	transgressions	I	confess,
grief	and	guilt	my	soul	oppress;
I	have	sinned	against	thy	grace
and	provoked	thee	to	thy	face;
I	confess	thy	judgment	just,
speechless,	I	thy	mercy	trust.
I	am	evil,	born	in	sin;
thou	desirest	truth	within.
Thou	alone	my	Savior	art,
teach	thy	wisdom	to	my	heart;
Make	me	pure,	thy	grace	bestow,
wash	me	whiter	than	the	snow.
Broken,	humbled	to	the	dust
by	thy	wrath	and	judgment	just,
Let	my	contrite	heart	rejoice
and	in	gladness	hear	thy	voice;
From	my	sins	O	hide	thy	face,
blot	them	out	in	boundless	grace.
Gracious	God,	my	heart	renew,
make	my	spirit	right	and	true;
Cast	me	not	away	from	thee,
let	thy	Spirit	dwell	in	me;
Thy	salvation’s	joy	impart,
steadfast	make	my	willing	heart.
Sinners	then	shall	learn	from	me
and	return,	O	God,	to	thee;
Savior,	all	my	guilt	remove,
and	my	tongue	shall	sing	thy	love;
Touch	my	silent	lips,	O	Lord,
and	my	mouth	shall	praise	accord.
FROM	
THE	PSALTER,	
1912,	FROM	PSALM	51:1–15
Alternate	tune:	“Rock	of	Ages”
NOTES
1
See,	for	example,	A.	H.	Strong,	
Systematic	Theology,	
pp.	567–73.	However,	Strong	defines	selfishness	in	a	very	specific	way
that	is	different	from	the	ordinary	sense	of	the	term	when	used	to	mean	simply	self-interest	or	self-interest	at	the	expense	of	other
persons.	Strong	regards	selfishness	as	“that	choice	of	self	as	the	supreme	end	which	constitutes	the	antithesis	of	supreme	love	to
God”	(p.	
567)	and	as	“a	fundamental	and	positive	choice	of	preference	of	self	instead	of	God,	as	the	object	of	affection	and	the
supreme	end	of	being”	(p.	
572).	By	thus	defining	selfishness	in	relationship	to	God,	and	specifically	as	the	opposite	of	love	for
God,	and	as	the	opposite	of	“love	for	that	which	is	most	characteristic	and	fundamental	in	God,	namely,	his	holiness”	(p.	
567),
Strong	has	actually	made	“selfishness”	approximately	equivalent	to	our	definition	(lack	of	conformity	to	the	moral	law	of	God),
especially	in	the	area	of	attitude	(which,	he	explains,	results	in	actions).	When	Strong	defines	“selfishness”	in	this	unusual	way,
his	definition	is	not	really	inconsistent	with	Scripture,	for	he	is	just	saying	that	sin	is	the	opposite	of	the	great	commandment	to
love	God	with	all	our	heart.	The	problem	with	this	definition,	however,	is	that	he	uses	the	word	
selfishness	
in	a	way	in	which	it	is
not	commonly	understood	in	English,	and	therefore	his	definition	of	sin	is	frequently	open	to	misunderstanding.	Our	discussion	in
this	section	is	not	objecting	to	sin	as	selfishness	in	the	unusual	sense	given	by	Strong,	but	rather	in	the	way	in	which	the	term
selfishness	
is	ordinarily	understood.
2
Of	course,	selfishness	that	seeks	our	own	good	at	the	expense	of	others	is	wrong,	and	that	is	what	is	meant	when	Scripture	tells
us	to	“do	nothing	from	selfishness	or	empty	conceit,	but	with	humility	of	mind	let	each	of	you	regard	one	another	as	more
important	than	himself”	(Phil.	2:3	NASB).	Yet	the	distinction	between	selfishness	in	the	wrong	sense	and	scripturally	enlightened
self-interest	is	unclear	in	the	minds	of	many	people.
3
See	discussion	of	God’s	jealousy	
chapter	12
.
4
See	discussion	of	dualism	in	
chapter	15
.
5
See	
chapter	16
,	for	further	discussion	of	God’s	providence	in	relationship	to	evil.	God	is	“not	a	God	who	delights	in	wickedness”
(Ps.	5:4)	but	one	whose	“soul	hates	him	that	loves	violence”	(Ps.	11:5),	so	that	God	certainly	does	not	take	pleasure	in	sin;
nonetheless,	for	his	own	purposes,	and	in	a	way	that	still	remains	largely	a	mystery	to	us,	God	ordained	that	sin	would	come	into
the	world.
6
See	discussion	of	the	sin	of	angels	in	
chapter	20
.
7
See	also	
chapter	15
,	on	the	need	to	insist	on	the	historicity	of	Adam	and	Eve	as	specific	persons.
8
I	have	used	the	phrase	“inherited	sin”	rather	than	the	more	common	designation	“original	sin”	because	the	phrase	“original	sin”
seems	so	easily	to	be	misunderstood	to	refer	to	Adam’s	first	sin,	rather	than	to	the	sin	that	is	ours	as	a	result	of	Adam’s	fall
(traditionally	the	technical	meaning).	The	phrase	“inherited	sin”	is	much	more	immediately	understandable	and	less	subject	to
misunderstanding.	Some	may	object	that,	technically	speaking,	we	do	not	“inherit”	guilt	because	it	is	directly	imputed	to	us	by
God	and	does	not	come	to	us	through	inheritance	from	our	parents	as	does	the	tendency	toward	sinful	actions	(traditionally	called
“original	pollution,”	and	here	termed	“inherited	corruption”).	But	the	fact	that	our	legal	guilt	is	inherited	directly	from	Adam	and
not	through	a	line	of	ancestors	does	not	make	it	any	less	inherited:	the	guilt	is	ours	because	it	belonged	to	our	first	father,	Adam,
and	we	inherit	it	from	him.
9
The	aorist	indicative	verb	
hēmarton	
in	the	historical	narrative	indicates	a	completed	past	action.	Here	Paul	is	saying	that
something	happened	and	was	completed	in	the	past,	namely,	that	“all	men	sinned.”	But	it	was	not	true	that	all	men	had	actually
committed	sinful	actions	at	the	time	that	Paul	was	writing,	because	some	had	not	even	been	born	yet,	and	many	others	had	died	in
infancy	before	committing	any	conscious	acts	of	sin.	So	Paul	must	be	meaning	that	when	Adam	sinned,	God	considered	it	true
that	all	men	sinned	in	Adam.
10
See	note	8,	above.
11
See,	for	example,	the	thorough	discussion	in	H.	Orton	Wiley,	
Christian	Theology,	
3	vols.	(Kansas	City,	Mo.:	Beacon	Hill	Press,
1941–49),	3:109–40.
12
See	
chapter	31
,	on	common	grace.
13
This	total	lack	of	spiritual	good	and	inability	to	do	good	before	God	has	traditionally	been	called	“total	depravity,”	but	I	will	not
use	the	phrase	here	because	it	is	easily	subject	to	misunderstanding.	It	can	give	the	impression	that	no	good	
in	any	sense	
can	be
done	by	unbelievers,	a	meaning	that	is	certainly	not	intended	by	that	term	or	by	this	doctrine.
14
See	discussion	of	the	question	of	free	will	in	
chapter	16
.
15
See	the	note	in	
chapter	3
,	on	whether	James	the	Lord’s	brother	was	an	apostle.
16
Some	popular	explanations	of	this	passage	deny	that	v.	8	applies	to	all	Christians.	This	position	is	taken	in	order	to	say	that
some	Christians	can	be	perfectly	free	from	sin	in	this	life,	if	they	reach	the	state	of	perfect	sanctification.	According	to	this	view,
v.	8	(“If	we	say	we	have	no	sin,	we	deceive	ourselves,	and	the	truth	is	not	in	us”)	applies	to	Christians	before	they	reach	the	stage
of	sinless	perfection.	The	next	sentence,	talking	about	our	confession	and	God’s	cleansing	us	from	“all	unrighteousness,”	includes
the	process	of	dealing	with	that	past	sin	and	having	it	forgiven.	Then	the	last	sentence	(v.	10)	does	include	those	who	have
obtained	the	state	of	sinless	perfection—they	do	not	any	longer	need	to	say	that	they	have	sin	in	the	present	in	their	lives,	but
simply	have	to	admit	that	they	had	sinned	in	the	past.	For	them	it	is	true,	“If	we	say	we	have	not	sinned,	we	make	him	a	liar”	(1
John	1:10).
But	this	explanation	is	not	persuasive,	because	John	writes	the	first	sentence	(v.	8)	in	the	present	tense,	and	it	is	something	that	is
true	of	all	Christians	at	all	times.	John	does	not	write,	“If	we	say	while	we	are	still	immature	Christians	that	we	have	no	sin,	we
deceive	ourselves.”	Nor	does	he	say	(as	this	view	would	hold),	“If	we	say,	before	we	have	reached	the	state	of	sinless	perfection,
that	we	have	no	sin,	we	deceive	ourselves.”	Rather,	near	the	end	of	his	life,	writing	a	general	letter	to	all	Christians,	including
those	who	have	grown	in	maturity	in	Christ	for	decades,	John	says	in	no	uncertain	terms	something	that	he	expects	to	be	true	of	all
Christians	to	whom	he	writes:	“If	we	say	we	have	no	sin,	we	deceive	ourselves,	and	the	truth	is	not	in	us.”	This	is	a	clear
statement	that	applies	to	all	Christians	as	long	as	they	are	in	this	life.	If	we	say	that	it	does	not	apply,	“we	deceive	ourselves.”
17
Pelagianism	was	more	fundamentally	concerned	with	the	question	of	salvation,	holding	that	man	can	take	the	first	and	the	most
important	steps	toward	salvation	on	his	own,	apart	from	God’s	intervening	grace.	Pelagianism	was	condemned	as	a	heresy	at	the
Council	of	Carthage	on	May	1,	A.D.	418.
18
This	is	the	position	of	Millard	Erickson,	for	example,	in	
Christian	Theology,	
p.	639.	He	uses	the	term	“age	of	responsibility”
rather	than	“age	of	accountability.”
19
However,	we	all	know	that	infants	almost	from	the	moment	of	birth	show	an	instinctive	trust	in	their	mothers	and	awareness	of
themselves	as	persons	distinct	from	their	mothers.	Thus	we	should	not	insist	that	it	is	impossible	that	they	would	also	have	an
intuitive	awareness	of	God,	and	if	God	gives	it,	an	intuitive	ability	to	trust	in	God	as	well.
20
Someone	might	object	that	David	is	only	saying	that	he	would	go	to	the	state	of	death	just	as	his	son	had.	But	this	interpretation
does	not	fit	the	language	of	the	verse:	David	does	not	say,	“I	shall	go	
where	he	is,”	
but	rather,	“I	shall	go	
to	him.”	
This	is	the
language	of	personal	reunion,	and	it	indicates	David’s	expectation	that	he	would	one	day	see	and	be	with	his	son.
21
We	may	understand	this	principle	more	clearly	when	we	realize	that	the	various	moral	laws	of	God	are	simply	different	aspects
of	his	perfect	moral	character,	to	which	he	expects	us	to	conform.	To	violate	any	one	part	of	it	is	to	become	unlike	him.	For
example,	if	I	were	to	steal,	I	would	not	only	break	the	commandment	against	stealing	(Commandment	8),	but	I	would	also
dishonor	God’s	name	(Commandment	3;	see	Prov.	30:9),	dishonor	my	parents	and	their	good	name	(Commandment	5),	covet
something	that	does	not	belong	to	me	(Commandment	10),	put	some	material	possession	ahead	of	God	himself	(Commandment	1;
see	Eph.	5:5),	and	carry	out	an	action	that	harms	another	human	being	and	damages	his	or	her	life	(Commandment	6;	cf.	Matt.
5:22).	With	a	little	reflection,	we	can	see	how	almost	any	sin	violates	some	of	the	principles	embodied	in	each	of	the	Ten
Commandments.	This	is	simply	a	reflection	of	the	fact	that	God’s	laws	are	a	unified	whole	and	reflect	the	moral	purity	and
perfection	of	God	himself	in	the	integrated	oneness	of	his	person.
22
The	distinction	between	mortal	and	venial	sins	may	seem	to	be	supported	by	1	John	5:16–17:	“If	any	one	sees	his	brother
committing	
what	is	not	a	mortal	sin,	
he	will	ask,	and	God	will	give	him	life	for	those	whose	sin	is	not	mortal.	There	is	sin	which
is	mortal;	I	do	not	say	that	one	is	to	pray	for	that.	All	wrongdoing	is	sin,	but	there	is	sin	which	is	not	mortal.”	The	Greek	phrase
here	translated	“mortal”	is	more	literally	“toward	death”	or	“unto	death”	(Gk.	
pros	thanaton
).	In	the	light	of	John’s	concern	in	this
epistle	to	combat	a	heresy	that	did	not	confess	Jesus	as	God	who	came	in	the	flesh	(see	1	John	4:2–3),	it	is	likely	that	this	sin
“unto	death”	is	the	serious	heresy	of	denying	Christ	and	subsequently	failing	to	obtain	salvation	through	Christ.	In	this	case,	John
would	simply	be	saying	that	we	should	not	pray	that	God	would	forgive	the	sin	of	rejecting	Christ	and	teaching	seriously	heretical
doctrine	about	him.	But	the	fact	that	John	says	there	is	one	sin	that	is	“unto	death”	(rejecting	Christ),	does	not	justify	establishing
a	whole	category	of	sins	that	cannot	be	forgiven.
23
On	“the	unpardonable	sin,”	which	is	the	one	exception	to	this	statement,	see	
chapter	24
,	below.
24
See	
chapter	36
,	on	justification.
25
See	
chapter	37
,	on	adoption.
26
Paul	is	not	saying	in	Romans	6:16	that	true	Christians	will	ever	actually	regress	to	a	point	at	which	they	fall	under	eternal
condemnation,	but	he	does	seem	to	be	saying	that	when	we	yield	to	sin	we	are	(in	a	spiritual/moral	sense)	traveling	in	that
direction.
27
See	
chapter	56
,	on	degrees	of	reward	in	heaven.
28
See	Berkhof,	
Systematic	Theology,	
pp.	252–53,	for	representatives	of	each	position.
29
See	the	extended	discussion	of	Hebrews	6:4–6	in	
chapter	40
.
30
Berkhof,	
Systematic	Theology,	
p.	253.
31
Ibid.
32
Ibid.,	p.	
254.
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	25
The	Covenants	Between	God	and	Man
What	principles	determine	the	way	God	relates	to	us?
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
How	does	God	relate	to	man?	Since	the	creation	of	the	world,	God’s
relationship	to	man	has	been	defined	by	specific	requirements	and	promises.
God	tells	people	how	he	wants	them	to	act	and	also	makes	promises	about
how	he	will	act	toward	them	in	various	circumstances.	The	Bible	contains
several	summaries	of	the	provisions	that	define	the	different	relationships
between	God	and	man	that	occur	in	Scripture,	and	it	often	calls	these
summaries	“covenants.”	With	respect	to	covenants	between	God	and	man	in
Scripture,	we	may	give	the	following	definition:	
A	covenant	is	an
unchangeable,	divinely	imposed	legal	agreement	between	God	and	man	that
stipulates	the	conditions	of	their	relationship.
Although	this	definition	includes	the	word	
agreement	
in	order	to	show	that
there	are	two	parties,	God	and	man,	who	must	enter	into	the	provisions	of	the
relationship,	the	phrase	“divinely	imposed”	is	also	included	to	show	that	man
can	never	negotiate	with	God	or	change	the	terms	of	the	covenant:	he	can
only	accept	the	covenant	obligations	or	reject	them.	Probably	for	this	reason
the	Greek	translators	of	the	Old	Testament	(known	as	the	Septuagint),	and,
following	them,	the	New	Testament	authors,	did	not	use	the	ordinary	Greek
word	for	contracts	or	agreements	in	which	both	parties	were	equal	(
synthēkē
),
but	rather	chose	a	less	common	word,	
diathēkē,	
which	emphasized	that	the
provisions	of	the	covenant	were	laid	down	by	one	of	the	parties	only.	(In	fact,
the	word	
diathēkē	
was	often	used	to	refer	to	a	“testament”	or	“will”	that	a
person	would	leave	to	assign	the	distribution	of	his	or	her	goods	after	death.)
This	definition	also	notes	that	covenants	are	“unchangeable.”	They	may	be
superseded	or	replaced	by	a	different	covenant,	but	they	may	not	be	changed
once	they	are	established.	Although	there	have	been	many	additional	details
specified	in	the	covenants	God	has	made	with	man	throughout	the	history	of
Scripture,	the	essential	element	at	the	heart	of	all	of	them	is	the	promise,	“I
will	be	their	God,	and	they	shall	be	my	people”	(Jer.	31:33;	2	Cor.	6:16;	et
al.).
Since	the	covenant	relationship	between	God	and	man	occurs	in	various
forms	throughout	Scripture	from	Genesis	to	Revelation,	a	treatment	of	this
subject	might	be	put	at	several	different	points	in	the	study	of	systematic
theology.	I	have	put	it	here	at	the	end	of	the	treatment	of	man	as	
created	
(in
the	image	of	God)	and	man	as	
fallen	
into	sin,	but	before	the	discussion	of	the
person	and	work	of	Christ.
A.	The	Covenant	of	Works
Some	have	questioned	whether	it	is	appropriate	to	speak	of	a	covenant	of
works	that	God	had	with	Adam	and	Eve	in	the	Garden	of	Eden.	The	actual
word	
covenant	
is	not	used	in	the	Genesis	narratives.	However,	the	essential
parts	of	the	covenant	are	all	there—a	clear	definition	of	the	parties	involved,	a
legally	binding	set	of	provisions	that	stipulates	the	conditions	of	their
relationship,	the	promise	of	blessings	for	obedience,	and	the	condition	for
obtaining	those	blessings.	Moreover,	Hosea	6:7,	in	referring	to	the	sins	of
Israel,	says,	“But	
like	Adam	
they	transgressed	
the	covenant”	
(RSV	mg.;	so
NIV,	NASB).
1
	This	passage	views	Adam	as	existing	in	a	covenant
relationship	that	he	then	transgressed	in	the	Garden	of	Eden.	In	addition,	in
Romans	5:12–21	Paul	sees	both	Adam	and	Christ	as	heads	of	a	people	whom
they	represent,	something	that	would	be	entirely	consistent	with	the	idea	of
Adam	being	in	a	covenant	before	the	fall.
In	the	Garden	of	Eden,	it	seems	quite	clear	that	there	was	a	legally	binding	set
of	provisions	that	defined	the	conditions	of	the	relationship	between	God	and
man.	The	two	parties	are	evident	as	God	speaks	to	Adam	and	gives
commands	to	him.	The	requirements	of	the	relationship	are	clearly	defined	in
the	commands	that	God	gave	to	Adam	and	Eve	(Gen.	1:28–30;	cf.	2:15)	and
in	the	direct	command	to	Adam,	“You	may	freely	eat	of	every	tree	of	the
garden;	but	of	the	tree	of	the	knowledge	of	good	and	evil	you	shall	not	eat,	for
in	the	day	that	you	eat	of	it	you	shall	die”	(Gen.	2:16–17).
In	this	statement	to	Adam	about	the	tree	of	the	knowledge	of	good	and	evil
there	is	a	promise	of	punishment	for	disobedience—death,	most	fully
understood	to	mean	death	in	an	extensive	sense,	physical,	spiritual,	and
eternal	death	and	separation	from	God.
2
	In	the	promise	of	punishment	for
disobedience	there	is	implicit	a	promise	of	blessing	for	obedience.	This
blessing	would	consist	of	not	receiving	death,	and	the	implication	is	that	the
blessing	would	be	the	opposite	of	“death.”	It	would	involve	physical	life	that
would	not	end	and	spiritual	life	in	terms	of	a	relationship	with	God	that	would
go	on	forever.	The	presence	of	the	“tree	of	life	.	.	.	in	the	midst	of	the	garden”
(Gen.	2:9)	also	signified	the	promise	of	eternal	life	with	God	if	Adam	and	Eve
had	met	the	conditions	of	a	covenant	relationship	by	obeying	God	completely
until	he	decided	that	their	time	of	testing	was	finished.	After	the	fall,	God
removed	Adam	and	Eve	from	the	garden,	partly	so	that	they	would	not	be
able	to	take	from	the	tree	of	life	“and	eat,	and	live	for	ever”	(Gen.	3:22).
Another	evidence	that	the	covenant	relationship	with	God	in	the	garden
included	a	promise	of	eternal	life	if	Adam	and	Eve	had	perfectly	obeyed	is	the
fact	that	even	in	the	New	Testament	Paul	speaks	as	though	perfect	obedience,
if	it	were	possible,	would	actually	lead	to	life.	He	speaks	of	a	“commandment
which	promised	life”	(Rom.	7:10;	lit.,	“the	commandment	unto	life”)	and,	in
order	to	demonstrate	that	the	law	does	not	rest	on	faith,	he	quotes	Leviticus
18:5	to	say,	about	the	provisions	of	the	law,	“He	who	does	them	shall	live	by
them”	(Gal.	3:12;	cf.	Rom.	10:5).
Other	covenants	in	Scripture	generally	have	an	outward	“sign”	associated
with	them	(such	as	circumcision,	or	baptism	and	the	Lord’s	Supper).	No
“sign”	for	the	covenant	of	works	is	clearly	designated	as	such	in	Genesis,	but
if	we	were	to	name	one,	it	would	probably	be	the	tree	of	life	in	the	midst	of
the	garden.	By	partaking	of	that	tree	Adam	and	Eve	would	be	partaking	of	the
promise	of	eternal	life	that	God	would	give.	The	fruit	itself	did	not	have
magical	properties	but	would	be	a	sign	by	which	God	outwardly	guaranteed
that	the	inward	reality	would	occur.
Why	is	it	important	to	speak	of	the	relationship	between	God	and	man	in	the
garden	as	a	
covenant	
relationship?	To	do	so	reminds	us	of	the	fact	that	this
relationship,	including	the	commands	of	obedience	and	promise	of	blessing
for	obedience,	was	not	something	that	automatically	occurred	in	the
relationship	between	Creator	and	creature.	God	did	not	make	any	such
covenant	with	the	animals	that	he	created,	for	example.
3
	Nor	did	the	nature	of
man	as	God	created	him	demand	that	God	have	any	fellowship	with	man	or
that	God	make	any	promises	concerning	his	relationship	with	men	or	give
man	any	clear	directions	concerning	what	he	should	do.	All	this	was	an
expression	of	God’s	fatherly	love	for	the	man	and	woman	he	had	created.
Moreover,	when	we	specify	this	relationship	as	a	“covenant,”	it	helps	us	to
see	the	clear	parallels	between	this	and	the	subsequent	covenant	relationships
that	God	had	with	his	people.	If	all	the	elements	of	a	covenant	are	present
(clear	stipulation	of	the	parties	involved,	statement	of	the	conditions	of	the
covenant,	and	a	promise	of	blessing	for	obedience	and	punishment	for
disobedience),	then	there	seems	no	reason	why	we	should	not	refer	to	it	as	a
covenant,	for	that	is	indeed	what	it	was.
Although	the	covenant	that	existed	before	the	fall	has	been	referred	to	by
various	terms	(such	as	the	Adamic	Covenant,	or	the	Covenant	of	Nature),	the
most	helpful	designation	seems	to	be	“covenant	of	works,”	since	participation
in	the	blessings	of	the	covenant	clearly	depended	on	obedience	or	“works”	on
the	part	of	Adam	and	Eve.
As	in	all	covenants	that	God	makes	with	man,	there	is	here	no	negotiating
over	the	provisions.	God	sovereignly	imposes	this	covenant	on	Adam	and
Eve,	and	they	have	no	opportunity	to	change	the	details—their	only	choice	is
to	keep	it	or	to	break	it.
Is	the	covenant	of	works	still	in	force?	In	several	important	senses	it	is.	First
of	all,	Paul	implies	that	perfect	obedience	to	God’s	laws,	if	it	were	possible,
would	lead	to	life	(see	Rom.	7:10;	10:5;	Gal.	3:12).	We	should	also	notice	that
the	punishment	for	this	covenant	is	still	in	effect,	for	“the	wages	of	sin	is
death”	(Rom.	6:23).	This	implies	that	the	covenant	of	works	is	still	in	force
for	every	human	being	apart	from	Christ,	even	though	no	sinful	human	being
can	fulfill	its	provisions	and	gain	blessing	by	it.	Finally,	we	should	note	that
Christ	perfectly	obeyed	the	covenant	of	works	for	us	since	he	committed	no
sin	(1	Peter	2:22)	but	completely	obeyed	God	on	our	behalf	(Rom.	5:18–19).
On	the	other	hand,	in	certain	senses,	the	covenant	of	works	does	not	remain	in
force:	(1)	We	no	longer	are	faced	with	the	specific	command	not	to	eat	of	the
tree	of	the	knowledge	of	good	and	evil.	(2)	Since	we	all	have	a	sinful	nature
(both	Christians	and	non-Christians),	we	are	not	able	to	fulfill	the	provisions
of	the	covenant	of	works	on	our	own	and	receive	its	benefits—as	this
covenant	applies	to	people	directly,	it	only	brings	punishments.	(3)	For
Christians,	Christ	has	fulfilled	the	provisions	of	this	covenant	successfully
once	for	all,	and	we	gain	the	benefits	of	it	not	by	actual	obedience	on	our	part
but	by	trusting	in	the	merits	of	Christ’s	work.	In	fact,	for	Christians	today	to
think	of	themselves	as	obligated	to	try	to	earn	God’s	favor	by	obedience
would	be	to	cut	themselves	off	from	the	hope	of	salvation.	“All	who	rely	on
works	of	the	law	are	under	a	curse.	.	.	.	Now	it	is	evident	that	no	man	is
justified	before	God	by	the	law	(Gal.	3:10–11).	Christians	have	been	freed
from	the	covenant	of	works	by	virtue	of	Christ’s	work	and	their	inclusion	in
the	new	covenant,	the	covenant	of	grace	(see	below).
B.	The	Covenant	of	Redemption
Theologians	speak	of	another	kind	of	covenant,	a	covenant	that	is	not	between
God	and	man,	but	is	among	the	members	of	the	Trinity.	This	covenant	they
call	the	“covenant	of	redemption.”	It	is	an	agreement	among	the	Father,	Son,
and	Holy	Spirit,	in	which	the	Son	agreed	to	become	a	man,	be	our
representative,	obey	the	demands	of	the	covenant	of	works	on	our	behalf,	and
pay	the	penalty	for	sin,	which	we	deserved.	Does	Scripture	teach	its
existence?	Yes,	for	it	speaks	about	a	specific	plan	and	purpose	of	God	that
was	agreed	upon	by	the	Father,	Son,	and	Holy	Spirit	in	order	to	gain	our
redemption.
On	the	part	of	the	Father,	this	“covenant	of	redemption”	included	an
agreement	to	give	to	the	Son	a	people	whom	he	would	redeem	for	his	own
possession	(John	17:2,	6),	to	send	the	Son	to	be	their	representative	(John
3:16;	Rom.	5:18–19),	to	prepare	a	body	for	the	Son	to	dwell	in	as	a	man	(Col.
2:9;	Heb.	10:5),	to	accept	him	as	representative	of	his	people	whom	he	had
redeemed	(Heb.	9:24),	and	to	give	him	all	authority	in	heaven	and	on	earth
(Matt.	28:18),	including	the	authority	to	pour	out	the	Holy	Spirit	in	power	to
apply	redemption	to	his	people	(Acts	1:4;	2:33).
On	the	part	of	the	Son,	there	was	an	agreement	that	he	would	come	into	the
world	as	a	man	and	live	as	a	man	under	the	Mosaic	law	(Gal.	4:4;	Heb.	2:14–
18),	and	that	he	would	be	perfectly	obedient	to	all	the	commands	of	the	Father
(Heb.	10:7–9),	becoming	obedient	unto	death,	even	death	on	a	cross	(Phil.
2:8).	The	Son	also	agreed	that	he	would	gather	for	himself	a	people	in	order
that	none	whom	the	Father	had	given	him	would	be	lost	(John	17:12).
The	role	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in	the	covenant	of	redemption	is	sometimes
overlooked	in	discussions	of	this	subject,	but	certainly	it	was	a	unique	and
essential	one.	He	agreed	to	do	the	will	of	the	Father	and	fill	and	empower
Christ	to	carry	out	his	ministry	on	earth	(Matt.	3:16;	Luke	4:1,	14,	18;	John
3:34),	and	to	apply	the	benefits	of	Christ’s	redemptive	work	to	his	people
after	Christ	returned	to	heaven	(John	14:16–17,	26;	Acts	1:8;	2:17–18,	33).
To	refer	to	the	agreement	among	the	members	of	the	Trinity	as	a	“covenant,”
reminds	us	that	it	was	something	voluntarily	undertaken	by	God,	not
something	that	he	had	to	enter	into	by	virtue	of	his	nature.	However,	this
covenant	is	also	different	from	the	covenants	between	God	and	man	because
the	parties	enter	into	it	as	equals,	whereas	in	covenants	with	man	God	is	the
sovereign	Creator	who	imposes	the	provisions	of	the	covenant	by	his	own
decree.	On	the	other	hand,	it	is	like	the	covenants	God	makes	with	man	in	that
it	has	the	elements	(specifying	the	parties,	conditions,	and	promised
blessings)	that	make	up	a	covenant.
C.	The	Covenant	of	Grace
1.
	Essential	Elements.
	When	man	failed	to	obtain	the	blessing	offered	in	the
covenant	of	works,	it	was	necessary	for	God	to	establish	another	means,	one
by	which	man	could	be	saved.	The	rest	of	Scripture	after	the	story	of	the	fall
in	Genesis	3	is	the	story	of	God	working	out	in	history	the	amazing	plan	of
redemption	whereby	sinful	people	could	come	into	fellowship	with	himself.
Once	again,	God	clearly	defines	the	provisions	of	a	covenant	that	would
specify	the	relationship	between	himself	and	those	whom	he	would	redeem.
In	these	specifications	we	find	some	variation	in	detail	throughout	the	Old
and	New	Testaments,	but	the	essential	elements	of	a	covenant	are	all	there,
and	the	nature	of	those	essential	elements	remains	the	same	throughout	the
Old	Testament	and	the	New	Testament.
The	
parties	
to	this	covenant	of	grace	are	God	and	the	people	whom	he	will
redeem.	But	in	this	case	Christ	fulfills	a	special	role	as	“mediator”	(Heb.	8:6;
9:15;	12:24)	in	which	he	fulfills	the	conditions	of	the	covenant	for	us	and
thereby	reconciles	us	to	God.	(There	was	no	mediator	between	God	and	man
in	the	covenant	of	works.)
The	
condition	
(or	requirement)	of	participation	in	the	covenant	is	
faith	
in	the
work	of	Christ	the	redeemer	(Rom.	1:17;	5:1;	et	al.).	This	requirement	of	faith
in	the	redemptive	work	of	the	Messiah	was	also	the	condition	of	obtaining	the
blessings	of	the	covenant	in	the	Old	Testament,	as	Paul	clearly	demonstrates
through	the	examples	of	Abraham	and	David	(Rom.	4:1–15).	They,	like	other
Old	Testament	believers,	were	saved	by	looking	forward	to	the	work	of	the
Messiah	who	was	to	come	and	putting	faith	in	him.
4
But	while	the	condition	of	
beginning	
the	covenant	of	grace	is	always	faith	in
Christ’s	work	alone,	the	condition	of	
continuing	
in	that	covenant	is	said	to	be
obedience	to	God’s	commands.	Though	this	obedience	did	not	in	the	Old
Testament	and	does	not	in	the	New	Testament	earn	us	any	merit	with	God,
nonetheless,	if	our	faith	in	Christ	is	genuine,	it	will	produce	obedience	(see
James	2:17),	and	obedience	to	Christ	is	in	the	New	Testament	seen	as
necessary	evidence	that	we	are	truly	believers	and	members	of	the	new
covenant	(see	1	John	2:4–6).
The	
promise	
of	blessings	in	the	covenant	was	a	promise	of	eternal	life	with
God.	This	promise	was	repeated	frequently	throughout	the	Old	and	the	New
Testaments.	God	promised	that	he	would	be	their	God	and	that	they	would	be
his	people.	“And	I	will	establish	my	covenant	between	me	and	you	and	your
descendants	after	you	throughout	their	generations	for	an	everlasting
covenant,	
to	be	God	to	you	
and	to	your	descendants	after	you”	(Gen.	17:7).	“I
will	be	their	God,	and	they	shall	be	my	people”	(Jer.	31:33).	“And	they	shall
be	my	people,	and	I	will	be	their	God	.	.	.	I	will	make	with	them	an
everlasting	covenant”	(Jer.	32:38–40;	cf.	Ezek.	34:30–31;	36:28;	37:26–27).
That	theme	is	picked	up	in	the	New	Testament	as	well:	
“I	will	be	their	God,
and	they	shall	be	my	people”	
(2	Cor.	6:16;	cf.	a	similar	theme	in	vv.	17–18;
also	1	Peter	2:9–10).	In	speaking	of	the	new	covenant,	the	author	of	Hebrews
quotes	Jeremiah	31:	“I	will	be	their	God,	and	they	shall	be	my	people”	(Heb.
8:10).	This	blessing	finds	fulfillment	in	the	church,	which	is	the	people	of
God,	but	it	finds	its	greatest	fulfillment	in	the	new	heaven	and	new	earth,	as
John	sees	in	his	vision	of	the	age	to	come:	“Behold,	the	dwelling	of	God	is
with	men.	He	will	dwell	with	them,	and	
they	shall	be	his	people,	and	God
himself	will	be	with	them”	
(Rev.	21:3).
The	
sign	
of	this	covenant	(the	outward,	physical	symbol	of	inclusion	in	the
covenant)	varies	between	the	Old	Testament	and	the	New	Testament.	In	the
Old	Testament	the	outward	sign	of	beginning	the	covenant	relationship	was
circumcision.	The	sign	of	continuing	the	covenant	relationship	was
continuing	to	observe	all	the	festivals	and	ceremonial	laws	that	God	gave	the
people	at	various	times.	In	the	new	covenant,	the	sign	of	beginning	a	covenant
relationship	is	baptism,	while	the	sign	of	continuing	in	that	relationship	is
participation	in	the	Lord’s	Supper.
The	reason	this	covenant	is	called	a	“covenant	of	grace”	is	that	it	is	entirely
based	on	God’s	“grace”	or	unmerited	favor	toward	those	whom	he	redeems.
2.	Various	Forms	of	the	Covenant.
	Although	the	essential	elements	of	the
covenant	of	grace	remain	the	same	throughout	the	history	of	God’s	people,
the	specific	provisions	of	the	covenant	vary	from	time	to	time.	At	the	time	of
Adam	and	Eve,	there	was	only	the	bare	hint	of	the	possibility	of	a	relationship
with	God	found	in	the	promise	about	the	seed	of	the	woman	in	Genesis	3:15
and	in	God’s	gracious	provision	of	clothing	for	Adam	and	Eve	(Gen.	3:21).
The	covenant	that	God	made	with	Noah	after	the	flood	(Gen.	9:8–17)	was	not
a	covenant	that	promised	all	the	blessings	of	eternal	life	or	spiritual
fellowship	with	God,	but	simply	one	in	which	God	promised	all	mankind	and
the	animal	creation	that	the	earth	would	no	longer	be	destroyed	by	a	flood.	In
this	sense	the	covenant	with	Noah,	although	it	certainly	does	depend	on	God’s
grace	or	unmerited	favor,	appears	to	be	quite	different	in	the	parties	involved
(God	and	all	mankind,	not	just	the	redeemed),	the	condition	named	(no	faith
or	obedience	is	required	of	man),	and	the	blessing	that	is	promised	(that	the
earth	will	not	be	destroyed	again	by	flood,	certainly	a	different	promise	from
that	of	eternal	life).	The	sign	of	the	covenant	(the	rainbow)	is	also	different	in
that	it	requires	no	active	or	voluntary	participation	on	man’s	part.
But	beginning	with	the	covenant	with	Abraham	(Gen.	15:1–21;	17:1–27),	the
essential	elements	of	the	covenant	of	grace	are	all	there.	In	fact,	Paul	can	say
that	“the	scripture	.	.	.	preached	the	gospel	beforehand	to	Abraham”	(Gal.
3:8).	Moreover,	Luke	tells	us	that	Zechariah,	the	father	of	John	the	Baptist,
prophesied	that	the	coming	of	John	the	Baptist	to	prepare	the	way	for	Christ
was	the	beginning	of	God’s	working	to	fulfill	the	ancient	covenant	promises
to	Abraham	(“to	perform	the	mercy	promised	to	our	fathers,	and	
to	remember
his	holy	covenant,	
the	oath	which	he	swore	to	our	father	Abraham,”	Luke
1:72–73).	So	the	covenant	promises	to	Abraham	remained	in	force	even	as
they	found	fulfillment	in	Christ	(see	Rom.	4:1–25;	Gal.	3:6–18,	29;	Heb.
2:16;	6:13–20).
5
What	then	is	the	“old	covenant”	in	contrast	with	the	“new	covenant”	in
Christ?	
It	is	not	the	whole	of	the	Old	Testament,	
because	the	covenants	with
Abraham	and	David	are	never	called	“old”	in	the	New	Testament.	Rather,
only	the	covenant	under	Moses,	
the	covenant	made	at	Mount	Sinai	(Ex.	19–
24)	is	called	the	“old	covenant”	(2	Cor.	3:14;	cf.	Heb.	8:6,	13),	to	be	replaced
by	the	“new	covenant”	in	Christ	(Luke	22:20;	1	Cor.	11:25;	2	Cor.	3:6;	Heb.
8:8,	13;	9:15;	12:24).	The	Mosaic	covenant	was	an	administration
6
	of	detailed
written	laws	given	for	a	time	to	restrain	the	sins	of	the	people	and	to	be	a
custodian	to	point	people	to	Christ.	Paul	says,	“Why	then	the	law?	It	was
added	because	of	transgressions,	till	the	offspring	should	come	to	whom	the
promise	had	been	made”	(Gal.	3:19),	and,	“The	law	was	our	custodian	until
Christ	came”	(Gal.	3:24).
We	should	not	assume	that	there	was	no	grace	available	to	people	from	Moses
until	Christ,	because	the	promise	of	salvation	by	faith	that	God	had	made	to
Abraham	remained	in	force:
Now	the	promises	were	made	to	Abraham	and	to	his	offspring	.	.	.	
the
law,	
which	came	four	hundred	and	thirty	years	afterward,	
does	not
annul	a	covenant	previously	ratified	by	God,	
so	as	to	make	the
promise	void.	For	if	the	inheritance	is	by	the	law,	it	is	no	longer	by
promise;	but	God	gave	it	to	Abraham	by	a	promise.	(Gal.	3:16–18)
Moreover,	although	the	sacrificial	system	of	the	Mosaic	covenant	did	not
really	take	away	sins	(Heb.	10:1–4),	it	foreshadowed	the	bearing	of	sin	by
Christ,	the	perfect	high	priest	who	was	also	the	perfect	sacrifice	(Heb.	9:11–
28).	Nevertheless,	the	Mosaic	covenant	itself,	with	all	its	detailed	laws,	could
not	save	people.	It	is	not	that	the	laws	were	wrong	in	themselves,	for	they
were	given	by	a	holy	God,	but	they	had	no	power	to	give	people	new	life,	and
the	people	were	not	able	to	obey	them	perfectly:	“Is	the	law	then	against	the
promises	of	God?	Certainly	not;	for	if	a	law	had	been	given	which	could
make	alive,	then	righteousness	would	indeed	be	by	the	law”	(Gal.	3:21).	Paul
realizes	that	the	Holy	Spirit	working	within	us	can	empower	us	to	obey	God
in	a	way	that	the	Mosaic	law	never	could,	for	he	says	that	God	“has	made	us
competent	to	be	ministers	of	a	new	covenant,	not	in	a	written	code	but	in	the
Spirit;	for	the	written	code	kills,	but	the	Spirit	gives	life”	(2	Cor.	3:6).
The	new	covenant	in	Christ,	then,	is	far	better	because	it	fulfills	the	promises
made	in	Jeremiah	31:31–34,	as	quoted	in	Hebrews	8:
But	as	it	is,	Christ	has	obtained	a	ministry	which	is	as	much	more
excellent	than	the	old	as	the	covenant	he	mediates	is	better,	since	it	is
enacted	on	better	promises.	For	if	that	first	covenant	had	been	faultless,
there	would	have	been	no	occasion	for	a	second.
For	he	finds	fault	with	them	when	he	says:
“The	days	will	come,	says	the	Lord,
when	I	will	establish	a	new	covenant	with	the	house	of
Israel
and	with	the	house	of	Judah;
not	like	the	covenant	that	I	made	with	their	fathers
on	the	day	when	I	took	them	by	the	hand
to	lead	them	out	of	the	land	of	Egypt;
for	they	did	not	continue	in	my	covenant,
and	so	I	paid	no	heed	to	them,	says	the	Lord.
This	is	the	covenant	that	I	will	make	with	the	house	of
Israel
after	those	days,	says	the	Lord:
I	will	put	my	laws	into	their	minds,
and	write	them	on	their	hearts,
and	I	will	be	their	God,
and	they	shall	be	my	people.
And	they	shall	not	teach	every	one	his	fellow
or	every	one	his	brother,	saying,	‘Know	the	Lord,’
for	all	shall	know	me,
from	the	least	of	them	to	the	greatest.
For	I	will	be	merciful	toward	their	iniquities,
and	I	will	remember	their	sins	no	more.”
In	speaking	of	a	new	covenant	he	treats	the	first	as	obsolete.	And	what
is	becoming	obsolete	and	growing	old	is	ready	to	vanish	away.	(Heb.
8:6–13)
In	this	new	covenant,	there	are	far	greater	blessings,	for	Jesus	the	Messiah	has
come;	he	has	lived,	died,	and	risen	among	us,	atoning	once	for	all	for	our	sins
(Heb.	9:24–28);	he	has	revealed	God	most	fully	to	us	(John	1:14;	Heb.	1:1–3);
he	has	poured	out	the	Holy	Spirit	on	all	his	people	in	new	covenant	power
(Acts	1:8;	1	Cor.	12:13;	2	Cor.	3:4–18);	he	has	written	his	laws	on	our	hearts
(Heb.	8:10).	This	new	covenant	is	the	“eternal	covenant”	(Heb.	13:20)	in
Christ,	through	which	we	shall	forever	have	fellowship	with	God,	and	he	shall
be	our	God,	and	we	shall	be	his	people.
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
Before	reading	this	chapter,	had	you	thought	of	your	relationship	to	God
in	terms	of	a	“covenant”?	Does	it	give	you	any	added	degree	of	certainty
or	sense	of	security	in	your	relationship	to	God	to	know	that	he	governs
that	relationship	by	a	set	of	promises	that	he	will	never	change?
2
.	
If	you	were	to	think	of	the	relationship	between	God	and	yourself
personally	in	terms	of	a	covenant,	whereby	you	and	God	are	the	only
two	parties	involved,	then	what	would	be	the	conditions	of	this	covenant
between	you	and	God?	Are	you	now	fulfilling	those	conditions?	What
role	does	Christ	play	in	the	covenant	relationship	between	you	and	God?
What	are	the	blessings	God	promises	to	you	if	you	fulfill	those
conditions?	What	are	the	signs	of	participation	in	this	covenant?	Does
this	understanding	of	the	covenant	increase	your	appreciation	of	baptism
and	the	Lord’s	Supper?
SPECIAL	TERMS
covenant
	
	
covenant	of	works
covenant	of	grace
	
	
new	covenant
covenant	of	redemption
	
	
old	covenant
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the	
bibliography	to
chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be	found	in	
Appendix	4
.)
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92			Litton	(no	explicit	treatment)
1930			Thomas,	134–41
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1983			Carter,	1:476–83
3.			Baptist
1767			Gill,	1:300–359,	491–530
1887			Boyce,	247–58
4.			Dispensational
1947			Chafer,	7:96–99
1949			Thiessen,	199–205
1986			Ryrie,	453–60
5.			Lutheran
1934			Mueller	(no	explicit	treatment)
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1861			Heppe,	281–319,	371–409
1871–73			Hodge,	2:117–22,	354–77
1878			Dabney,	292–305,	429–63
1889			Shedd,	2a:148–67
1937–66			Murray,	
CW,	
2:47–59,	123–31
1938			Berkhof,	211–18,	262–301
1962			Buswell,	1:307–20
7.			Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988–92			Williams,	1:275–304
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955			Ott	(no	explicit	treatment)
2.			Roman	Catholic:	Post-Vatican	II
1980			McBrien	(no	explicit	treatment)
Other	Works
Archer,	G.	L.	“Covenant.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	276–78.
Collins,	G.	N.	M.	“Federal	Theology.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	413–14.
Dumbrell,	W.	J.	
Covenant	and	Creation.	
Nashville:	Thomas	Nelson,
1984.
Fuller,	Daniel	P.	
Gospel	and	Law:	Contrast	or	Continuum?	The
Hermeneutics	of	Dispensationalism	and	Covenant	Theology.	
Grand
Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1980.
Jocz,	Jakob.	
The	Covenant:	A	Theology	of	Human	Destiny.	
Grand
Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1968.
Kaiser,	Walter	C.,	Jr.	
Toward	An	Old	Testament	Theology.	
Grand	Rapids:
Zondervan,	1978.
Martens,	Elmer.	
God’s	Design:	A	Focus	on	Old	Testament	Theology.
Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1981.
McComiskey,	Thomas	E.	
The	Covenants	of	Promise:	A	Theology	of	the
Old	Testament	Covenants.	
Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1985.
Murray,	John.	
Covenant	of	Grace.	
London:	Tyndale,	1954.
Osterhaven,	M.	E.	“Covenant	Theology.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	279–80.
Pentecost,	J.	Dwight.	
Thy	Kingdom	Come.	
Wheaton,	Ill.:	Scripture	Press,
1990.
Peters,	G.	N.	H.	
The	Theocratic	Kingdom.	
3	vols.	New	York:	Funk	and
Wagnalls,	1952	(first	published	1884).
Rayburn,	R.	S.	“Covenant,	The	New.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	278–79.
Robertson,	O.	Palmer.	
The	Christ	of	the	Covenants.	
Grand	Rapids:
Baker,	1980.
Ryrie,	C.	C.	
Dispensationalism	Today.	
Chicago:	Moody,	1965.
VanGemeren,	Willem.	
The	Progress	of	Redemption.	
Grand	Rapids:
Zondervan,	1988.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
Hebrews	8:10:
“This	is	the	covenant	that	I	will	make	with	the	house	of	Israel
after	those	days,”	says	the	Lord:
“I	will	put	my	laws	into	their	minds,
and	write	them	on	their	hearts,
and	I	will	be	their	God,
and	they	shall	be	my	people.”
HYMN
“Trust	and	Obey”
This	hymn	reminds	us	that	the	enjoyment	of	God’s	blessings	depends	on	our
continuing	to	fulfill	the	conditions	of	faith	and	obedience	as	stipulated	in	the
New	Testament,	which	is	the	written	record	of	the	provisions	of	the	new
covenant	that	God	has	made	with	us.
When	we	walk	with	the	Lord	in	the	light	of	his	Word,
What	a	glory	he	sheds	on	our	way!
While	we	do	his	good	will,	he	abides	with	us	still,
And	with	all	who	will	trust	and	obey.
Chorus:
Trust	and	obey,	for	there’s	no	other	way
To	be	happy	in	Jesus,	but	to	trust	and	obey.
Not	a	shadow	can	rise,	not	a	cloud	in	the	skies,
But	his	smile	quickly	drives	it	away;
Not	a	doubt	or	a	fear,	not	a	sigh	nor	a	tear,
Can	abide	while	we	trust	and	obey.
Not	a	burden	we	bear,	not	a	sorrow	we	share,
But	our	toil	he	doth	richly	repay;
Not	a	grief	nor	a	loss,	not	a	frown	or	a	cross,
But	is	blest	if	we	trust	and	obey.
But	we	never	can	prove	the	delights	of	his	love
Until	all	on	the	altar	we	lay;
For	the	favor	he	shows,	and	the	joy	he	bestows,
Are	for	them	who	will	trust	and	obey.
Then	in	fellowship	sweet	we	will	sit	at	his	feet,
Or	we’ll	walk	by	his	side	in	the	way;
What	he	says	we	will	do,	where	he	sends	we	will	go,
Never	fear,	only	trust	and	obey.
AUTHOR:	JAMES	H.	SAMMIS,	D.	1919
NOTES
1
The	RSV	text	translates,	“But	
at	Adam	
they	transgressed	the	covenant,”	but	the	marginal	note	admits	that	this	is	a	conjectural
emendation	and	that	the	Hebrew	text	actually	reads	“like	Adam”	(Heb.	
ke’ādām
).	The	Hebrew	preposition	
ke	
means	“like,”	not
“at.”	The	word	translated	“Adam”	(Heb.	
’ādām
)	can	also	be	translated	“man,”	but	the	statement	would	make	little	sense:	there	is
no	single	well-known	transgression	of	a	covenant	by	
man	
to	which	it	could	refer.	Moreover,	it	would	do	little	good	to	compare	the
Israelites	to	what	they	already	are	(that	is,	men)	and	say	that	they	“like	man”	broke	the	covenant.	Such	a	sentence	would	almost
imply	that	the	Israelites	were	not	men,	but	some	other	kind	of	creature.	For	these	reasons,	the	translation	“like	Adam”	is	to	be
preferred.	(The	identical	Hebrew	expression	is	translated	“like	Adam”	in	Job	31:33	in	the	NASB,	RSV	margin,	and	NIV	margin.)
2
The	punishment	of	death	began	to	be	carried	out	on	the	day	that	Adam	and	Eve	sinned,	but	it	was	carried	out	slowly	over	time,
as	their	bodies	grew	old	and	they	eventually	died.	The	promise	of	spiritual	death	was	put	into	effect	immediately,	since	they	were
cut	off	from	fellowship	with	God.	The	death	of	eternal	condemnation	was	rightfully	theirs,	but	the	hints	of	redemption	in	the	text
(see	Gen.	3:15,	21)	suggest	that	this	penalty	was	ultimately	overcome	by	the	redemption	that	Christ	purchased.
3
However,	animals	were	included	with	human	beings	in	the	covenant	that	God	spoke	to	Noah,	promising	that	he	would	never
again	destroy	the	earth	with	a	flood	(Gen.	9:8–17).
4
See	
chapter	7
,	for	a	discussion	of	the	fact	that	Old	Testament	believers	were	saved	only	by	trusting	in	the	Messiah	who	was	to
come.
5
The	covenant	promises	to	Abraham	were	renewed	and	further	assurances	given	when	God	spoke	with	David	(see	esp.	2	Sam.
7:5–16;	cf.	Jer.	33:19–22),	giving	to	David	the	promise	that	a	Davidic	king	would	reign	over	the	people	of	God	forever.	For	an
excellent	discussion	of	the	continuity	of	God’s	promises	as	seen	in	the	covenants	made	with	Abraham	and	David,	and	in	the	new
covenant,	see	Thomas	E.	McComiskey,	
The	Covenants	of	Promise:	A	Theology	of	the	Old	Testament	Covenants	
(Grand	Rapids:
Baker,	1985),	esp.	pp.	59–93.
6
For	an	excellent	discussion	of	the	difference	between	the	overarching	covenant	of	promise	and	the	various	“administrative
covenants”	that	God	used	at	different	times,	see	McComiskey,	
Covenants	of	Promise,	
esp.	pp.	139–77	and	193–211.
OceanofPDF.com
Part	4
The	Doctrines	of	Christ	and	the	Holy	Spirit
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	26
The	Person	of	Christ
How	is	Jesus	fully	God	and	fully	man,	yet	one	person?
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
We	may	summarize	the	biblical	teaching	about	the	person	of	Christ	as
follows:	
Jesus	Christ	was	fully	God	and	fully	man	in	one	person,	and	will	be
so	forever.
The	scriptural	material	supporting	this	definition	is	extensive.	We	will	discuss
first	the	humanity	of	Christ,	then	his	deity,	and	then	attempt	to	show	how
Jesus’	deity	and	humanity	are	united	in	the	one	person	of	Christ.
A.	The	Humanity	of	Christ
1.
	Virgin	Birth.
	When	we	speak	of	the	humanity	of	Christ	it	is	appropriate	to
begin	with	a	consideration	of	the	virgin	birth	of	Christ.	Scripture	clearly
asserts	that	Jesus	was	conceived	in	the	womb	of	his	mother	Mary	by	a
miraculous	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	and	without	a	human	father.
“Now	the	birth	of	Jesus	Christ	took	place	in	this	way.	When	his	mother	Mary
had	been	betrothed	to	Joseph,	
before	they	came	together	
she	was	found	to	be
with	child	
of	the	Holy	Spirit”	
(Matt.	1:18).	Shortly	after	that	an	angel	of	the
Lord	said	to	Joseph,	who	was	engaged	to	Mary,	“Joseph,	son	of	David,	do	not
fear	to	take	Mary	your	wife,	for	
that	which	is	conceived	in	her	is	of	the	Holy
Spirit”	
(Matt.	1:20).	Then	we	read	that	Joseph	“did	as	the	angel	of	the	Lord
commanded	him;	he	took	his	wife,	but	knew	her	not	until	she	had	borne	a
son;	and	he	called	his	name	Jesus”	(Matt.	1:24–25).
The	same	fact	is	affirmed	in	Luke’s	gospel,	where	we	read	about	the
appearance	of	the	angel	Gabriel	to	Mary.	After	the	angel	had	told	her	that	she
would	bear	a	son,	Mary	said,	“How	shall	this	be,	since	I	have	no	husband?”
The	angel	answered,
“The	Holy	Spirit	will	come	upon	you,
and	the	power	of	the	Most	High	will	overshadow	you;
therefore	the	child	to	be	born	will	be	called	holy,
the	Son	of	God.”	(Luke	1:35;	cf.	3:23)
The	doctrinal	importance	of	the	virgin	birth	is	seen	in	at	least	three	areas.
1.	It	shows	that	salvation	ultimately	must	come	from	the	Lord.	Just	as	God
had	promised	that	the	“seed”	of	the	woman	(Gen.	3:15)	would	ultimately
destroy	the	serpent,	so	God	brought	it	about	by	his	own	power,	not	through
mere	human	effort.	The	virgin	birth	of	Christ	is	an	unmistakable	reminder	that
salvation	can	never	come	through	human	effort,	but	must	be	the	work	of	God
himself.	Our	salvation	only	comes	about	through	the	supernatural	work	of
God,	and	that	was	evident	at	the	very	beginning	of	Jesus’	life	when	“God	sent
forth	his	Son,	born	of	woman,	born	under	the	law,	to	redeem	those	who	were
under	the	law,	so	that	we	might	receive	adoption	as	sons”	(Gal.	4:4–5).
2.	The	virgin	birth	made	possible	the	uniting	of	full	deity	and	full	humanity	in
one	person.	This	was	the	means	God	used	to	send	his	Son	(John	3:16;	Gal.
4:4)	into	the	world	as	a	man.	If	we	think	for	a	moment	of	other	possible	ways
in	which	Christ	might	have	come	to	the	earth,	none	of	them	would	so	clearly
unite	humanity	and	deity	in	one	person.	It	probably	would	have	been	possible
for	God	to	create	Jesus	as	a	complete	human	being	in	heaven	and	send	him	to
descend	from	heaven	to	earth	without	the	benefit	of	any	human	parent.	But
then	it	would	have	been	very	hard	for	us	to	see	how	Jesus	could	be	fully
human	as	we	are,	nor	would	he	be	a	part	of	the	human	race	that	physically
descended	from	Adam.	On	the	other	hand,	it	probably	would	have	been
possible	for	God	to	have	Jesus	come	into	the	world	with	two	human	parents,
both	a	father	and	a	mother,	and	with	his	full	divine	nature	miraculously	united
to	his	human	nature	at	some	point	early	in	his	life.	But	then	it	would	have
been	hard	for	us	to	understand	how	Jesus	was	fully	God,	since	his	origin	was
like	ours	in	every	way.	When	we	think	of	these	two	other	possibilities,	it	helps
us	to	understand	how	God,	in	his	wisdom,	ordained	a	combination	of	human
and	divine	influence	in	the	birth	of	Christ,	so	that	his	full	humanity	would	be
evident	to	us	from	the	fact	of	his	ordinary	human	birth	from	a	human	mother,
and	his	full	deity	would	be	evident	from	the	fact	of	his	conception	in	Mary’s
womb	by	the	powerful	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit.
1
3.	The	virgin	birth	also	makes	possible	Christ’s	true	humanity	without
inherited	sin.	As	we	noted	in	chapter	24,	all	human	beings	have	inherited
legal	guilt	and	a	corrupt	moral	nature	from	their	first	father,	Adam	(this	is
sometimes	called	“inherited	sin”	or	“original	sin”).	But	the	fact	that	Jesus	did
not	have	a	human	father	means	that	the	line	of	descent	from	Adam	is	partially
interrupted.	Jesus	did	not	descend	from	Adam	in	exactly	the	same	way	in
which	every	other	human	being	has	descended	from	Adam.	And	this	helps	us
to	understand	why	the	legal	guilt	and	moral	corruption	that	belongs	to	all
other	human	beings	did	not	belong	to	Christ.
This	idea	seems	to	be	indicated	in	the	statement	of	the	angel	Gabriel	to	Mary,
where	he	says	to	her,
“The	Holy	Spirit	will	come	upon	you,
and	the	power	of	the	Most	High	will	overshadow	you;
therefore	the	child	to	be	born	will	be	called	holy,
the	Son	of	God.”	(Luke	1:35)
Because	
the	Spirit	brought	about	the	conception	of	Jesus	in	the	womb	of
Mary,	the	child	was	to	be	called	
“holy.”
2
	Such	a	conclusion	should	not	be
taken	to	mean	that	the	transmission	of	sin	comes	only	through	the	father,	for
Scripture	nowhere	makes	such	an	assertion.	It	is	enough	for	us	merely	to	say
that	
in	this	case	
the	unbroken	line	of	descent	from	Adam	was	interrupted,	and
Jesus	was	conceived	by	the	power	of	the	Holy	Spirit.	Luke	1:35	connects	this
conception	by	the	Holy	Spirit	with	the	holiness	or	moral	purity	of	Christ,	and
reflection	on	that	fact	allows	us	to	understand	that	through	the	absence	of	a
human	father,	Jesus	was	not	fully	descended	from	Adam,	and	that	this	break
in	the	line	of	descent	was	the	method	God	used	to	bring	it	about	that	Jesus
was	fully	human	yet	did	not	share	inherited	sin	from	Adam.
But	why	did	Jesus	not	inherit	a	sinful	nature	from	Mary?	The	Roman	Catholic
Church	answers	this	question	by	saying	that	Mary	herself	was	free	from	sin,
but	Scripture	nowhere	teaches	this,	and	it	would	not	really	solve	the	problem
anyway	(for	why	then	did	Mary	not	inherit	sin	from	her	mother?).
3
	A	better
solution	is	to	say	that	the	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in	Mary	must	have
prevented	not	only	the	transmission	of	sin	from	Joseph	(for	Jesus	had	no
human	father)	but	also,	in	a	miraculous	way,	the	transmission	of	sin	from
Mary:	“The	Holy	Spirit	will	come	upon	you	.	.	.	
therefore	
the	child	to	be	born
will	be	called	
holy”	
(Luke	1:35).
It	has	been	common,	at	least	in	previous	generations,	for	those	who	do	not
accept	the	complete	truthfulness	of	Scripture	to	deny	the	doctrine	of	the	virgin
birth	of	Christ.	But	if	our	beliefs	are	to	be	governed	by	the	statements	of
Scripture,	then	we	will	certainly	not	deny	this	teaching.	Whether	or	not	we
could	discern	any	aspects	of	doctrinal	importance	for	this	teaching,	we	should
believe	it	first	of	all	simply	because	Scripture	affirms	it.	Certainly	such	a
miracle	is	not	too	hard	for	the	God	who	created	the	universe	and	everything	in
it—anyone	who	affirms	that	a	virgin	birth	is	“impossible”	is	just	confessing
his	or	her	own	unbelief	in	the	God	of	the	Bible.	Yet	in	addition	to	the	fact	that
Scripture	teaches	the	virgin	birth,	we	can	see	that	it	is	doctrinally	important,
and	if	we	are	to	understand	the	biblical	teaching	on	the	person	of	Christ
correctly,	it	is	important	that	we	begin	with	an	affirmation	of	this	doctrine.
2.	Human	Weaknesses	and	Limitations.
a.	Jesus	Had	a	Human	Body:
	The	fact	that	Jesus	had	a	human	body	just	like
our	human	bodies	is	seen	in	many	passages	of	Scripture.	He	was	born	just	as
all	human	babies	are	born	(Luke	2:7).	He	grew	through	childhood	to
adulthood	just	as	other	children	grow:	“And	the	child	grew	and	became
strong,	filled	with	wisdom;	and	the	favor	of	God	was	upon	him”	(Luke	2:40).
Moreover,	Luke	tells	us	that	“Jesus	increased	in	wisdom	
and	in	stature,	
and	in
favor	with	God	and	man”	(Luke	2:52).
Jesus	became	tired	just	as	we	do,	for	we	read	that	“Jesus,	
wearied	
as	he	was
with	his	journey,	sat	down	beside	the	well”	in	Samaria	(John	4:6).	He	became
thirsty,	for	when	he	was	on	the	cross	he	said,	
“I	thirst”	
(John	19:28).	After	he
had	fasted	for	forty	days	in	the	wilderness,	we	read	that	“he	was	
hungry”
(Matt.	4:2).	He	was	at	times	physically	weak,	for	during	his	temptation	in	the
wilderness	he	fasted	for	forty	days	(the	point	at	which	a	human	being’s
physical	strength	is	almost	entirely	gone	and	beyond	which	irreparable
physical	harm	will	occur	if	the	fast	continues).	At	that	time	“angels	came	and
ministered	to	him”	(Matt.	4:11),	apparently	to	care	for	him	and	provide
nourishment	until	he	regained	enough	strength	to	come	out	of	the	wilderness.
When	Jesus	was	on	his	way	to	be	crucified,	the	soldiers	forced	Simon	of
Cyrene	to	carry	his	cross	(Luke	23:26),	most	likely	because	Jesus	was	so
weak	following	the	beating	he	had	received	that	he	did	not	have	strength
enough	to	carry	it	himself.	The	culmination	of	Jesus’	limitations	in	terms	of
his	human	body	is	seen	when	he	died	on	the	cross	(Luke	23:46).	His	human
body	ceased	to	have	life	in	it	and	ceased	to	function,	just	as	ours	does	when
we	die.
Jesus	also	rose	from	the	dead	in	a	physical,	human	body,	though	one	that	was
made	perfect	and	was	no	longer	subject	to	weakness,	disease,	or	death.	He
demonstrates	repeatedly	to	his	disciples	that	he	does	have	a	real	physical
body:	he	says,	“See	my	hands	and	my	feet,	that	it	is	I	myself;	handle	me,	and
see;	for	
a	spirit	has	not	flesh	and	bones	as	you	see	that	I	have”	
(Luke	24:39).
He	is	showing	them	and	teaching	them	that	he	has	“flesh	and	bones”	and	is
not	merely	a	“spirit”	without	a	body.	Another	evidence	of	this	fact	is	that
“they	gave	him	a	piece	of	broiled	fish,	and	he	took	it	and	ate	before	them”
(Luke	24:42;	cf.	v.	
30;	John	20:17,	20,	27;	21:9,	13).
In	this	same	human	body	(though	a	resurrection	body	that	was	made	perfect),
Jesus	also	ascended	into	heaven.	He	said	before	he	left,	“I	am	leaving	the
world	and	going	to	the	Father”	(John	16:28;	cf.	17:11).	The	way	in	which
Jesus	ascended	up	to	heaven	was	calculated	to	demonstrate	the	continuity
between	his	existence	in	a	physical	body	here	on	earth	and	his	continuing
existence	in	that	body	in	heaven.	Just	a	few	verses	after	Jesus	had	told	them,
“A	spirit	has	not	flesh	and	bones	as	you	see	that	I	have”	(Luke	24:39),	we
read	in	Luke’s	gospel	that	Jesus	“led	them	out	as	far	as	Bethany,	and	lifting	up
his	hands	he	blessed	them.	While	he	blessed	them,	he	parted	from	them,	and
was	carried	up	into	heaven”	(Luke	24:50–51).	Similarly,	we	read	in	Acts,	“As
they	were	looking	on,	he	was	lifted	up,	and	a	cloud	took	him	out	of	their
sight”	(Acts	1:9).
All	of	these	verses	taken	together	show	that,	as	far	as	Jesus’	human	body	is
concerned,	it	was	like	ours	in	every	respect	before	his	resurrection,	and	after
his	resurrection	it	was	still	a	human	body	with	“flesh	and	bones,”	but	made
perfect,	the	kind	of	body	that	we	will	have	when	Christ	returns	and	we	are
raised	from	the	dead	as	well.
4
	Jesus	continues	to	exist	in	that	human	body	in
heaven,	as	the	ascension	is	designed	to	teach.
b.	Jesus	Had	A	Human	Mind:
	The	fact	that	Jesus	
“increased	in	wisdom”
(Luke	2:52)	says	that	he	went	through	a	learning	process	just	as	all	other
children	do—he	learned	how	to	eat,	how	to	talk,	how	to	read	and	write,	and
how	to	be	obedient	to	his	parents	(see	Heb.	5:8).	This	ordinary	learning
process	was	part	of	the	genuine	humanity	of	Christ.
We	also	see	that	Jesus	had	a	human	mind	like	ours	when	he	speaks	of	the	day
on	which	he	will	return	to	earth:	“But	of	that	day	or	that	hour	no	one	knows,
not	even	the	angels	in	heaven,	nor	the	Son,	but	only	the	Father”	(Mark
13:32).
5
c.	Jesus	Had	a	Human	Soul	and	Human	Emotions:
	We	see	several
indications	that	Jesus	had	a	human	soul	(or	spirit).	Just	before	his	crucifixion,
Jesus	said,	“Now	is	my	soul	
troubled”	
(John	12:27).	John	writes	just	a	little
later,	“When	Jesus	had	thus	spoken,	he	was	
troubled	
in	spirit”	(John	13:21).
In	both	verses	the	word	
troubled	
represents	the	Greek	term	
tarassō,	
a	word
that	is	often	used	of	people	when	they	are	anxious	or	suddenly	very	surprised
by	danger.
6
Moreover,	before	Jesus’	crucifixion,	as	he	realized	the	suffering	he	would
face,	he	said,	“My	soul	is	very	sorrowful,	even	to	death”	(Matt.	26:38).	So
great	was	the	sorrow	he	felt	that	it	seemed	as	though,	if	it	were	to	become	any
stronger,	it	would	take	his	very	life.
Jesus	had	a	full	range	of	human	emotions.	He	“marveled”	at	the	faith	of	the
centurion	(Matt.	8:10).	He	wept	with	sorrow	at	the	death	of	Lazarus	(John
11:35).	And	he	prayed	with	a	heart	full	of	emotion,	for	“in	the	days	of	his
flesh,	Jesus	offered	up	prayers	and	supplications,	
with	loud	cries	and	tears,	
to
him	who	was	able	to	save	him	from	death,	and	he	was	heard	for	his	godly
fear”	(Heb.	5:7).
Moreover,	the	author	tells	us,	“Although	he	was	a	Son,	
he	learned	obedience
through	what	he	suffered;	and	being	made	perfect	he	became	the	source	of
eternal	salvation	to	all	who	obey	him”	(Heb.	5:8–9).	Yet	if	Jesus	never	sinned,
how	could	he	“learn	obedience”?	Apparently	as	Jesus	grew	toward	maturity
he,	like	all	other	human	children,	was	able	to	take	on	more	and	more
responsibility.	The	older	he	became	the	more	demands	his	father	and	mother
could	place	on	him	in	terms	of	obedience,	and	the	more	difficult	the	tasks	that
his	heavenly	Father	could	assign	to	him	to	carry	out	in	the	strength	of	his
human	nature.	With	each	increasingly	difficult	task,	even	when	it	involved
some	suffering	(as	Heb.	5:8	specifies),	Jesus’	human	moral	ability,	his	ability
to	obey	under	more	and	more	difficult	circumstances,	increased.	We	might
say	that	his	“moral	backbone”	was	strengthened	by	more	and	more	difficult
exercise.	Yet	in	all	this	he	never	once	sinned.
The	complete	absence	of	sin	in	the	life	of	Jesus	is	all	the	more	remarkable
because	of	the	severe	temptations	he	faced,	not	only	in	the	wilderness,	but
throughout	his	life.	The	author	of	Hebrews	affirms	that	Jesus	“
in	every	respect
has	been	tempted	as	we	are,	yet	without	sin”	(Heb.	4:15).	The	fact	that	he
faced	temptation	means	that	he	had	a	genuine	human	nature	that	could	be
tempted,	for	Scripture	clearly	tells	us	that	“God	cannot	be	tempted	with	evil”
(James	1:13).
d.	People	Near	Jesus	Saw	Him	As	Only	a	Man:
	Matthew	reports	an
amazing	incident	in	the	middle	of	Jesus’	ministry.	Even	though	Jesus	had
taught	throughout	all	Galilee,	“healing	every	disease	and	every	infirmity
among	the	people,”	so	that	“great	crowds	followed	him”	(Matt.	4:23–25),
when	he	came	to	his	own	village	of	Nazareth,	the	people	who	had	known	him
for	many	years	did	not	receive	him:
And	when	Jesus	had	finished	these	parables,	he	went	away	from
there,	and	coming	to	his	own	country	he	taught	them	in	their
synagogue,	so	that	they	were	astonished,	and	said,	
“Where	did	this
man	get	this	wisdom	and	these	mighty	works?	
Is	not	this	the
carpenter’s	son?	Is	not	his	mother	called	Mary?	And	are	not	his
brothers	James	and	Joseph	and	Simon	and	Judas?	And	are	not	all	his
sisters	with	us?	Where	then	did	this	man	get	all	this?”	And	
they	took
offense	at	him.	.	.	.	
And	he	did	not	do	many	mighty	works	there,
because	of	their	unbelief.	
(Matt.	13:53–58)
This	passage	indicates	that	those	people	who	knew	Jesus	best,	the	neighbors
with	whom	he	had	lived	and	worked	for	thirty	years,	saw	him	as	no	more	than
an	ordinary	man—a	good	man,	no	doubt,	fair	and	kind	and	truthful,	but
certainly	not	a	prophet	of	God	who	could	work	miracles	and	certainly	not
God	himself	in	the	flesh.	Although	in	the	following	sections	we	will	see	how
Jesus	was	fully	divine	in	every	way—was	truly	God	and	man	in	one	person—
we	must	still	recognize	the	full	force	of	a	passage	like	this.	For	the	first	thirty
years	of	his	life	Jesus	lived	a	human	life	that	was	so	ordinary	that	the	people
of	Nazareth	who	knew	him	best	were	amazed	that	he	could	teach	with
authority	and	work	miracles.	They	knew	him.	He	was	one	of	them.	He	was
“the	carpenter’s	son”	(Matt.	13:55),	and	he	was	himself	“the	carpenter”	(Mark
6:3),	so	ordinary	that	they	could	ask,	“Where	then	did	this	man	get	all	this?”
(Matt.	13:56).	And	John	tells	us,	“
Even	his	brothers	
did	not	believe	in	him”
(John	7:5).
Was	Jesus	fully	human?	He	was	so	fully	human	that	even	those	who	lived	and
worked	with	him	for	thirty	years,	even	those	brothers	who	grew	up	in	his	own
household,	did	not	realize	that	he	was	anything	more	than	another	very	good
human	being.	They	apparently	had	no	idea	that	he	was	God	come	in	the	flesh.
3.	Sinlessness.
	Though	the	New	Testament	clearly	affirms	that	Jesus	was
fully	human	just	as	we	are,	it	also	affirms	that	Jesus	was	different	in	one
important	respect:	he	was	without	sin,	and	he	never	committed	sin	during	his
lifetime.	Some	have	objected	that	if	Jesus	did	not	sin,	then	he	was	not	
truly
human,	for	all	humans	sin.	But	those	making	that	objection	simply	fail	to
realize	that	human	beings	are	now	in	an	
abnormal	
situation.	God	did	not
create	us	sinful,	but	holy	and	righteous.	Adam	and	Eve	in	the	Garden	of	Eden
before	they	sinned	were	
truly	
human,	and	we	now,	though	human,	do	not
match	the	pattern	that	God	intends	for	us	when	our	full,	sinless	humanity	is
restored.
The	sinlessness	of	Jesus	is	taught	frequently	in	the	New	Testament.	We	see
suggestions	of	this	early	in	his	life	when	he	was	“filled	with	wisdom”	and
“the	favor	of	God	was	upon	him”	(Luke	2:40).	Then	we	see	that	Satan	was
unable	to	tempt	Jesus	successfully,	but	failed,	after	forty	days,	to	persuade
him	to	sin:	“And	when	the	devil	had	ended	every	temptation,	he	departed
from	him	until	an	opportune	time”	(Luke	4:13).	We	also	see	in	the	synoptic
gospels	(Matthew,	Mark,	and	Luke)	no	evidence	of	wrongdoing	on	Jesus’
part.	To	the	Jews	who	opposed	him,	Jesus	asked,	“Which	of	you	convicts	me
of	sin?”	(John	8:46),	and	received	no	answer.
The	statements	about	Jesus’	sinlessness	are	more	explicit	in	John’s	gospel.
Jesus	made	the	amazing	proclamation,	“I	am	the	light	of	the	world”	(John
8:12).	If	we	understand	light	to	represent	both	truthfulness	and	moral	purity,
then	Jesus	is	here	claiming	to	be	the	source	of	truth	and	the	source	of	moral
purity	and	holiness	in	the	world—an	astounding	claim,	and	one	that	could
only	be	made	by	someone	who	was	free	from	sin.	Moreover,	with	regard	to
obedience	to	his	Father	in	heaven,	he	said,	“I	always	do	what	is	pleasing	to
him”	(John	8:29;	the	present	tense	gives	the	sense	of	continual	activity,	“I	
am
always	doing	
what	is	pleasing	to	him”).	At	the	end	of	his	life,	Jesus	could	say,
“I	have	kept	my	Father’s	commandments	and	abide	in	his	love”	(John	15:10).
It	is	significant	that	when	Jesus	was	put	on	trial	before	Pilate,	in	spite	of	the
accusations	of	the	Jews,	Pilate	could	only	conclude,	“I	find	no	crime	in	him”
(John	18:38).
In	the	book	of	Acts	Jesus	is	several	times	called	the	“Holy	One”	or	the
“Righteous	One,”	or	is	referred	to	with	some	similar	expression	(see	Acts
2:27;	3:14;	4:30;	7:52;	13:35).	When	Paul	speaks	of	Jesus	coming	to	live	as	a
man	he	is	careful	not	to	say	that	he	took	on	“sinful	flesh,”	but	rather	says	that
God	sent	his	own	Son	“
in	the	likeness	of	
sinful	flesh	and	for	sin”	(Rom.	8:3).
And	he	refers	to	Jesus	as	“him	.	.	.	who	knew	no	sin”	(2	Cor.	5:21).
The	author	of	Hebrews	affirms	that	Jesus	was	tempted	but	simultaneously
insists	that	he	did	not	sin:	Jesus	is	“one	who	in	every	respect	has	been	tempted
as	we	are,	
yet	without	sin”	
(Heb.	4:15).	He	is	a	high	priest	who	is	“holy,
blameless,	unstained,	separated	from	sinners,	exalted	above	the	heavens”
(Heb.	7:26).	Peter	speaks	of	Jesus	as	“a	lamb	without	blemish	or	spot”	(1
Peter	1:19),	using	Old	Testament	imagery	to	affirm	his	freedom	from	any
moral	defilement.	Peter	directly	states,	
“He	committed	no	sin;	
no	guile	was
found	on	his	lips”	(1	Peter	2:22).	When	Jesus	died,	it	was	“the	righteous	for
the	unrighteous,	that	he	might	bring	us	to	God”	(1	Peter	3:18).	And	John,	in
his	first	epistle,	calls	him	“Jesus	Christ	the	righteous”	(1	John	2:1)	and	says,
“In	him	there	is	no	sin”	(1	John	3:5).	It	is	hard	to	deny,	then,	that	the
sinlessness	of	Christ	is	taught	clearly	in	all	the	major	sections	of	the	New
Testament.	He	was	truly	man	yet	without	sin.
In	connection	with	Jesus’	sinlessness,	we	should	notice	in	more	detail	the
nature	of	his	temptations	in	the	wilderness	(Matt.	4:1–11;	Mark	1:12–13;
Luke	4:1–13).	The	essence	of	these	temptations	was	an	attempt	to	persuade
Jesus	to	escape	from	the	hard	path	of	obedience	and	suffering	that	was
appointed	for	him	as	the	Messiah.	Jesus	was	“led	by	the	Spirit	for	forty	days
in	the	wilderness,	tempted	by	the	devil”	(Luke	4:1–2).	In	many	respects	this
temptation	was	parallel	to	the	testing	that	Adam	and	Eve	faced	in	the	Garden
of	Eden,	but	it	was	much	more	difficult.	Adam	and	Eve	had	fellowship	with
God	and	with	each	other	and	had	an	abundance	of	all	kinds	of	food,	for	they
were	only	told	not	to	eat	from	one	tree.	By	contrast,	Jesus	had	no	human
fellowship	and	no	food	to	eat,	and	after	he	had	fasted	for	forty	days	he	was
near	the	point	of	physical	death.	In	both	cases	the	kind	of	obedience	required
was	not	obedience	to	an	eternal	moral	principle	rooted	in	the	character	of
God,	but	was	a	test	of	pure	obedience	to	God’s	specific	directive.	With	Adam
and	Eve,	God	told	them	not	to	eat	of	the	tree	of	the	knowledge	of	good	and
evil,	and	the	question	was	whether	they	would	obey	simply	because	God	told
them.	In	the	case	of	Jesus,	“led	by	the	Spirit”	for	forty	days	in	the	wilderness,
he	apparently	realized	that	it	was	the	Father’s	will	that	he	eat	nothing	during
those	days	but	simply	remain	there	until	the	Father,	through	the	leading	of	the
Holy	Spirit,	told	him	that	the	temptations	were	over	and	he	could	leave.
We	can	understand,	then,	the	force	of	the	temptation,	“If	you	are	the	Son	of
God,	command	this	stone	to	become	bread”	(Luke	4:3).	Of	course	Jesus	was
the	Son	of	God,	and	of	course	he	had	the	power	to	make	any	stone	into	bread
instantly.	He	was	the	one	who	would	soon	change	water	into	wine	and
multiply	the	loaves	and	the	fishes.	The	temptation	was	intensified	by	the	fact
that	it	seemed	as	though,	if	he	did	not	eat	soon,	his	very	life	would	be	taken
from	him.	Yet	he	had	come	to	obey	God	perfectly	in	our	place,	and	to	do	so
as	a	man.	
This	meant	that	he	had	to	obey	in	his	human	strength	alone.	If	he
had	called	upon	his	divine	powers	to	make	the	temptation	easier	for	himself,
then	he	would	not	have	obeyed	God	fully	
as	a	man.	
The	temptation	was	to
use	his	divine	power	to	“cheat”	a	bit	on	the	requirements	and	make	obedience
somewhat	easier.	But	Jesus,	unlike	Adam	and	Eve,	refused	to	eat	what
appeared	to	be	good	and	necessary	for	him,	choosing	rather	to	obey	the
command	of	his	heavenly	Father.
The	temptation	to	bow	down	and	worship	Satan	for	a	moment	and	then
receive	authority	over	“all	the	kingdoms	of	the	world”	(Luke	4:5)	was	a
temptation	to	receive	power	not	through	the	path	of	lifelong	obedience	to	his
heavenly	Father,	but	through	wrongful	submission	to	the	Prince	of	Darkness.
Again,	Jesus	rejected	the	apparently	easy	path	and	chose	the	path	of
obedience	that	led	to	the	cross.
Similarly,	the	temptation	to	throw	himself	down	from	the	pinnacle	of	the
temple	(Luke	4:9–11)	was	a	temptation	to	“force”	God	to	perform	a	miracle
and	rescue	him	in	a	spectacular	way,	thus	attracting	a	large	following	from	the
people	without	pursuing	the	hard	path	ahead,	the	path	that	included	three
years	of	ministering	to	people’s	needs,	teaching	with	authority,	and
exemplifying	absolute	holiness	of	life	in	the	midst	of	harsh	opposition.	But
Jesus	again	resisted	this	“easy	route”	to	the	fulfillment	of	his	goals	as	the
Messiah	(again,	a	route	that	would	not	actually	have	fulfilled	those	goals	in
any	case).
These	temptations	were	really	the	culmination	of	a	lifelong	process	of	moral
strengthening	and	maturing	that	occurred	throughout	Jesus’	childhood	and
early	adulthood,	as	he	“increased	in	wisdom	.	.	.	and	in	favor	with	God”	(Luke
2:52)	and	as	he	
“learned	obedience	
through	what	he	suffered”	(Heb.	5:8).	In
these	temptations	in	the	wilderness	and	in	the	various	temptations	that	faced
him	through	the	thirty-three	years	of	his	life,	Christ	obeyed	God	in	our	place
and	as	our	representative,	thus	succeeding	where	Adam	had	failed,	where	the
people	of	Israel	in	the	wilderness	had	failed,	and	where	we	had	failed	(see
Rom.	5:18–19).
As	difficult	as	it	may	be	for	us	to	comprehend,	Scripture	affirms	that	in	these
temptations	Jesus	gained	an	ability	to	understand	and	help	us	in	our
temptations.
“Because	he	himself	has	suffered	and	been	tempted,	
he	is	able	to
help	those	who	are	tempted”	(Heb.	2:18).	The	author	goes	on	to	connect
Jesus’	ability	to	sympathize	with	our	weaknesses	to	the	fact	the	he	was
tempted	as	we	are:
For	we	have	not	a	high	priest	who	is	unable	to	sympathize	with	our
weaknesses,	but	one	who	in	every	respect	has	been	tempted	as	we	are,
yet	without	sin.	Let	us	then	[lit.,	‘therefore’]	with	confidence	draw
near	to	the	throne	of	grace,	that	we	may	receive	mercy	and	find	grace
to	help	in	time	of	need.	(Heb.	4:15–16)
This	has	practical	application	for	us:	in	every	situation	in	which	we	are
struggling	with	temptation,	we	should	reflect	on	the	life	of	Christ	and	ask	if
there	were	not	similar	situations	that	he	faced.	Usually,	after	reflecting	for	a
moment	or	two,	we	will	be	able	to	think	of	some	instances	in	the	life	of	Christ
where	he	faced	temptations	that,	though	they	were	not	the	same	in	every
detail,	were	very	similar	to	the	situations	that	we	face	every	day.
7
4.	Could	Jesus	Have	Sinned?
	The	question	is	sometimes	raised,	“Was	it
possible	for	Christ	to	have	sinned?”	Some	people	argue	for	the	
impeccability
of	Christ,	in	which	the	word	
impeccable	
means	“not	able	to	sin.”
8
	Others
object	that	if	Jesus	were	not	able	to	sin,	his	temptations	could	not	have	been
real,	for	how	can	a	temptation	be	real	if	the	person	being	tempted	is	not	able
to	sin	anyway?
In	order	to	answer	this	question	we	must	distinguish	what	Scripture	clearly
affirms,	on	the	one	hand,	and,	on	the	other	hand,	what	is	more	in	the	nature	of
possible	inference	on	our	part.	(1)	Scripture	clearly	affirms	that	Christ	never
actually	sinned	(see	above).	There	should	be	no	question	in	our	minds	at	all
on	this	fact.	(2)	It	also	clearly	affirms	that	Jesus	was	tempted,	and	that	these
were	real	temptations	(Luke	4:2).	If	we	believe	Scripture,	then	we	must	insist
that	Christ	“
in	every	respect	has	been	tempted	as	we	are,	
yet	without	sin”
(Heb.	4:15).	If	our	speculation	on	the	question	of	whether	Christ	could	have
sinned	ever	leads	us	to	say	that	he	was	not	truly	tempted,	then	we	have
reached	a	wrong	conclusion,	one	that	contradicts	the	clear	statements	of
Scripture.
(3)	We	also	must	affirm	with	Scripture	that	“God	cannot	be	tempted	with
evil”	(James	1:13).	But	here	the	question	becomes	difficult:	if	Jesus	was	fully
God	as	well	as	fully	man	(and	we	shall	argue	below	that	Scripture	clearly	and
repeatedly	teaches	this),	then	must	we	not	also	affirm	that	(in	some	sense)
Jesus	also	“could	not	be	tempted	with	evil”?
This	is	as	far	as	we	can	go	in	terms	of	clear	and	explicit	affirmations	of
Scripture.	At	this	point	we	are	faced	with	a	dilemma	similar	to	a	number	of
other	doctrinal	dilemmas	where	Scripture	seems	to	be	teaching	things	that	are,
if	not	directly	contradictory,	at	least	very	difficult	to	combine	together	in	our
understanding.	For	example,	with	respect	to	the	doctrine	of	the	Trinity,	we
affirmed	that	God	exists	in	three	persons,	and	each	is	fully	God,	and	there	is
one	God.	Although	those	statements	are	not	contradictory,	they	are,
nonetheless,	difficult	to	understand	in	connection	with	each	other,	and
although	we	can	make	some	progress	in	understanding	how	they	fit	together,
in	this	life,	at	least,	we	have	to	admit	that	there	can	be	no	final	understanding
on	our	part.	Here	the	situation	is	somewhat	similar.	We	do	not	have	an	actual
contradiction.	Scripture	does	not	tell	us	that	“Jesus	was	tempted”	and	that
“Jesus	was	not	tempted”	(a	contradiction	if	“Jesus”	and	“tempted”	are	used
exactly	in	the	same	sense	in	both	sentences).	The	Bible	tells	us	that	“Jesus
was	tempted”	and	“Jesus	was	fully	man”	and	“Jesus	was	fully	God”	and	“God
cannot	be	tempted.”	This	combination	of	teachings	from	Scripture	leaves
open	the	possibility	that	as	we	understand	the	way	in	which	Jesus’	human
nature	and	divine	nature	work	together,	we	might	understand	more	of	the	way
in	which	he	could	be	tempted	in	one	sense	and	yet,	in	another	sense,	not	be
tempted.	(This	possibility	will	be	discussed	further	below.)
At	this	point,	then,	we	pass	beyond	the	clear	affirmations	of	Scripture	and
attempt	to	suggest	a	solution	to	the	problem	of	whether	Christ	could	have
sinned.	But	it	is	important	to	recognize	that	the	following	solution	is	more	in
the	nature	of	a	suggested	means	of	combining	various	biblical	teachings	and
is	not	directly	supported	by	explicit	statements	of	Scripture.	With	this	in
mind,	it	is	appropriate	for	us	to	say:
9
	(1)	If	Jesus’	human	nature	had	existed	by
itself,	independent	of	his	divine	nature,	then	it	would	have	been	a	human
nature	just	like	that	which	God	gave	Adam	and	Eve.	It	would	have	been	free
from	sin	but	nonetheless	
able	to	sin.	
Therefore,	if	Jesus’	human	nature	had
existed	by	itself,	there	was	the	abstract	or	theoretical	possibility	that	Jesus
could	have	sinned,	just	as	Adam	and	Eve’s	human	natures	were	able	to	sin.
(2)	But	Jesus’	human	nature	never	existed	apart	from	union	with	his	divine
nature.	From	the	moment	of	his	conception,	he	existed	as	truly	God	and	truly
man	as	well.	Both	his	human	nature	and	his	divine	nature	existed	united	in
one	person.	(3)	Although	there	were	some	things	(such	as	being	hungry	or
thirsty	or	weak)	that	Jesus	experienced	in	his	human	nature	alone	and	were
not	experienced	in	his	divine	nature	(see	below),	nonetheless,	an	act	of	sin
would	have	been	a	moral	act	that	would	apparently	have	involved	the	whole
person	of	Christ.	Therefore,	if	he	had	sinned,	it	would	have	involved	both	his
human	and	divine	natures.	(4)	But	if	Jesus	as	a	person	had	sinned,	involving
both	his	human	and	divine	natures	in	sin,	then	God	himself	would	have
sinned,	and	he	would	have	ceased	to	be	God.	Yet	that	is	clearly	impossible
because	of	the	infinite	holiness	of	God’s	nature.	(5)	Therefore,	if	we	are
asking	if	it	was	
actually	
possible	for	Jesus	to	have	sinned,	it	seems	that	we
must	conclude	that	it	was	not	possible.	The	union	of	his	human	and	divine
natures	in	one	person	prevented	it.
But	the	question	remains,	“How	then	could	Jesus’	temptations	be	real?”	The
example	of	the	temptation	to	change	the	stones	into	bread	is	helpful	in	this
regard.	Jesus	had	the	ability,	by	virtue	of	his	divine	nature,	to	perform	this
miracle,	but	if	he	had	done	it,	he	would	no	longer	have	been	obeying	in	the
strength	of	his	human	nature	alone,	he	would	have	failed	the	test	that	Adam
also	failed,	and	he	would	not	have	earned	our	salvation	for	us.	Therefore,
Jesus	refused	to	rely	on	his	divine	nature	to	make	obedience	easier	for	him.	In
like	manner,	it	seems	appropriate	to	conclude	that	Jesus	met	every	temptation
to	sin,	not	by	his	divine	power,	but	on	the	strength	of	his	human	nature	alone
(though,	of	course,	it	was	not	“alone”	because	Jesus,	in	exercising	the	kind	of
faith	that	humans	should	exercise,	was	perfectly	depending	on	God	the	Father
and	the	Holy	Spirit	at	every	moment).	The	moral	strength	of	his	divine	nature
was	there	as	a	sort	of	“backstop”	that	would	have	prevented	him	from	sinning
in	any	case	(and	therefore	we	can	say	that	it	was	not	possible	for	him	to	sin),
but	he	did	not	rely	on	the	strength	of	his	divine	nature	to	make	it	easier	for
him	to	face	temptations,	and	his	refusal	to	turn	the	stones	into	bread	at	the
beginning	of	his	ministry	is	a	clear	indication	of	this.
Were	the	temptations	real	then?	Many	theologians	have	pointed	out	that	only
he	who	successfully	resists	a	temptation	to	the	end	most	fully	feels	the	force
of	that	temptation.	Just	as	a	champion	weightlifter	who	successfully	lifts	and
holds	over	head	the	heaviest	weight	in	the	contest	feels	the	force	of	it	more
fully	than	one	who	attempts	to	lift	it	and	drops	it,	so	any	Christian	who	has
successfully	faced	a	temptation	to	the	end	knows	that	that	is	far	more	difficult
than	giving	in	to	it	at	once.	So	it	was	with	Jesus:	every	temptation	he	faced,
he	faced	to	the	end,	and	triumphed	over	it.	The	temptations	were	real,	even
though	he	did	not	give	in	to	them.	In	fact,	they	were	most	real	
because	
he	did
not	give	in	to	them.
What	then	do	we	say	about	the	fact	that	“God	cannot	be	tempted	with	evil”
(James	1:13)?	It	seems	that	this	is	one	of	a	number	of	things	that	we	must
affirm	to	be	true	of	Jesus’	divine	nature	but	not	of	his	human	nature.	His
divine	nature	could	not	be	tempted	with	evil,	but	his	human	nature	could	be
tempted	and	was	clearly	tempted.	How	these	two	natures	united	in	one	person
in	facing	temptations,	Scripture	does	not	clearly	explain	to	us.	But	this
distinction	between	what	is	true	of	one	nature	and	what	is	true	of	another
nature	is	an	example	of	a	number	of	similar	statements	that	Scripture	requires
us	to	make	(see	more	on	this	distinction,	below,	when	we	discuss	how	Jesus
could	be	God	and	man	in	one	person).
5.	Why	Was	Jesus’	Full	Humanity	Necessary?
	When	John	wrote	his	first
epistle,	a	heretical	teaching	was	circulating	in	the	church	to	the	effect	that
Jesus	was	not	a	man.	This	heresy	became	known	as	
docetism.
10
	So	serious
was	this	denial	of	truth	about	Christ,	that	John	could	say	it	was	a	doctrine	of
the	antichrist:	“By	this	you	know	the	Spirit	of	God:	every	spirit	which
confesses	
that	Jesus	Christ	has	come	in	the	flesh	
is	of	God,	and	every	spirit
which	does	not	confess	Jesus	is	not	of	God.	This	is	the	spirit	of	antichrist”	(1
John	4:2–3).	The	apostle	John	understood	that	to	deny	Jesus’	true	humanity
was	to	deny	something	at	the	very	heart	of	Christianity,	so	that	no	one	who
denied	that	Jesus	had	come	in	the	flesh	was	sent	from	God.
As	we	look	through	the	New	Testament,	we	see	several	reasons	why	Jesus
had	to	be	fully	man	if	he	was	going	to	be	the	Messiah	and	earn	our	salvation.
We	can	list	seven	of	those	reasons	here.
a.	For	Representative	Obedience:
	As	we	noted	in	the	chapter	on	the
covenants	between	God	and	man	above,
11
	Jesus	was	our	representative	and
obeyed	for	us	where	Adam	had	failed	and	disobeyed.	We	see	this	in	the
parallels	between	Jesus’	temptation	(Luke	4:1–13)	and	the	time	of	testing	for
Adam	and	Eve	in	the	garden	(Gen.	2:15–3:7).	It	is	also	clearly	reflected	in
Paul’s	discussion	of	the	parallels	between	Adam	and	Christ,	in	Adam’s
disobedience	and	Christ’s	obedience:
Then	as	one	man’s	trespass	led	to	condemnation	for	all	men,	so	
one
man’s	act	of	righteousness	
leads	to	acquittal	and	life	for	all	men.	For
as	by	one	man’s	disobedience	many	were	made	sinners,	so	
by	one
man’s	obedience	
many	will	be	made	righteous.	(Rom.	5:18–19)
This	is	why	Paul	can	call	Christ	“the	last	Adam”	(1	Cor.	15:45)	and	can	call
Adam	the	“first	man”	and	Christ	the	“second	man”	(1	Cor.	15:47).	Jesus	had
to	be	a	man	in	order	to	be	our	representative	and	obey	in	our	place.
b.	To	Be	a	Substitute	Sacrifice:
	If	Jesus	had	not	been	a	man,	he	could	not
have	died	in	our	place	and	paid	the	penalty	that	was	due	to	us.	The	author	of
Hebrews	tells	us	that	“For	surely	it	is	not	with	angels	that	he	is	concerned	but
with	the	descendants	of	Abraham.	Therefore	he	
had	to	
be	made	like	his
brethren	in	every	respect,	so	that	he	might	become	a	merciful	and	faithful
high	priest	in	the	service	of	God,	to	make	expiation	[more	accurately,
‘propitiation’]	for	the	sins	of	the	people”	(Heb.	2:16–17;	cf.	v.	
14).	Jesus	had
to	become	a	man,	not	an	angel,	because	God	was	concerned	with	saving	men,
not	with	saving	angels.	But	to	do	this	he	
“had	to”	
be	made	like	us	in	every
way,	so	that	he	might	become	“the	propitiation”	for	us,	the	sacrifice	that	is	an
acceptable	substitute	for	us.	Though	this	idea	will	be	discussed	more	fully	in
chapter	27,	on	the	atonement,	it	is	important	here	to	realize	that	unless	Christ
was	fully	man,	he	could	not	have	died	to	pay	the	penalty	for	man’s	sins.	He
could	not	have	been	a	substitute	sacrifice	for	us.
c.	To	Be	the	One	Mediator	Between	God	and	Men:
	Because	we	were
alienated	from	God	by	sin,	we	needed	someone	to	come	between	God	and
ourselves	and	bring	us	back	to	him.	We	needed	a	mediator	who	could
represent	us	to	God	and	who	could	represent	God	to	us.	There	is	only	one
person	who	has	ever	fulfilled	that	requirement:	“There	is	one	God,	and	
there
is	one	mediator	
between	God	and	men,	the	man	Christ	Jesus”	(1	Tim.	2:5).	In
order	to	fulfill	this	role	of	mediator,	Jesus	had	to	be	fully	man	as	well	as	fully
God.
d.	To	Fulfill	God’s	Original	Purpose	for	Man	to	Rule	Over	Creation:
	As
we	saw	in	the	discussion	of	the	purpose	for	which	God	created	man,
12
	God
put	mankind	on	the	earth	to	subdue	it	and	rule	over	it	as	God’s
representatives.	But	man	did	not	fulfill	that	purpose,	for	he	instead	fell	into
sin.	The	author	of	Hebrews	realizes	that	God	intended	everything	to	be	in
subjection	to	man,	but	he	admits,	“As	it	is,	we	do	not	yet	see	everything	in
subjection	to	him”	(Heb.	2:8).	Then	when	Jesus	came	as	a	man,	he	was	able
to	obey	God	and	thereby	have	the	right	to	rule	over	creation	
as	a	man,	
thus
fulfilling	God’s	original	purpose	in	putting	man	on	the	earth.	Hebrews
recognizes	this	when	it	says	that	now	“we	see	Jesus”	in	the	place	of	authority
over	the	universe,	“crowned	with	glory	and	honor”	(Heb.	2:9;	cf.	the	same
phrase	in	v.	
7).	Jesus	in	fact	has	been	given	“all	authority	in	heaven	and	on
earth”	(Matt.	28:18),	and	God	has	“put	all	things	under	his	feet	and	has	made
him	the	head	over	all	things	for	the	church”	(Eph.	1:22).	Indeed,	we	shall
someday	reign	with	him	on	his	throne	(Rev.	3:21)	and	experience,	in
subjection	to	Christ	our	Lord,	the	fulfillment	of	God’s	purpose	that	we	reign
over	the	earth	(cf.	Luke	19:17,	19;	1	Cor.	6:3).	Jesus	had	to	be	a	man	in	order
to	fulfill	God’s	original	purpose	that	man	rule	over	his	creation.
e.	To	Be	Our	Example	and	Pattern	in	Life:
	John	tells	us,	“He	who	says	he
abides	in	him	ought	to	walk	
in	the	same	way	in	which	he	walked”	
(1	John
2:6),	and	reminds	us	that	“when	he	appears	we	shall	be	like	him,”	and	that
this	hope	of	future	conformity	to	Christ’s	character	even	now	gives	increasing
moral	purity	to	our	lives	(1	John	3:2–3).	Paul	tells	us	that	we	are	continually
being	“changed	into	his	likeness”	(2	Cor.	3:18),	thus	moving	toward	the	goal
for	which	God	saved	us,	that	we	might	“be	conformed	to	the	image	of	his
Son”	(Rom.	8:29).	Peter	tells	us	that	especially	in	suffering	we	have	to
consider	Christ’s	example:	“Christ	also	suffered	for	you,	
leaving	you	an
example,	
that	you	should	follow	in	his	steps”	(1	Peter	2:21).	Throughout	our
Christian	life,	we	are	to	run	the	race	set	before	us	“looking	to	Jesus	the
pioneer	and	perfecter	of	our	faith”	(Heb.	12:2).	If	we	become	discouraged	by
the	hostility	and	opposition	of	sinners,	we	are	to	“consider	him	who	endured
from	sinners	such	hostility	against	himself”	(Heb.	12:3).	Jesus	is	also	our
example	in	death.	Paul’s	goal	is	to	become	“
like	him	
in	his	death”	(Phil.	3:10;
cf.	Acts	7:60;	1	Peter	3:17–18	with	4:1).	Our	goal	should	be	to	be	like	Christ
all	our	days,	up	to	the	point	of	death,	and	to	die	with	unfailing	obedience	to
God,	with	strong	trust	in	him,	and	with	love	and	forgiveness	to	others.	Jesus
had	to	become	a	man	like	us	in	order	to	live	as	our	example	and	pattern	in
life.
f.	To	Be	the	Pattern	for	Our	Redeemed	Bodies:
	Paul	tells	us	that	when
Jesus	rose	from	the	dead	he	rose	in	a	new	body	that	was	“imperishable	.	.	.
raised	in	glory	.	.	.	raised	in	power	.	.	.	raised	a	spiritual	body”	(1	Cor.	15:42–
44).	This	new	resurrection	body	that	Jesus	had	when	he	rose	from	the	dead	is
the	pattern	for	what	our	bodies	will	be	like	when	we	are	raised	from	the	dead,
because	Christ	is	“the	first	fruits”	(1	Cor.	15:23)—an	agricultural	metaphor
that	likens	Christ	to	the	first	sample	of	the	harvest,	showing	what	the	other
fruit	from	that	harvest	would	be	like.	We	now	have	a	physical	body	like
Adam’s,	but	we	will	have	one	like	Christ’s:	“Just	as	we	have	borne	the	image
of	the	man	of	dust,	we	shall	also	bear	the	image	of	the	man	of	heaven”	(1	Cor.
15:49).	Jesus	had	to	be	raised	as	a	man	in	order	to	be	the	“first-born	from	the
dead”	(Col.	1:18),	the	pattern	for	the	bodies	that	we	would	later	have.
g.	To	Sympathize	As	High	Priest:
	The	author	of	Hebrews	reminds	us	that
“because	he	himself	has	suffered	and	been	tempted,	he	is	able	to	help	those
who	are	tempted”	(Heb.	2:18;	cf.	4:15–16).	If	Jesus	had	not	been	a	man,	he
would	not	have	been	able	to	know	
by	experience	
what	we	go	through	in	our
temptations	and	struggles	in	this	life.	But	because	he	has	lived	as	a	man,	he	is
able	to	sympathize	more	fully	with	us	in	our	experiences.
13
6.	Jesus	Will	Be	a	Man	Forever.
	Jesus	did	not	give	up	his	human	nature	after
his	death	and	resurrection,	for	he	appeared	to	his	disciples	as	a	man	after	the
resurrection,	even	with	the	scars	of	the	nail	prints	in	his	hands	(John	20:25–
27).	He	had	“flesh	and	bones”	(Luke	24:39)	and	ate	food	(Luke	24:41–42).
Later,	when	he	was	talking	with	his	disciples,	he	was	taken	up	into	heaven,
still	in	his	resurrected	human	body,	and	two	angels	promised	that	he	would
return	in	the	same	way:	“This	Jesus,	who	was	taken	up	from	you	into	heaven,
will	come	in	the	same	way	
as	you	saw	him	go	into	heaven”	(Acts	1:11).	Still
later,	Stephen	gazed	into	heaven	and	saw	Jesus	as	“the	Son	of	man	standing	at
the	right	hand	of	God”	(Acts	7:56).	Jesus	also	appeared	to	Saul	on	the
Damascus	Road	and	said,	“I	am	Jesus,	whom	you	are	persecuting”	(Acts	9:5)
—an	appearance	that	Saul	(Paul)	later	coupled	with	the	resurrection
appearances	of	Jesus	to	others	(1	Cor.	9:1;	15:8).	In	John’s	vision	in
Revelation,	Jesus	still	appears	as	“one	like	a	son	of	man”	(Rev.	1:13),	though
he	is	filled	with	great	glory	and	power,	and	his	appearance	causes	John	to	fall
at	his	feet	in	awe	(Rev.	1:13–17).	He	promises	one	day	to	drink	wine	again
with	his	disciples	in	his	Father’s	kingdom	(Matt.	26:29)	and	invites	us	to	a
great	marriage	supper	in	heaven	(Rev.	19:9).	Moreover,	Jesus	will	continue
forever	in	his	offices	as	prophet,	priest,	and	king,	all	of	them	carried	out	by
virtue	of	the	fact	that	he	is	both	God	and	man	forever.
14
All	of	these	texts	indicate	that	Jesus	did	not	
temporarily	
become	man,	but	that
his	divine	nature	was	
permanently	
united	to	his	human	nature,	and	he	lives
forever	not	just	as	the	eternal	Son	of	God,	the	second	person	of	the	Trinity,
but	also	as	Jesus,	the	man	who	was	born	of	Mary,	and	as	Christ,	the	Messiah
and	Savior	of	his	people.	Jesus	will	remain	fully	God	and	fully	man,	yet	one
person,	forever.
B.	The	Deity	of	Christ
To	complete	the	biblical	teaching	about	Jesus	Christ,	we	must	affirm	not	only
that	he	was	fully	human,	but	also	that	he	was	fully	divine.	Although	the	word
does	not	explicitly	occur	in	Scripture,	the	church	has	used	the	term
incarnation	
to	refer	to	the	fact	that	Jesus	was	God	in	human	flesh.	The
incarnation	
was	the	act	of	God	the	Son	whereby	he	took	to	himself	a	human
nature.
15
	The	scriptural	proof	for	the	deity	of	Christ	is	very	extensive	in	the
New	Testament.	We	shall	examine	it	under	several	categories.
16
1.
	Direct	Scriptural	Claims.
	In	this	section	we	examine	direct	statements	of
Scripture	that	Jesus	is	God	or	that	he	is	divine.
17
a.	The	Word	
God	(Theos)	
Used	of	Christ:
	Although	the	word	
theos,	
“God,”
is	usually	reserved	in	the	New	Testament	for	God	the	Father,	nonetheless,
there	are	several	passages	where	it	is	also	used	to	refer	to	Jesus	Christ.	In	all
of	these	passages	the	word	“God”	is	used	in	the	strong	sense	to	refer	to	the
one	who	is	the	Creator	of	heaven	and	earth,	the	ruler	over	all.	These	passages
include	John	1:1;	1:18	(in	older	and	better	manuscripts);	20:28;	Romans	9:5;
Titus	2:13;	Hebrews	1:8	(quoting	Ps.	45:6);	and	2	Peter	1:1.
18
	As	these
passages	have	been	discussed	in	some	detail	in	the	chapter	on	the	Trinity,
19
the	discussion	will	not	be	repeated	here.	It	is	enough	to	note	that	there	are	at
least	these	seven	clear	passages	in	the	New	Testament	that	explicitly	refer	to
Jesus	as	God.
One	Old	Testament	example	of	the	name	
God	
applied	to	Christ	is	seen	in	a
familiar	messianic	passage:	“For	to	us	a	child	is	born,	to	us	a	son	is	given;	and
the	government	will	be	upon	his	shoulder,	and	his	name	will	be	called
‘Wonderful	Counselor,	
Mighty	God	
.	.	.’	”	(Isa.	9:6).
b.	The	Word	
Lord	(Kyrios)	
Used	of	Christ:
	Sometimes	the	word	
Lord	
(Gk.
kyrios
)	is	used	simply	as	a	polite	address	to	a	superior,	roughly	equivalent	to
our	word	
sir	
(see	Matt.	13:27;	21:30;	27:63;	John	4:11).	Sometimes	it	can
simply	mean	“master”	of	a	servant	or	slave	(Matt.	6:24;	21:40).	Yet	the	same
word	is	also	used	in	the	Septuagint	(the	Greek	translation	of	the	Old
Testament,	which	was	commonly	used	at	the	time	of	Christ)	as	a	translation
for	the	Hebrew	
yhwh,	
“Yahweh,”	or	(as	it	is	frequently	translated)	“the
L
ORD
,”	or	“Jehovah.”	The	word	
kyrios	
is	used	to	translate	the	name	of	the
Lord	6,814	times	in	the	Greek	Old	Testament.	Therefore,	any	Greek-speaking
reader	at	the	time	of	the	New	Testament	who	had	any	knowledge	at	all	of	the
Greek	Old	Testament	would	have	recognized	that,	in	contexts	where	it	was
appropriate,	the	word	“Lord”	was	the	name	of	the	one	who	was	the	Creator
and	Sustainer	of	heaven	and	earth,	the	omnipotent	God.
Now	there	are	many	instances	in	the	New	Testament	where	“Lord”	is	used	of
Christ	in	what	can	only	be	understood	as	this	strong	Old	Testament	sense,
“the	Lord”	who	is	Yahweh	or	God	himself.	This	use	of	the	word	“Lord”	is
quite	striking	in	the	word	of	the	angel	to	the	shepherds	of	Bethlehem:	“For	to
you	is	born	this	day	in	the	city	of	David	a	Savior,	who	is	Christ	
the	Lord”
(Luke	2:11).	Though	these	words	are	familiar	to	us	from	frequent	reading	of
the	Christmas	story,	we	should	realize	how	surprising	it	would	be	to	any	first-
century	Jew	to	hear	that	someone	born	as	a	baby	was	the	“Christ”	(or
“Messiah”),
20
	and,	moreover,	that	this	one	who	was	the	Messiah	was	also	“the
Lord”—that	is,	the	Lord	God	himself!	The	amazing	force	of	the	angel’s
statement,	which	the	shepherds	could	hardly	believe,	was	to	say,	essentially,
“Today	in	Bethlehem	a	baby	has	been	born	who	is	your	Savior	and	your
Messiah,	and	who	is	also	God	himself.”	It	is	not	surprising	that	“all	who
heard	it	wondered	at	what	the	shepherds	told	them”	(Luke	2:18).
When	Mary	comes	to	visit	Elizabeth	several	months	before	Jesus	is	to	be
born,	Elizabeth	says,	“Why	is	this	granted	me,	that	the	mother	of	
my	Lord
should	come	to	me?”	(Luke	1:43).	Because	Jesus	was	not	even	born,
Elizabeth	could	not	be	using	the	word	“Lord”	to	mean	something	like	human
“master.”	She	must	rather	be	using	it	in	the	strong	Old	Testament	sense,
giving	an	amazing	sense	to	the	sentence:	“Why	is	this	granted	me,	that	the
mother	of	the	Lord	God	himself	should	come	to	me?”	Though	this	is	a	very
strong	statement,	it	is	difficult	to	understand	the	word	“Lord”	in	this	context
in	any	weaker	sense.
We	see	another	example	when	Matthew	says	that	John	the	Baptist	is	the	one
who	cries	out	in	the	wilderness,	“Prepare	the	way	of	
the	Lord,	
make	his	paths
straight”	(Matt.	3:3).	In	doing	this	John	is	quoting	Isaiah	40:3,	which	speaks
about	the	Lord	God	himself	coming	among	his	people.	But	the	context	applies
this	passage	to	John’s	role	of	preparing	the	way	for	Jesus	to	come.	The
implication	is	that	when	Jesus	comes,	
the	Lord	himself	
will	come.
Jesus	also	identifies	himself	as	the	sovereign	Lord	of	the	Old	Testament	when
he	asks	the	Pharisees	about	Psalm	110:1,	“The	Lord	said	to	
my	Lord,	
Sit	at	my
right	hand,	till	I	put	your	enemies	under	your	feet”	(Matt.	22:44).	The	force	of
this	statement	is	that	“God	the	Father	said	to	God	the	Son	[David’s	Lord],	‘Sit
at	my	right	hand.	.	.	.’	”	The	Pharisees	know	he	is	talking	about	himself	and
identifying	himself	as	one	worthy	of	the	Old	Testament	title	
kyrios,	
“Lord.”
Such	usage	is	seen	frequently	in	the	Epistles,	where	“the	Lord”	is	a	common
name	to	refer	to	Christ.	Paul	says	“there	is	one	God,	the	Father,	from	whom
are	all	things	and	for	whom	we	exist,	and	
one	Lord,	
Jesus	Christ,	through
whom	are	all	things	and	through	whom	we	exist”	(1	Cor.	8:6;	cf.	12:3,	and
many	other	passages	in	the	Pauline	epistles).
A	particularly	clear	passage	is	found	in	Hebrews	1,	where	the	author	quotes
Psalm	102,	which	speaks	about	the	work	of	the	Lord	in	creation	and	applies	it
to	Christ:
You,	Lord,	founded	the	earth	in	the	beginning,
and	the	heavens	are	the	work	of	your	hands;
they	will	perish,	but	you	remain;
they	will	all	grow	old	like	a	garment,
like	a	mantle	you	will	roll	them	up,
and	they	will	be	changed.
But	you	are	the	same,
and	your	years	will	never	end.	(Heb.	1:10–12)
Here	Christ	is	explicitly	spoken	of	as	the	eternal	Lord	of	heaven	and	earth
who	created	all	things	and	will	remain	the	same	forever.	Such	strong	usage	of
the	term	“Lord”	to	refer	to	Christ	culminates	in	Revelation	19:16,	where	we
see	Christ	returning	as	conquering	King,	and	“On	his	robe	and	on	his	thigh	he
has	a	name	inscribed,	King	of	kings	and	
Lord	of	lords.”
c.	Other	Strong	Claims	to	Deity:
	In	addition	to	the	uses	of	the	word	
God
and	
Lord	
to	refer	to	Christ,	we	have	other	passages	that	strongly	claim	deity
for	Christ.	When	Jesus	told	his	Jewish	opponents	that	Abraham	had	seen	his
(Christ’s)	day,	they	challenged	him,	“You	are	not	yet	fifty	years	old,	and	have
you	seen	Abraham?”	(John	8:57).	Here	a	sufficient	response	to	prove	Jesus’
eternity	would	have	been,	“Before	Abraham	was,	I	was.”	But	Jesus	did	not
say	this.	Instead,	he	made	a	much	more	startling	assertion:	“Truly,	truly,	I	say
to	you,	before	Abraham	was,	
I	am”	
(John	8:58).	Jesus	combined	two
assertions	whose	sequence	seemed	to	make	no	sense:	“Before	something	in
the	past	happened	[Abraham	was],	something	in	the	present	happened	[I
am].”	The	Jewish	leaders	recognized	at	once	that	he	was	not	speaking	in
riddles	or	uttering	nonsense:	when	he	said,	“I	am,”	he	was	repeating	the	very
words	God	used	when	he	identified	himself	to	Moses	as	“
IAM	who	
IAM”
(Ex.	3:14).	Jesus	was	claiming	for	himself	the	title	“IAM,”	by	which	God
designates	himself	as	the	eternal	existing	One,	the	God	who	is	the	source	of
his	own	existence	and	who	always	has	been	and	always	will	be.	When	the
Jews	heard	this	unusual,	emphatic,	solemn	statement,	they	knew	that	he	was
claiming	to	be	God.	“So	they	took	up	stones	to	throw	at	him;	but	Jesus	hid
himself,	and	went	out	of	the	temple”	(John	8:59).
21
Another	strong	claim	to	deity	is	Jesus’	statement	at	the	end	of	Revelation,	“I
am	the	Alpha	and	the	Omega,	the	first	and	the	last,	the	beginning	and	the	end”
(Rev.	22:13).	When	this	is	combined	with	the	statement	of	God	the	Father	in
Revelation	1:8,	“I	am	the	Alpha	and	the	Omega,”	it	also	constitutes	a	strong
claim	to	equal	deity	with	God	the	Father.	Sovereign	over	all	of	history	and	all
of	creation,	Jesus	is	the	beginning	and	the	end.
In	John	1:1,	John	not	only	calls	Jesus	“God”	but	also	refers	to	him	as	“the
Word”	(Gk.	
logos
).	John’s	readers	would	have	recognized	in	this	term	
logos	
a
dual	reference,	both	to	the	powerful,	creative	Word	of	God	in	the	Old
Testament	by	which	the	heavens	and	earth	were	created	(Ps.	33:6)	and	to	the
organizing	or	unifying	principle	of	the	universe,	the	thing	that	held	it	together
and	allowed	it	to	make	sense,	in	Greek	thinking.
22
	John	is	identifying	Jesus
with	both	of	these	ideas	and	saying	that	he	is	not	only	the	powerful,	creative
Word	of	God	and	the	organizing	or	unifying	force	in	the	universe,	but	also
that	he	became	man:	“The	Word	became	flesh	and	dwelt	among	us,	full	of
grace	and	truth;	we	have	beheld	his	glory,	glory	as	of	the	only	Son	from	the
Father”	(John	1:14).	Here	is	another	strong	claim	to	deity	coupled	with	an
explicit	statement	that	Jesus	also	became	man	and	moved	among	us	as	a	man.
Further	evidence	of	claims	to	deity	can	be	found	in	the	fact	that	Jesus	calls
himself	“
the	
Son	of	man.”	This	title	is	used	eighty-four	times	in	the	four
gospels	but	only	by	Jesus	and	only	to	speak	of	himself	(note,	e.g.,	Matt.	16:13
with	Luke	9:18).	In	the	rest	of	the	New	Testament,	the	phrase	“
the	
Son	of
man”	(with	the	definite	article	“the”)	is	used	only	once,	in	Acts	7:56,	where
Stephen	refers	to	Christ	as	the	Son	of	Man.	This	unique	term	has	as	its
background	the	vision	in	Daniel	7	where	Daniel	saw	one	like	a	“Son	of	Man”
who	“came	to	the	Ancient	of	Days”	and	was	given	“dominion	and	glory	and
kingdom,	
that	all	peoples,	nations,	and	languages	should	serve	him;	his
dominion	is	an	everlasting	dominion,	
which	shall	not	pass	away”	(Dan.	7:13–
14).	It	is	striking	that	this	“son	of	man”	came	“with	the	clouds	of	heaven”
(Dan.	7:13).	This	passage	clearly	speaks	of	someone	who	had	heavenly	origin
and	who	was	given	
eternal	rule	
over	the	
whole	world.	
The	high	priests	did	not
miss	the	point	of	this	passage	when	Jesus	said,	“Hereafter	you	will	see	the
Son	of	man	
seated	at	the	right	hand	of	Power,	and	coming	on	the	clouds	of
heaven”	
(Matt.	26:64).	The	reference	to	Daniel	7:13–14	was	unmistakable,
and	the	high	priest	and	his	council	knew	that	Jesus	was	claiming	to	be	the
eternal	world	ruler	of	heavenly	origin	spoken	of	in	Daniel’s	vision.
Immediately	they	said,	“He	has	uttered	blasphemy.	.	.	.	He	deserves	death”
(Matt.	26:65–66).	Here	Jesus	finally	made	explicit	the	strong	claims	to	eternal
world	rule	that	were	earlier	hinted	at	in	his	frequent	use	of	the	title	“the	Son
of	man”	to	apply	to	himself.
Though	the	title	“Son	of	God”	can	sometimes	be	used	simply	to	refer	to	Israel
(Matt.	2:15),	or	to	man	as	created	by	God	(Luke	2:38),	or	to	redeemed	man
generally	(Rom.	8:14,	19,	23),	there	are	nevertheless	instances	in	which	the
phrase	“Son	of	God”	refers	to	Jesus	as	the	heavenly,	eternal	Son	who	is	equal
to	God	himself	(see	Matt.	11:25–30;	17:5;	1	Cor.	15:28;	Heb.	1:1–3,	5,	8).
This	is	especially	true	in	John’s	gospel	where	Jesus	is	seen	as	a	unique	Son
from	the	Father	(John	1:14,	18,	34,	49)	who	fully	reveals	the	Father	(John
8:19;	14:9).	As	Son	he	is	so	great	that	we	can	trust	in	him	for	eternal	life
(something	that	could	be	said	of	no	created	being:	John	3:16,	36;	20:31).	He
is	also	the	one	who	has	all	authority	from	the	Father	to	give	life,	pronounce
eternal	judgment,	and	rule	over	all	(John	3:36;	5:20–22,	25;	10:17;	16:15).	As
Son	he	has	been	sent	by	the	Father,	and	therefore	he	existed	before	he	came
into	the	world	(John	3:37;	5:23;	10:36).
The	first	three	verses	of	Hebrews	are	emphatic	in	saying	that	the	Son	is	the
one	whom	God	“appointed	the	heir	of	all	things,	through	whom	also	he
created	the	world”	(Heb.	1:2).	This	Son,	says	the	writer,	“reflects	the	glory	of
God	and	bears	the	very	stamp	[lit.,	is	the	‘exact	duplicate,’	Gk.	
charaktēr
)	of
his	nature,	upholding	the	universe	by	his	word	of	power”	(Heb.	1:3).	Jesus	is
the	exact	duplicate	of	the	“nature”	(or	being,	Gk.	
hypostasis
)	of	God,	making
him	exactly	equal	to	God	in	every	attribute.	Moreover,	he	continually	upholds
the	universe	“by	his	word	of	power,”	something	that	only	God	could	do.
These	passages	combine	to	indicate	that	the	title	“Son	of	God”	
when	applied
to	Christ	
strongly	affirms	his	deity	as	the	eternal	Son	in	the	Trinity,	one	equal
to	God	the	Father	in	all	his	attributes.
2.	Evidence	That	Jesus	Possessed	Attributes	of	Deity.
	In	addition	to	the
specific	affirmations	of	Jesus’	deity	seen	in	the	many	passages	quoted	above,
we	see	many	examples	of	actions	in	Jesus’	lifetime	that	point	to	his	divine
character.
Jesus	demonstrated	his	
omnipotence	
when	he	stilled	the	storm	at	sea	with	a
word	(Matt.	8:26–27),	multiplied	the	loaves	and	fish	(Matt.	14:19),	and
changed	water	into	wine	(John	2:1–11).	Some	might	object	that	these	miracles
just	showed	the	power	of	the	Holy	Spirit	working	through	him,	just	as	the
Holy	Spirit	could	work	through	any	other	human	being,	and	therefore	these
do	not	demonstrate	Jesus’	own	deity.	But	the	contextual	explanations	of	these
events	often	point	not	to	what	they	demonstrate	about	the	power	of	the	Holy
Spirit	but	to	what	they	demonstrate	about	Jesus	himself.	For	instance,	after
Jesus	turned	water	into	wine,	John	tells	us,	“This,	the	first	of	his	miraculous
signs,	Jesus	did	at	Cana	in	Galilee,	and	
manifested	his	glory;	
and	his	disciples
believed	in	him”	(John	2:11).	It	was	not	the	glory	of	the	Holy	Spirit	that	was
manifested	but	the	glory	of	Jesus	himself,	as	his	divine	power	worked	to
change	water	into	wine.	Similarly,	after	Jesus	stilled	the	storm	on	the	Sea	of
Galilee,	the	disciples	did	not	say,	“How	great	is	the	power	of	the	Holy	Spirit
working	through	this	prophet,”	but	rather,	“What	sort	of	man	is	this,	that	even
winds	and	sea	
obey	him?”	
(Matt.	8:27).	It	was	the	authority	of	Jesus	himself
to	which	the	winds	and	the	waves	were	subject,	and	this	could	only	be	the
authority	of	God	who	rules	over	the	seas	and	has	power	to	still	the	waves	(cf.
Ps.	65:7;	89:9;	107:29).
23
Jesus	asserts	his	
eternity	
when	he	says,	“Before	Abraham	was,	I	am”	(John
8:58,	see	discussion	above),	or,	“I	am	the	Alpha	and	the	Omega”	(Rev.
22:13).
The	
omniscience	
of	Jesus	is	demonstrated	in	his	knowing	people’s	thoughts
(Mark	2:8)	and	seeing	Nathaniel	under	the	fig	tree	from	far	away	(John	1:48),
and	knowing	“from	the	first	who	those	were	that	did	not	believe,	and	who	it
was	that	would	betray	him”	(John	6:64).	Of	course,	the	revelation	of
individual,	specific	events	or	facts	is	something	that	God	could	give	to	anyone
who	had	a	gift	of	prophecy	in	the	Old	or	New	Testaments.	But	Jesus’
knowledge	was	much	more	extensive	than	that.	He	knew	“who	those	were
that	did	not	believe,”	thus	implying	that	he	knew	the	belief	or	unbelief	that
was	in	the	hearts	of	all	men.	In	fact,	John	says	explicitly	that	Jesus	“
knew	all
men	
and	needed	no	one	to	bear	witness	of	man”	(John	2:25).	The	disciples
could	later	say	to	him,	“Now	we	know	that	
you	know	all	things”	
(John
16:30).	These	statements	say	much	more	than	what	could	be	said	of	any	great
prophet	or	apostle	of	the	Old	Testament	or	New	Testament,	for	they	imply
omniscience	on	the	part	of	Jesus.
24
Finally,	after	his	resurrection,	when	Jesus	asked	Peter	if	he	loved	him,	Peter
answered,	“Lord,	
you	know	everything;	
you	know	that	I	love	you”	(John
21:17).	Here	Peter	is	saying	much	more	than	that	Jesus	knows	his	heart	and
knows	that	he	loves	him.	He	is	rather	making	a	general	statement	(“You	know
everything”)	and	from	it	he	is	drawing	a	specific	conclusion	(“You	know	that
I	love	you”).	Peter	is	confident	that	Jesus	knows	what	is	in	the	heart	of	every
person,	and	therefore	he	is	sure	that	Jesus	knows	his	own	heart.
The	divine	attribute	of	
omnipresence	
is	not	directly	affirmed	to	be	true	of
Jesus	during	his	earthly	ministry.	However,	while	looking	forward	to	the	time
that	the	church	would	be	established,	Jesus	could	say,	“Where	two	or	three	are
gathered	in	my	name,	
there	am	I	
in	the	midst	of	them”	(Matt.	18:20).
Moreover,	before	he	left	the	earth,	he	told	his	disciples,	“I	am	with	you
always,	to	the	close	of	the	age”	(Matt.	28:20).
25
That	Jesus	possessed	divine	
sovereignty,	
a	kind	of	authority	possessed	by	God
alone,	is	seen	in	the	fact	that	he	could	forgive	sins	(Mark	2:5–7).	Unlike	the
Old	Testament	prophets	who	declared,	“Thus	says	the	L
ORD
,”	he	could
preface	his	statements	with	the	phrase,	“But	
I	say	to	you”	
(Matt.	5:22,	28,	32,
34,	39,	44)—an	amazing	claim	to	his	own	authority.	He	could	speak	with	the
authority	of	God	himself	because	he	was	himself	fully	God.	He	had	“all
things”	delivered	into	his	hands	by	the	Father	and	the	authority	to	reveal	the
Father	to	whomever	he	chose	(Matt.	11:25–27).	Such	is	his	authority	that	the
future	eternal	state	of	everyone	in	the	universe	depends	on	whether	they
believe	in	him	or	reject	him	(John	3:36).
Jesus	also	possessed	the	divine	attribute	of	
immortality,	
the	inability	to	die.
We	see	this	indicated	near	the	beginning	of	John’s	gospel,	when	Jesus	says	to
the	Jews,	“Destroy	this	temple,	and	in	three	days	
I	will	raise	it	up”	
(John
2:19).	John	explains	that	he	was	not	speaking	about	the	temple	made	with
stones	in	Jerusalem,	“but	he	spoke	of	the	temple	of	
his	body.	
When	therefore
he	was	raised	from	the	dead,	his	disciples	remembered	that	he	had	said	this;
and	they	believed	the	scripture	and	the	word	which	Jesus	had	spoken”	(John
2:21–22).	We	must	insist	of	course	that	Jesus	really	did	die:	this	very	passage
speaks	of	the	time	when	“he	was	raised	from	the	dead.”	But	it	is	also
significant	that	Jesus	predicts	that	he	will	have	an	active	role	in	his	own
resurrection:	“
I	
will	raise	it	up.”	Although	other	Scripture	passages	tell	us	that
God	the	Father	was	active	in	raising	Christ	from	the	dead,	here	he	says	that	he
himself	will	be	active	in	his	resurrection.
Jesus	claims	the	power	to	lay	down	his	life	and	take	it	up	again	in	another
passage	in	John’s	gospel:	“For	this	reason	the	Father	loves	me,	because	I	lay
down	my	life,	that	I	may	take	it	again.	No	one	takes	it	from	me,	but	I	lay	it
down	on	my	own	accord.	I	have	power	to	lay	it	down,	and	I	have	power	to
take	it	again;	this	charge	I	have	received	from	my	Father”	(John	10:17–18).
Here	Jesus	speaks	of	a	power	no	other	human	being	has	had—the	power	to
lay	down	his	own	life	
and	
the	power	to	take	it	up	again.	Once	again,	this	is	an
indication	that	Jesus	possessed	the	divine	attribute	of	immortality.	Similarly,
the	author	of	Hebrews	says	that	Jesus	“has	become	a	priest,	not	according	to	a
legal	requirement	concerning	bodily	descent	but	by	the	power	of	
an
indestructible	life”	
(Heb.	7:16).	(The	fact	that	immortality	is	a	unique
characteristic	of	God	alone	is	seen	in	1	Tim.	6:16,	which	speaks	of	God	as	the
one	“who	alone	has	immortality.”)
Another	clear	attestation	to	the	deity	of	Christ	is	the	fact	that	he	is	counted
worthy	to	be	worshiped,	
something	that	is	true	of	no	other	creature,	including
angels	(see	Rev.	19:10),	but	only	God	alone.	Yet	Scripture	says	of	Christ	that
“God	has	highly	exalted	him	and	bestowed	on	him	the	name	which	is	above
every	name,	that	at	the	name	of	Jesus	every	knee	should	bow,	in	heaven	and
on	earth	and	under	the	earth,	and	every	tongue	confess	that	Jesus	Christ	is
Lord,	to	the	glory	of	God	the	Father”	(Phil.	2:9–11).	Similarly,	God
commands	the	angels	to	worship	Christ,	for	we	read,	“When	he	brings	the
first-born	into	the	world,	he	says,	‘Let	all	God’s	angels	worship	him’	”	(Heb.
1:6).
John	is	allowed	a	glimpse	of	the	worship	that	occurs	in	heaven,	for	he	sees
thousands	and	thousands	of	angels	and	heavenly	creatures	around	God’s
throne	saying,	“Worthy	is	the	Lamb	who	was	slain,	to	receive	power	and
wealth	and	wisdom	and	might	and	honor	and	glory	and	blessing!”	(Rev.
5:12).	Then	he	hears	“
every	creature	
in	heaven	and	on	earth	and	under	the
earth	and	in	the	sea,	and	all	therein,	saying,	‘To	him	who	sits	upon	the	throne
and	to	the	Lamb	
be	blessing	and	honor	and	glory	and	might	for	ever	and
ever!’	”	(Rev.	5:13).	Christ	is	here	called	“the	Lamb	who	was	slain,”	and	he	is
accorded	the	universal	worship	offered	to	God	the	Father,	thus	clearly
demonstrating	his	equality	in	deity.
26
3.	Did	Jesus	Give	Up	Some	of	His	Divine	Attributes	While	on	Earth?
(The	Kenosis	Theory).
	Paul	writes	to	the	Philippians,
Have	this	mind	among	yourselves,	which	is	yours	in	Christ	Jesus,
who,	though	he	was	in	the	form	of	God,	did	not	count	equality	with
God	a	thing	to	be	grasped,	but	
emptied	himself,	
taking	the	form	of	a
servant,	being	born	in	the	likeness	of	men.	(Phil.	2:5–7)
Beginning	with	this	text,	several	theologians	in	Germany	(from	about	1860–
1880)	and	in	England	(from	about	1890–1910)	advocated	a	view	of	the
incarnation	that	had	not	been	advocated	before	in	the	history	of	the	church.
This	new	view	was	called	the	“kenosis	theory,”	and	the	overall	position	it
represented	was	called	“kenotic	theology.”	The	
kenosis	theory	
holds	that
Christ	gave	up	some	of	his	divine	attributes	while	he	was	on	earth	as	a	man.
(The	word	
kenosis	
is	taken	from	the	Greek	verb	
kenoō,	
which	generally
means	“to	empty,”	and	is	translated	“emptied	himself”	in	Phil.	2:7.)
According	to	the	theory	Christ	“emptied	himself”	of	some	of	his	divine
attributes,	such	as	omniscience,	omnipresence,	and	omnipotence,	while	he
was	on	earth	as	a	man.	This	was	viewed	as	a	voluntary	self-limitation	on
Christ’s	part,	which	he	carried	out	in	order	to	fulfill	his	work	of	redemption.
27
But	does	Philippians	2:7	teach	that	Christ	emptied	himself	of	some	of	his
divine	attributes,	and	does	the	rest	of	the	New	Testament	confirm	this?	The
evidence	of	Scripture	points	to	a	negative	answer	to	both	questions.	We	must
first	realize	that	no	recognized	teacher	in	the	first	1,800	years	of	church
history,	including	those	who	were	native	speakers	of	Greek,	thought	that
“emptied	himself”	in	Philippians	2:7	meant	that	the	Son	of	God	gave	up	some
of	his	divine	attributes.	Second,	we	must	recognize	that	the	text	does	not	say
that	Christ	“emptied	himself	of	some	powers”	or	“emptied	himself	of	divine
attributes”	or	anything	like	that.	Third,	the	text	
does	
describe	what	Jesus	did
in	this	“emptying”:	he	did	not	do	it	by	giving	up	any	of	his	attributes	but
rather	by	“taking	the	form	of	a	servant,”	that	is,	by	coming	to	live	as	a	man,
and	“being	found	in	human	form	he	humbled	himself	and	became	obedient
unto	death,	even	death	on	a	cross”	(Phil.	2:8).	Thus,	the	context	itself
interprets	this	“emptying”	as	equivalent	to	“humbling	himself”	and	taking	on
a	lowly	status	and	position.	Thus,	the	NIV,	instead	of	translating	the	phrase,
“He	
emptied	
himself,”	translates	it,	“but	
made	himself	nothing”	
(Phil.	2:7
NIV).	The	emptying	includes	change	of	role	and	status,	not	essential
attributes	or	nature.
A	fourth	reason	for	this	interpretation	is	seen	in	Paul’s	purpose	in	this	context.
His	purpose	has	been	to	persuade	the	Philippians	that	they	should	“do	nothing
from	selfishness	or	conceit,	but	in	humility	count	others	better	than
yourselves”	(Phil.	2:3),	and	he	continues	by	telling	them,	“Let	each	of	you
look	not	only	to	his	own	interests,	but	also	to	the	interests	of	others”	(Phil.
2:4).	To	persuade	them	to	be	humble	and	to	put	the	interests	of	others	first,	he
then	holds	up	the	example	of	Christ:	“Have	this	mind	among	yourselves,
which	is	yours	in	Christ	Jesus,	who,	though	he	was	in	the	form	of	God,	did
not	count	equality	with	God	a	thing	to	be	grasped,	but	emptied	himself,	taking
the	form	of	a	servant	.	.	.”	(Phil.	2:5–7).
Now	in	holding	up	Christ	as	an	example,	he	wants	the	Philippians	to	imitate
Christ.	But	certainly	he	is	not	asking	the	Philippian	Christians	to	“give	up”	or
“lay	aside”	any	of	their	essential	attributes	or	abilities!	He	is	not	asking	them
to	“give	up”	their	intelligence	or	strength	or	skill	and	become	a	diminished
version	of	what	they	were.	Rather,	he	is	asking	them	to	put	the	interests	of
others	first:	“Let	each	of	you	look	not	only	to	his	own	interests,	but	also	to	the
interests	of	others”	(Phil.	2:4).	And	because	that	is	his	goal,	it	fits	the	context
to	understand	that	he	is	using	Christ	as	the	supreme	example	of	one	who	did
just	that:	he	put	the	interests	of	others	first	and	was	willing	to	give	up	some	of
the	privilege	and	status	that	was	his	as	God.
Therefore,	the	best	understanding	of	this	passage	is	that	it	talks	about	Jesus
giving	up	the	
status	
and	
privilege	
that	was	his	in	heaven:	he	“did	not	count
equality	with	God	a	thing	to	be	grasped”	(or	“clung	to	for	his	own
advantage”),	but	“emptied	himself”	or	“humbled	himself”	for	our	sake,	and
came	to	live	as	a	man.	Jesus	speaks	elsewhere	of	the	“glory”	he	had	with	the
Father	“before	the	world	was	made”	(John	17:5),	a	glory	that	he	had	given	up
and	was	going	to	receive	again	when	he	returned	to	heaven.	And	Paul	could
speak	of	Christ	who,	“though	he	was	rich,	yet	for	your	sake	he	became	poor”
(2	Cor.	8:9),	once	again	speaking	of	the	privilege	and	honor	that	he	deserved
but	temporarily	gave	up	for	us.
The	fifth	and	final	reason	why	the	“kenosis”	view	of	Philippians	2:7	must	be
rejected	is	the	larger	context	of	the	teaching	of	the	New	Testament	and	the
doctrinal	teaching	of	the	entire	Bible.	If	it	were	true	that	such	a	momentous
event	as	this	happened,	that	the	eternal	Son	of	God	ceased	for	a	time	to	have
all	the	attributes	of	God—ceased,	for	a	time,	to	be	omniscient,	omnipotent,
and	omnipresent,	for	example—then	we	would	expect	that	such	an	incredible
event	would	be	taught	clearly	and	repeatedly	in	the	New	Testament,	not	found
in	the	very	doubtful	interpretation	of	one	word	in	one	epistle.	But	we	find	the
opposite	of	that:	we	do	not	find	it	stated	anywhere	else	that	the	Son	of	God
ceased	to	have	some	of	the	attributes	of	God	that	he	had	possessed	from
eternity.	In	fact,	if	the	kenosis	theory	were	true	(and	this	is	a	foundational
objection	against	it),	then	we	could	no	longer	affirm	Jesus	was	fully	God
while	he	was	here	on	earth.
28
	The	kenosis	theory	ultimately	denies	the	full
deity	of	Jesus	Christ	and	makes	him	something	less	than	fully	God.	S.	M.
Smith	admits,	“All	forms	of	classical	orthodoxy	either	explicitly	reject	or
reject	in	principle	kenotic	theology.”
29
It	is	important	to	realize	that	the	major	force	persuading	people	to	accept
kenotic	theory	was	not	that	they	had	discovered	a	better	understanding	of
Philippians	2:7	or	any	other	passage	of	the	New	Testament,	but	rather	the
increasing	discomfort	people	were	feeling	with	the	formulations	of	the
doctrine	of	Christ	in	historic,	classical	orthodoxy.	It	just	seemed	too	incredible
for	modern	rational	and	“scientific”	people	to	believe	that	Jesus	Christ	could
be	truly	human	and	fully,	absolutely	God	at	the	same	time.
30
	The	kenosis
theory	began	to	sound	more	and	more	like	an	acceptable	way	to	say	that	(in
some	sense)	Jesus	was	God,	but	a	kind	of	God	who	had	for	a	time	given	up
some	of	his	Godlike	qualities,	those	that	were	most	difficult	for	people	to
accept	in	the	modern	world.
4.	Conclusion:	Christ	Is	Fully	Divine.
	The	New	Testament,	in	hundreds	of
explicit	verses	that	call	Jesus	“God”	and	“Lord”	and	use	a	number	of	other
titles	of	deity	to	refer	to	him,	and	in	many	passages	that	attribute	actions	or
words	to	him	that	could	only	be	true	of	God	himself,	affirms	again	and	again
the	full,	absolute	deity	of	Jesus	Christ.	“In	him	
all	the	fulness	of	God	
was
pleased	to	dwell”	(Col.	1:19),	and	“in	him	the	whole	fulness	of	deity	dwells
bodily”	(Col.	2:9).	In	an	earlier	section	we	argued	that	Jesus	is	truly	and	fully
man.	Now	we	conclude	that	he	is	truly	and	fully	God	as	well.	His	name	is
rightly	called	“Emmanuel,”	that	is,	“God	with	us”	(Matt.	1:23).
5.	Is	The	Doctrine	of	the	Incarnation	“Unintelligible”	Today?
	Throughout
history	there	have	been	objections	to	the	New	Testament	teaching	on	the	full
deity	of	Christ.	One	recent	attack	on	this	doctrine	deserves	mention	here
because	it	created	a	large	controversy,	since	the	contributors	to	the	volume
were	all	recognized	church	leaders	in	England.	The	book	was	called	
The	Myth
of	God	Incarnate,	
edited	by	John	Hick	(London:	SCM,	1977).	The	title	gives
away	the	thesis	of	the	book:	the	idea	that	Jesus	was	“God	incarnate”	or	“God
come	in	the	flesh”	is	a	“myth”—a	helpful	story,	perhaps,	for	the	faith	of
earlier	generations,	but	not	one	that	can	really	be	believed	by	us	today.
The	argument	of	the	book	begins	with	some	foundational	assumptions:	(1)	the
Bible	does	not	have	absolute	divine	authority	for	us	today	(p.	
i),	and	(2)
Christianity,	like	all	human	life	and	thought,	is	evolving	and	changing	over
time	(p.	
ii).	The	basic	claims	of	the	book	are	laid	out	in	the	first	two	chapters.
In	chapter	1,	Maurice	Wiles	argues	that	it	is	possible	to	have	Christianity
without	the	doctrine	of	the	incarnation.	The	church	has	given	up	earlier
doctrines,	such	as	the	“real	presence”	of	Christ	in	the	Lord’s	Supper,	the
inerrancy	of	Scripture,	and	the	virgin	birth;	therefore,	it	is	possible	to	give	up
the	traditional	doctrine	of	the	incarnation	and	still	keep	the	Christian	faith	as
well	(pp.	2–3).	Moreover,	the	doctrine	of	the	incarnation	is	not	directly
presented	in	Scripture	but	originated	in	a	setting	where	belief	in	the
supernatural	was	credible;	nevertheless,	it	has	never	been	a	coherent	or
intelligible	doctrine	through	the	history	of	the	church	(pp.	3–5).
Regarding	the	New	Testament	teaching,	Francis	Young,	in	chapter	2,	argues
that	the	New	Testament	contains	the	writings	of	many	diverse	witnesses	who
tell	of	their	own	understanding	of	Christ,	but	that	no	single	or	unified	view	of
Christ	can	be	gained	from	the	entire	New	Testament;	the	early	church’s
understanding	of	the	person	of	Christ	was	developing	in	various	directions
over	time.	Young	concludes	that	the	situation	is	similar	today:	within	the
Christian	church	many	diverse	
personal	responses	
to	the	story	of	Jesus	Christ
are	acceptable	for	us	as	well,	and	that	would	certainly	include	the	response
that	sees	Christ	as	a	man	in	whom	God	was	uniquely	at	work	but	not	by	any
means	a	man	who	was	also	fully	God.
31
From	the	standpoint	of	evangelical	theology,	it	is	significant	to	note	that	this
forthright	rejection	of	Jesus’	deity	could	only	be	advocated	upon	a	prior
assumption	that	the	New	Testament	is	not	to	be	accepted	as	an	absolute	divine
authority	for	us,	truthful	at	every	point.	This	question	of	authority	is,	in	many
cases,	the	great	dividing	line	in	conclusions	about	the	person	of	Christ.
Second,	much	of	the	criticism	of	the	doctrine	of	the	incarnation	focused	on
the	claim	that	it	was	not	“coherent”	or	“intelligible.”	Yet	at	root	this	is	simply
an	indication	that	the	authors	are	unwilling	to	accept	anything	that	does	not
appear	to	fit	in	with	their	“scientific”	worldview	in	which	the	natural	universe
is	a	closed	system	not	open	to	such	divine	intrusions	as	miracles	and	the
incarnation.	The	assertion	that	“Jesus	was	fully	God	and	fully	man	in	one
person,”	though	not	a	contradiction,	is	a	paradox	that	we	cannot	fully
understand	in	this	age	and	perhaps	not	for	all	eternity,	but	this	does	not	give
us	the	right	to	label	it	“incoherent”	or	“unintelligible.”	The	doctrine	of	the
incarnation	as	understood	by	the	church	throughout	history	has	indeed	been
coherent	and	intelligible,	though	no	one	maintains	that	it	provides	us	with	an
exhaustive	explanation	of	how	Jesus	is	both	fully	God	and	fully	man.	Our
proper	response	is	not	to	reject	the	clear	and	central	teaching	of	Scripture
about	the	incarnation,	but	simply	to	recognize	that	it	will	remain	a	paradox,
that	this	is	all	that	God	has	chosen	to	reveal	to	us	about	it,	and	that	it	is	true.	If
we	are	to	submit	ourselves	to	God	and	to	his	words	in	Scripture,	then	we	must
believe	it.
6.	Why	Was	Jesus’	Deity	Necessary?
	In	the	previous	section	we	listed
several	reasons	why	it	was	necessary	for	Jesus	to	be	fully	man	in	order	to	earn
our	redemption.	Here	it	is	appropriate	to	recognize	that	it	is	crucially
important	to	insist	on	the	full	deity	of	Christ	as	well,	not	only	because	it	is
clearly	taught	in	Scripture,	but	also	because	(1)	only	someone	who	is	infinite
God	could	bear	the	full	penalty	for	all	the	sins	of	all	those	who	would	believe
in	him—any	finite	creature	would	have	been	incapable	of	bearing	that
penalty;	(2)	salvation	is	from	the	Lord	(Jonah	2:9	NASB),	and	the	whole
message	of	Scripture	is	designed	to	show	that	no	human	being,	no	creature,
could	ever	save	man—only	God	himself	could;	and	(3)	only	someone	who
was	truly	and	fully	God	could	be	the	one	mediator	between	God	and	man	(1
Tim.	2:5),	both	to	bring	us	back	to	God	and	also	to	reveal	God	most	fully	to
us	(John	14:9).
Thus,	if	Jesus	is	not	fully	God,	we	have	no	salvation	and	ultimately	no
Christianity.	It	is	no	accident	that	throughout	history	those	groups	that	have
given	up	belief	in	the	full	deity	of	Christ	have	not	remained	long	within	the
Christian	faith	but	have	soon	drifted	toward	the	kind	of	religion	represented
by	Unitarianism	in	the	United	States	and	elsewhere.	“No	one	who	denies	the
Son	has	the	Father”	(1	John	2:23).	“Any	one	who	goes	ahead	and	does	not
abide	in	the	doctrine	of	Christ	does	not	have	God;	he	who	abides	in	the
doctrine	has	both	the	Father	and	the	Son”	(2	John	9).
C.	The	Incarnation:	Deity	and	Humanity	in	the	
One	Person	of	Christ
The	biblical	teaching	about	the	full	deity	and	full	humanity	of	Christ	is	so
extensive	that	both	have	been	believed	from	the	earliest	times	in	the	history	of
the	church.	But	a	precise	understanding	of	how	full	deity	and	full	humanity
could	be	combined	together	in	one	person	was	formulated	only	gradually	in
the	church	and	did	not	reach	the	final	form	until	the	Chalcedonian	Definition
in	A.D.	451.	Before	that	point,	several	inadequate	views	of	the	person	of
Christ	were	proposed	and	then	rejected.	One	view,	Arianism,	which	held	that
Jesus	was	not	fully	divine,	was	discussed	above	in	the	chapter	on	the	doctrine
of	the	Trinity.
32
	But	three	other	views	that	were	eventually	rejected	as
heretical	should	be	mentioned	at	this	point.
1.
	Three	Inadequate	Views	of	the	Person	of	Christ.
a.	Apollinarianism:
	Apollinaris,	who	became	bishop	in	Laodicea	about	A.D.
361,	taught	that	the	one	person	of	Christ	had	a	human	body	but	not	a	human
mind	or	spirit,	and	that	the	mind	and	spirit	of	Christ	were	from	the	divine
nature	of	the	Son	of	God.	This	view	may	be	represented	as	in	figure	26.1.
APPOLINARIASM
Figure	26.1
But	the	views	of	Apollinaris	were	rejected	by	the	leaders	of	the	church	at	that
time,	who	realized	that	it	was	not	just	our	human	body	that	needed	salvation
and	needed	to	be	represented	by	Christ	in	his	redemptive	work,	but	our
human	minds	and	spirits	(or	souls)	as	well:	Christ	had	to	be	fully	and	truly
man	if	he	was	to	save	us	(Heb.	2:17).	Apollinarianism	was	rejected	by	several
church	councils,	from	the	Council	of	Alexandria	in	A.D.	362	to	the	Council
of	Constantinople	in	A.D.	381.
b.	Nestorianism:
	Nestorianism	is	the	doctrine	that	there	were	two	separate
persons	in	Christ,	a	human	person	and	a	divine	person,	a	teaching	that	is
distinct	from	the	biblical	view	that	sees	Jesus	as	one	person.	Nestorianism
may	be	diagramed	as	in	figure	26.2.

NESTORIANISM
Figure	26.2
Nestorius	was	a	popular	preacher	at	Antioch,	and	from	A.D.	428	was	bishop
of	Constantinople.	Although	Nestorius	himself	probably	never	taught	the
heretical	view	that	goes	by	his	name	(the	idea	that	Christ	was	two	persons	in
one	body,	rather	than	one	person),	through	a	combination	of	several	personal
conflicts	and	a	good	deal	of	ecclesiastical	politics,	he	was	removed	from	his
office	of	bishop	and	his	teachings	were	condemned.
33
It	is	important	to	understand	why	the	church	could	not	accept	the	view	that
Christ	was	two	distinct	persons.	Nowhere	in	Scripture	do	we	have	an
indication	that	the	human	nature	of	Christ,	for	example,	is	an	independent
person,	deciding	to	do	something	contrary	to	the	divine	nature	of	Christ.
Nowhere	do	we	have	an	indication	of	the	human	and	divine	natures	talking	to
each	other	or	struggling	within	Christ,	or	any	such	thing.	Rather,	we	have	a
consistent	picture	of	a	single	person	acting	in	wholeness	and	unity.	Jesus
always	speaks	as	“I,”	not	as	“we,”
34
	though	he	can	refer	to	himself	and	the
Father	together	as	“we”	(John	14:23).	The	Bible	always	speaks	of	Jesus	as
“he,”	not	as	“they.”	And,	though	we	can	sometimes	distinguish	actions	of	his
divine	nature	and	actions	of	his	human	nature	in	order	to	help	us	understand
some	of	the	statements	and	actions	recorded	in	Scripture,	the	Bible	itself	does
not	say	“Jesus’	human	nature	did	this”	or	“Jesus’	divine	nature	did	that,”	as
though	they	were	separate	persons,	but	always	talks	about	what	the	
person	
of
Christ	did.	Therefore,	the	church	continued	to	insist	that	Jesus	was	one
person,	although	possessing	both	a	human	nature	and	a	divine	nature.
c.	Monophysitism	(Eutychianism):
	A	third	inadequate	view	is	called
monophysitism,	
the	view	that	Christ	had	one	nature	only	(Gk.	
monos,	
“one,”
and	
physis,	
“nature”).	The	primary	advocate	of	this	view	in	the	early	church
was	Eutyches	(c.	A.D.	378–454),	who	was	the	leader	of	a	monastery	at
Constantinople.	Eutyches	taught	the	opposite	error	from	Nestorianism,	for	he
denied	that	the	human	nature	and	divine	nature	in	Christ	remained	fully
human	and	fully	divine.	He	held	rather	that	the	human	nature	of	Christ	was
taken	up	and	absorbed	into	the	divine	nature,	so	that	both	natures	were
changed	somewhat	and	
a	third	kind	of	nature	
resulted.
35
	An	analogy	to
Eutychianism	can	be	seen	if	we	put	a	drop	of	ink	in	a	glass	of	water:	the
mixture	resulting	is	neither	pure	ink	nor	pure	water,	but	some	kind	of	third
substance,	a	mixture	of	the	two	in	which	both	the	ink	and	the	water	are
changed.	Similarly,	Eutyches	taught	that	Jesus	was	a	mixture	of	divine	and
human	elements	in	which	both	were	somewhat	modified	to	form	one	new
nature.	This	may	be	represented	as	in	figure	26.3.
Monophysitism	also	rightly	caused	great	concern	in	the	church,	because,	by
this	doctrine,	Christ	was	neither	truly	God	nor	truly	man.	And	if	that	was	so,
he	could	not	truly	represent	us	as	a	man	nor	could	he	be	true	God	and	able	to
earn	our	salvation.
2.	The	Solution	to	the	Controversy:	The	Chalcedonian	Definition	of	A.D.
451.
	In	order	to	attempt	to	solve	the	problems	raised	by	the	controversies	over
the	person	of	Christ,	a	large	church	council	was	convened	in	the	city	of
Chalcedon	near	Constantinople	(modern	Istanbul),	from	October	8	to
November	1,	A.D.	451.	The	resulting	statement,	called	the	Chalcedonian
Definition,	guarded	against	Apollinarianism,	Nestorianism,	and
Eutychianism.	It	has	been	taken	as	the	standard,	orthodox	definition	of	the
biblical	teaching	on	the	person	of	Christ	since	that	day	by	Catholic,
Protestant,	and	Orthodox	branches	of	Christianity	alike.
36
EUTYCHANISM
Figure	26.3
The	statement	is	not	long,	and	we	may	quote	it	in	its	entirety:
37
We,	then,	following	the	holy	Fathers,	all	with	one	consent,	teach	men
to	confess	one	and	the	same	Son,	our	Lord	Jesus	Christ,	the	same
perfect	in	Godhead	and	also	perfect	in	manhood;	truly	God	and	truly
man,	of	a	reasonable	[rational]	soul	and	body;	
consubstantial
[coessential]	with	the	Father	according	to	the	Godhead,	and
consubstantial	with	us	according	to	the	Manhood;	
in	all	things	like
unto	us,	without	sin;	begotten	before	all	ages	of	the	Father	according
to	the	Godhead,	and	in	these	latter	days,	for	us	and	for	our	salvation,
born	of	the	Virgin	Mary,	the	Mother	of	God,	according	to	the
Manhood;	one	and	the	same	Christ,	Son,	Lord,	Only-begotten,	to	be
acknowledged	in	
two	natures,	inconfusedly,	unchangeably,	indivisibly,
inseparably;	
the	distinction	of	natures	being	by	no	means	taken	away
by	the	union,	but	rather	
the	property	of	each	nature	being	preserved,
and	concurring	in	
one	Person	
and	one	Subsistence,	not	parted	or
divided	into	two	persons,	but	one	and	the	same	Son,	and	only
begotten,	God,	the	Word,	the	Lord	Jesus	Christ,	as	the	prophets	from
the	beginning	[have	declared]	concerning	him,	and	the	Lord	Jesus
Christ	himself	has	taught	us,	and	the	Creed	of	the	holy	Fathers	has
been	handed	down	to	us.
Against	the	view	of	Apollinaris	that	Christ	did	not	have	a	human	mind	or
soul,	we	have	the	statement	that	he	was	“
truly	man,	
of	a	
reasonable	soul	
and
body	.	.	.	
consubstantial	with	us	
according	to	the	Manhood;	in	all	things	like
unto	us.”	(The	word	
consubstantial	
means	“having	the	same	nature	or
substance.”)
In	opposition	to	the	view	of	Nestorianism	that	Christ	was	two	persons	united
in	one	body,	we	have	the	words	“
indivisibly,	inseparably	
.	.	.	concurring	in
one	Person	
and	one	Subsistence,	not	parted	or	divided	into	two	persons.”
Against	the	view	of	Monophysitism	that	Christ	had	only	one	nature,	and	that
his	human	nature	was	lost	in	the	union	with	the	divine	nature,	we	have	the
words	“to	be	acknowledged	in	
two	natures,	inconfusedly,	unchangeably	
.	.	.
the	distinction	of	natures	being	by	no	means	taken	away	by	the	union,	but
rather	
the	property	of	each	nature	being	preserved.”	
The	human	and	the
divine	natures	were	not	confused	or	changed	when	Christ	became	man,	but
the	human	nature	remained	a	truly	human	nature,	and	the	divine	nature
remained	a	truly	divine	nature.
Figure	26.4	may	be	helpful	in	showing	this,	in	contrast	to	the	earlier
diagrams.	It	indicates	that	the	eternal	Son	of	God	took	to	himself	a	truly
human	nature,	and	that	Christ’s	divine	and	human	natures	remain	distinct	and
retain	their	own	properties,	yet	they	are	eternally	and	inseparably	united
together	in	one	person.
CHALCEDONIA	CHRISTOLOGY
Figure	26.4
Some	have	said	that	the	Chalcedonian	Definition	really	did	not	define	for	us
in	any	positive	way	what	the	person	of	Christ	actually	
is,	
but	simply	told	us
several	things	that	it	
is	not.	
In	this	way	some	have	said	that	it	is	not	a	very
helpful	definition.	But	such	an	accusation	is	misleading	and	inaccurate.	The
definition	actually	did	a	great	deal	to	help	us	understand	the	biblical	teaching
correctly.	It	taught	that	Christ	definitely	has	two	natures,	a	human	nature	and
a	divine	nature.	It	taught	that	his	divine	nature	is	exactly	the	same	as	that	of
the	Father	(“consubstantial	with	the	Father	according	to	the	Godhead”).	And
it	maintained	that	the	human	nature	is	exactly	like	our	human	nature,	yet
without	sin	(“consubstantial	with	us	according	to	the	Manhood;	in	all	things
like	unto	us,	without	sin”).	Moreover,	it	affirmed	that	in	the	person	of	Christ
the	human	nature	retains	its	distinctive	characteristics	and	the	divine	nature
retains	its	distinctive	characteristics	(“the	distinction	of	natures	being	by	no
means	taken	away	by	the	union,	but	rather	
the	property	of	each	nature	being
preserved”).	
Finally,	it	affirmed	that,	whether	we	can	understand	it	or	not,
these	two	natures	are	united	together	in	the	one	person	of	Christ.
When	the	Chalcedonian	Definition	says	that	the	two	natures	of	Christ	occur
together	“in	one	Person	and	one	
Subsistence,”	
the	Greek	word	translated	as
“Subsistence”	is	the	word	
hypostasis,	
“being.”	Hence	the	union	of	Christ’s
human	and	divine	natures	in	one	person	is	sometimes	called	the	
hypostatic
union.	
This	phrase	simply	means	the	union	of	Christ’s	human	and	divine
natures	in	one	being.
3.	Combining	Specific	Biblical	Texts	on	Christ’s	Deity	and	Humanity.
When	we	examine	the	New	Testament,	as	we	did	above	in	the	sections	on
Jesus’	humanity	and	deity,	there	are	several	passages	that	seem	difficult	to	fit
together	(How	could	Jesus	be	omnipotent	and	yet	weak?	How	could	he	leave
the	world	and	yet	be	present	everywhere?	How	could	he	learn	things	and	yet
be	omniscient?).	As	the	church	struggled	to	understand	these	teachings,	it
finally	came	up	with	the	Chalcedonian	Definition,	which	spoke	of	two
distinct	natures	in	Christ	that	retain	their	own	properties	yet	remain	together
in	one	person.	This	distinction,	which	helps	us	in	our	understanding	of	the
biblical	passages	mentioned	earlier,	also	seems	to	be	demanded	by	those
passages.
a.	One	Nature	Does	Some	Things	That	the	Other	Nature	Does	Not	Do:
Evangelical	theologians	in	previous	generations	have	not	hesitated	to
distinguish	between	things	done	by	Christ’s	human	nature	but	not	by	his
divine	nature,	or	by	his	divine	nature	but	not	by	his	human	nature.	It	seems
that	we	have	to	do	this	if	we	are	willing	to	affirm	the	Chalcedonian	statement
about	“the	
property	of	each	nature	
being	preserved.”	But	few	recent
theologians	have	been	willing	to	make	such	distinctions,	perhaps	because	of	a
hesitancy	to	affirm	something	we	cannot	understand.
When	we	are	talking	about	Jesus’	human	nature,	we	can	say	that	he	ascended
to	heaven	and	is	no	longer	in	the	world	(John	16:28;	17:11;	Acts	1:9–11).
38
But	with	respect	to	his	divine	nature,	we	can	say	that	Jesus	is	everywhere
present:	“Where	two	or	three	are	gathered	in	my	name,	
there	am	I	
in	the	midst
of	them”	(Matt.	18:20);	“I	am	with	you	always,	to	the	close	of	the	age”	(Matt.
28:20);	“If	a	man	loves	me,	he	will	keep	my	word,	and	my	Father	will	love
him,	and	
we	
will	come	to	him	and	make	our	home	with	him”	(John	14:23).	So
we	can	say	that	both	things	are	true	about	the	
person	
of	Christ—he	has
returned	to	heaven,	
and	
he	is	also	present	with	us.
Similarly,	we	can	say	that	Jesus	was	about	thirty	years	old	(Luke	3:23),	if	we
are	speaking	with	respect	to	his	human	nature,	but	we	can	say	that	he
eternally	existed	(John	1:1–2;	8:58)	if	we	are	speaking	of	his	divine	nature.
In	his	human	nature,	Jesus	was	weak	and	tired	(Matt.	4:2;	8:24;	Mark	15:21;
John	4:6),	but	in	his	divine	nature	he	was	omnipotent	(Matt.	8:26–27;	Col.
1:17;	Heb.	1:3).	Particularly	striking	is	the	scene	on	the	Sea	of	Galilee	where
Jesus	was	asleep	in	the	stern	of	the	boat,	presumably	because	he	was	weary
(Matt.	8:24).	But	he	was	able	to	arise	from	his	sleep	and	calm	the	wind	and
sea	with	a	word	(Matt.	8:26–27)!	Tired	yet	omnipotent!	Here	Jesus’	weak
human	nature	completely	hid	his	omnipotence	until	that	omnipotence	broke
forth	in	a	sovereign	word	from	the	Lord	of	heaven	and	earth.
If	someone	asks	whether	Jesus,	when	he	was	asleep	in	the	boat,	was	also
“continually	carrying	along	all	things	by	his	word	of	power”	(Heb.	1:3,
author’s	translation),	and	whether	all	things	in	the	universe	were	being	held
together	by	him	at	that	time	(see	Col.	1:17),	the	answer	must	be	yes,	for	those
activities	have	always	been	and	will	always	be	the	particular	responsibility	of
the	second	person	of	the	Trinity,	the	eternal	Son	of	God.	Those	who	find	the
doctrine	of	the	incarnation	“inconceivable”	have	sometimes	asked	whether
Jesus,	when	he	was	a	baby	in	the	manger	at	Bethlehem,	was	also	“upholding
the	universe.”	To	this	question	the	answer	must	also	be	yes:	Jesus	was	not	just
potentially	God	or	someone	in	whom	God	uniquely	worked,	but	was	
truly	and
fully	God,	
with	all	the	attributes	of	God.	He	was	“a	Savior,	who	is	Christ	
the
Lord”	
(Luke	2:11).	Those	who	reject	this	as	impossible	simply	have	a
different	definition	of	what	is	“possible”	than	God	has,	as	revealed	in
Scripture.
39
	To	say	that	we	cannot	understand	this	is	appropriate	humility.	But
to	say	that	it	is	not	possible	seems	more	like	intellectual	arrogance.
In	a	similar	way,	we	can	understand	that	in	his	human	nature,	Jesus	died
(Luke	23:46;	1	Cor.	15:3).	But	with	respect	to	his	divine	nature,	he	did	not
die,	but	was	able	to	raise	himself	from	the	dead	(John	2:19;	10:17–18;	Heb.
7:16).	Yet	here	we	must	give	a	note	of	caution:	it	is	true	that	when	Jesus	died
his	physical	body	died	and	his	human	soul	(or	spirit)	was	separated	from	his
body	and	passed	into	the	presence	of	God	the	Father	in	heaven	(Luke	23:43,
46).	In	this	way	he	experienced	a	death	that	is	like	the	one	we	as	believers
experience	if	we	die	before	Christ	returns.	And	it	is	not	correct	to	say	that
Jesus’	divine	nature	died,	or	could	die,	if	“die”	means	a	cessation	of	activity,	a
cessation	of	consciousness,	or	a	diminution	of	power.	Nevertheless,	by	virtue
of	union	with	Jesus’	human	nature,	his	divine	nature	somehow	tasted
something	of	what	it	was	like	to	go	through	death.	The	
person	
of	Christ
experienced	death.	Moreover,	it	seems	difficult	to	understand	how	Jesus’
human	nature	alone	could	have	borne	the	wrath	of	God	against	the	sins	of
millions	of	people.	It	seems	that	Jesus’	divine	nature	had	somehow	to
participate	in	the	bearing	of	wrath	against	sin	that	was	due	to	us	(though
Scripture	nowhere	explicitly	affirms	this).	Therefore,	even	though	Jesus’
divine	nature	did	not	actually	die,	Jesus	went	through	the	experience	of	death
as	a	whole	person,	and	both	human	and	divine	natures	somehow	shared	in
that	experience.	Beyond	that,	Scripture	does	not	enable	us	to	say	more.
The	distinction	between	Jesus’	human	and	divine	natures	also	helps	us
understand	Jesus’	temptations.	With	respect	to	his	human	nature,	he	certainly
was	tempted	in	every	way	as	we	are,	yet	without	sin	(Heb.	4:15).	Yet	with
respect	to	his	divine	nature,	he	was	not	tempted,	because	God	cannot	be
tempted	with	evil	(James	1:13).
At	this	point	it	seems	necessary	to	say	that	Jesus	had	two	distinct	wills,	a
human	will	and	a	divine	will,	and	that	the	wills	belong	to	the	two	distinct
natures	of	Christ,	not	to	the	person.	In	fact,	there	was	a	position,	called	the
monothelite	
view,	which	held	that	Jesus	had	only	“one	will,”	but	that	was
certainly	a	minority	view	in	the	church,	and	it	was	rejected	as	heretical	at	a
church	council	in	Constantinople	in	A.D.	681.	Since	then	the	view	that	Christ
had	two	wills	(a	human	will	and	a	divine	will)	has	been	generally,	but	not
universally,	held	through	the	church.	In	fact,	Charles	Hodge	says:
The	decision	against	Nestorius,	in	which	the	unity	of	Christ’s	person
was	asserted;	that	against	Eutyches,	affirming	the	distinction	of
natures;	and	that	against	the	Monothelites,	declaring	that	the
possession	of	a	human	nature	involves	of	necessity	the	possession	of	a
human	will,	have	been	received	as	the	true	faith	by	the	Church
universal,	the	Greek,	Latin,	and	Protestant.
40
Hodge	explains	that	the	church	thought	that	“to	deny	Christ	a	human	will,
was	to	deny	he	had	a	human	nature,	or	was	truly	a	man.	Besides,	it	precluded
the	possibility	of	his	having	been	tempted,	and	therefore	contradicted	the
Scriptures,	and	separated	him	so	far	from	his	people	he	could	not	sympathize
with	them	in	their	temptations.”
41
	Moreover,	Hodge	notes	that	along	with	the
idea	that	Christ	had	two	wills	is	the	related	idea	that	he	had	two	centers	of
consciousness	or	intelligence:	“As	there	are	two	distinct	natures,	human	and
divine,	there	are	of	necessity	two	intelligences	and	two	wills,	the	one	fallible
and	finite,	the	other	immutable	and	infinite.”
42
This	distinction	of	two	wills	and	two	centers	of	consciousness	helps	us
understand	how	Jesus	could	learn	things	and	yet	know	all	things.	On	the	one
hand,	with	respect	to	his	human	nature,	he	had	limited	knowledge	(Mark
13:32;	Luke	2:52).	On	the	other	hand,	Jesus	clearly	knew	all	things	(John
2:25;	16:30;	21:17).	Now	this	is	only	understandable	if	Jesus	learned	things
and	had	limited	knowledge	with	respect	to	his	human	nature	but	was	always
omniscient	with	respect	to	his	divine	nature,	and	therefore	he	was	able	any
time	to	“call	to	mind”	whatever	information	would	be	needed	for	his	ministry.
In	this	way	we	can	understand	Jesus’	statement	concerning	the	time	of	his
return:	“But	of	that	day	or	that	hour	no	one	knows,	not	even	the	angels	in
heaven,	nor	the	Son,	but	only	the	Father”	(Mark	13:32).	This	ignorance	of	the
time	of	his	return	was	true	of	Jesus’	human	nature	and	human	consciousness
only,	for	in	his	divine	nature	he	was	certainly	omniscient	and	certainly	knew
the	time	when	he	would	return	to	the	earth.
43
At	this	point	someone	may	object	that	if	we	say	that	Jesus	had	two	centers	of
consciousness	and	two	wills,	that	
requires	
that	he	was	two	distinct	persons,
and	we	have	really	fallen	into	the	error	of	“Nestorianism.”	But	in	response,	it
must	simply	be	affirmed	that	two	wills	and	two	centers	of	consciousness	
do
not	
require	that	Jesus	be	two	distinct	persons.	It	is	mere	assertion	without
proof	to	say	that	they	do.	If	someone	responds	that	he	or	she	
does	not
understand	
how	Jesus	could	have	two	centers	of	consciousness	and	still	be
one	person,	then	that	fact	may	certainly	be	admitted	by	all.	But	failing	to
understand	something	does	not	mean	that	it	is	impossible,	only	that	our
understanding	is	limited.	The	great	majority	of	the	church	throughout	its
history	has	said	that	Jesus	had	two	wills	and	centers	of	consciousness,	yet	he
remained	one	person.	Such	a	formulation	is	not	impossible,	merely	a	mystery
that	we	do	not	now	fully	understand.	To	adopt	any	other	solution	would	create
a	far	greater	problem:	it	would	require	that	we	give	up	either	the	full	deity	or
the	full	humanity	of	Christ,	and	that	we	cannot	do.
44
b.	Anything	Either	Nature	Does,	the	Person	of	Christ	Does:
	In	the
previous	section	we	mentioned	a	number	of	things	that	were	done	by	one
nature	but	not	the	other	in	the	person	of	Christ.	Now	we	must	affirm	that
anything	that	is	true	of	the	human	or	the	divine	nature	is	true	of	the	person	of
Christ.	Thus	Jesus	can	say,	“Before	Abraham	was,	I	am”	(John	8:58).	He	does
not	say,	“Before	Abraham	was,	my	divine	nature	existed,”	because	he	is	free
to	talk	about	anything	done	by	his	divine	nature	alone	or	his	human	nature
alone	as	something	that	
he	
did.
In	the	human	sphere,	this	is	certainly	true	of	our	conversation	as	well.	If	I	type
a	letter,	even	though	my	feet	and	toes	had	nothing	to	do	with	typing	the	letter,
I	do	not	tell	people,	“My	fingers	typed	a	letter	and	my	toes	had	nothing	to	do
with	it”	(though	that	is	true).	Rather,	I	tell	people,	“
I	
typed	a	letter.”	That	is
true	because	anything	that	is	done	by	one	part	of	me	is	done	by	
me.
Thus,	“
Christ	
died	for	our	sins”	(1	Cor.	15:3).	Even	though	actually	only	his
human	body	ceased	living	and	ceased	functioning,	it	was	nonetheless	
Christ
as	a	person	who	died	for	our	sin.	This	is	simply	a	means	of	affirming	that
whatever	can	be	said	of	one	nature	or	the	other	can	be	said	of	the	
person	
of
Christ.
Therefore	it	is	correct	for	Jesus	to	say,	“I	am	leaving	the	world”	(John	16:28),
or	“I	am	no	more	in	the	world”	(John	17:11),	but	at	the	same	time	to	say,	“I
am	with	you	always”	(Matt.	28:20).	Anything	that	is	done	by	one	nature	or
the	other	is	done	by	the	
person	
of	Christ.
c.	Titles	That	Remind	Us	One	Nature	Can	Be	Used	of	the	Person	Even
When	the	Action	Is	Done	By	the	Other	Nature:
	The	New	Testament
authors	sometimes	use	titles	that	remind	us	of	either	the	human	nature	or	the
divine	nature	in	order	to	speak	of	the	person	of	Christ,	even	though	the	action
mentioned	may	be	done	only	by	the	other	nature	than	the	one	we	might	think
of	from	the	title.	For	example,	Paul	says	that	if	the	rulers	of	this	world	had
understood	the	wisdom	of	God,	“they	would	not	have	crucified	
the	Lord	of
glory”	
(1	Cor.	2:8).	Now	when	we	see	the	phrase	“the	Lord	of	glory”	it
reminds	us	specifically	of	Jesus’	divine	nature.	But	Paul	uses	this	title
(probably	intentionally	to	show	the	horrible	evil	of	the	crucifixion)	to	say	that
Jesus	was	“crucified.”	Even	though	Jesus’	divine	nature	was	not	crucified,	it
was	true	of	Jesus	as	a	
person	
that	he	was	crucified,	and	Paul	affirms	that
about	him	even	though	he	uses	the	title	“the	Lord	of	glory.”
Similarly,	when	Elizabeth	calls	Mary	“the	mother	of	
my	Lord”	
(Luke	1:43),
the	name	“my	Lord”	is	a	title	that	reminds	us	of	Christ’s	divine	nature.	Yet
Mary	of	course	is	not	the	mother	of	Jesus’	divine	nature,	which	has	always
existed.	Mary	is	simply	the	mother	of	the	human	nature	of	Christ.
Nevertheless,	Elizabeth	can	call	her	“the	mother	of	my	Lord”	because	she	is
using	the	title	“Lord”	to	refer	to	the	person	of	Christ.	A	similar	expression
occurs	in	Luke	2:11:	“For	to	you	
is	born	
this	day	in	the	city	of	David	a	Savior,
who	is	Christ	
the	Lord.”
In	this	way,	we	can	understand	Mark	13:32,	where	Jesus	says	no	one	knows
the	time	of	his	return,	“not	even	the	angels	in	heaven,	
nor	the	Son,	
but	only
the	Father.”	Though	the	term	“the	Son”	specifically	reminds	us	of	Jesus’
heavenly,	eternal	sonship	with	God	the	Father,	it	is	really	used	here	not	to
speak	specifically	of	his	divine	nature,	but	to	speak	generally	of	him	as	a
person,	and	to	affirm	something	that	is	in	fact	true	of	his	human	nature	only.
45
And	it	is	true	that	in	one	important	sense	(that	is,	with	respect	to	his	human
nature)	Jesus	did	not	know	the	time	when	he	would	return.
d.	Brief	Summary	Sentence:
	Sometimes	in	the	study	of	systematic	theology,
the	following	sentence	has	been	used	to	summarize	the	incarnation:
“Remaining	what	he	was,	he	became	what	he	was	not.”	In	other	words,	while
Jesus	continued	“remaining”	what	he	was	(that	is,	fully	divine)	he	also
became	what	he	previously	had	not	been	(that	is,	fully	human	as	well).	Jesus
did	not	give	up	any	of	his	deity	when	he	became	man,	but	he	did	take	on
humanity	that	was	not	his	before.
e.	“Communication”	of	Attributes:
	Once	we	have	decided	that	Jesus	was
fully	man	and	fully	God,	and	that	his	human	nature	remained	
fully	
human	and
his	divine	nature	remained	
fully	
divine,	we	can	still	ask	whether	there	were
some	qualities	or	abilities	that	were	given	(or	“communicated”)	from	one
nature	to	the	other.	It	seems	there	were.
(1)	From	the	Divine	Nature	to	the	Human	Nature:
	Although	Jesus’	human
nature	did	not	change	its	essential	character,	because	it	was	united	with	the
divine	nature	in	the	one	person	of	Christ,	Jesus’	human	nature	gained	(a)	a
worthiness	to	be	worshiped	and	(b)	an	inability	to	sin,	both	of	which	did	not
belong	to	human	beings	otherwise.
46
(2)	From	the	Human	Nature	to	the	Divine	Nature:
	Jesus’	human	nature
gave	him	(a)	an	ability	to	experience	suffering	and	death;	(b)	an	ability	to
understand	by	experience	what	we	are	experiencing;	and	(c)	an	ability	to	be
our	substitute	sacrifice,	which	Jesus	as	God	alone	could	not	have	done.
f.	Conclusion:
	At	the	end	of	this	long	discussion,	it	may	be	easy	for	us	to	lose
sight	of	what	is	actually	taught	in	Scripture.	It	is	by	far	the	most	amazing
miracle	of	the	entire	Bible—far	more	amazing	than	the	resurrection	and	more
amazing	even	than	the	creation	of	the	universe.	The	fact	that	the	infinite,
omnipotent,	eternal	Son	of	God	could	become	man	and	join	himself	to	a
human	nature	forever,	so	that	infinite	God	became	one	person	with	finite	man,
will	remain	for	eternity	the	most	profound	miracle	and	the	most	profound
mystery	in	all	the	universe.
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
After	reading	this	chapter,	are	there	specific	ways	in	which	you	now
think	of	Jesus	as	being	more	like	you	than	you	did	before?	What	are
these?	How	can	a	clearer	understanding	of	Jesus’	humanity	help	you	face
temptations?	How	can	it	help	you	to	pray?	What	are	the	most	difficult
situations	in	your	life	right	now?	Can	you	think	of	any	similar	situations
that	Jesus	might	have	faced?	Does	that	encourage	you	to	pray
confidently	to	him?	Can	you	picture	what	it	would	have	been	like	if	you
had	been	present	when	Jesus	said,	“Before	Abraham	was,	I	am”?	What
would	you	have	felt?	Honestly,	what	would	your	response	have	been?
Now	try	visualizing	yourself	as	present	when	Jesus	made	some	of	the
other	“I	am”	statements	recorded	in	John’s	gospel.
47
2
.	
After	reading	this	chapter,	is	there	anything	that	you	understand	more
fully	about	the	deity	of	Jesus?	Can	you	describe	(and	perhaps	identify
with)	what	the	disciples	must	have	felt	as	they	came	to	a	growing
realization	of	who	Jesus	actually	was?	Do	you	think	Jesus	is	the	one
person	you	would	be	able	to	trust	with	your	life	for	all	eternity?	Will	you
be	happy	to	join	with	thousands	of	others	in	worshiping	around	his
throne	in	heaven?	Do	you	delight	in	worshiping	him	now?
SPECIAL	TERMS
Apollinarianism
	
kenosis	theory
Arianism
	
Logos
Chalcedonian	Definition
	
Lord
communication	of	attributes
	
monophysitism
docetism
	
monothelite	view
Eutychianism
	
Nestorianism
God
	
Son	of	God
hypostatic	union
	
Son	of	Man
impeccability
	
virgin	birth
incarnation
	
	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the	
bibliography	to
chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be	found	in	
Appendix	4
.)
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92			Litton,	178–218
1930			Thomas,	32–49,	223–28
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1875–76			Pope,	2:106–51,	188–96,	254–62
1892–94			Miley,	2:4–62
1940			Wiley,	2:143–86
1960			Purkiser,	164–82
1983			Carter,	1:331–74
1987–90			Oden,	2:1–314,	527–42
3.			Baptist
1767			Gill,	1:537–69
1887			Boyce,	258–91
1907			Strong,	669–700
1917			Mullins,	154–202
1976–83			Henry,	3:9–215
1983–85			Erickson,	661–758
1987–94			Lewis/Demarest,	2:251–370
4.			Dispensational
1947			Chafer,	1:318–96;	5:3–176
1949			Thiessen,	206–28
1986			Ryrie,	235–53,	260–66
5.			Lutheran
1917–24			Pieper,	2:55–279
1934			Mueller,	255–86
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1559			Calvin,	1:423–94	(2.9–14)
1724–58			Edwards,	2:499–510,	949–55
1861			Heppe,	410–47
1871–73			Hodge,	1:483–521;	2:378–454
1878			Dabney,	464–99
1887–1921			Warfield,	
BTS,	
157–237;	
SSW,	
1:139–66;
BD,	
71–100,	175–212;	
PWC,	
4–319;	
LG,	
1–304;	
CC,
3–389,	447–58
1889			Shedd,	2a:261–349;	3:378–400
1937–66			Murray,	
CW,	
1:29–35,	340–43;	
CW,	
2:132–
41;	
CW,	
4:58–91
1938			Berkhof,	305–30
1962			Buswell,	2:17–32,	40–70
7.			Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988–92			Williams,	1:305–52
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955			Ott,	125–75
2.			Roman	Catholic:	Post-Vatican	II
1980			McBrien,	1:267–546
Other	Works
Anselm.	“The	Incarnation	of	the	Word.”	In	
Anselm	of	Canterbury.	
Vol.	3.
Toronto:	Edwin	Mellen,	1976.
_____.	
Why	God	Became	Man:	and	The	Virgin	Conception	and	Original
Sin.	
Trans.	by	Joseph	M.	Colleran.	Albany,	N.Y.:	Magi,	1969.
Athanasius.	
On	the	Incarnation.	
Translated	by	a	religious	of	C.S.M.V.
New	York:	Macmillan,	1946.
Berkouwer,	G.	C.	
The	Person	of	Christ.	
Trans.	by	John	Vriend.	Grand
Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1954.
Bray,	G.	L.	
Creeds,	Councils	and	Christ.	
Leicester:	Inter-Varsity	Press,
1984.
_____.	“Christology.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	137–40.
Brown,	Harold	O.	J.	
Heresies:	The	Image	of	Christ	in	the	Mirror	of
Heresy	and	Orthodoxy	From	the	Apostles	to	the	Present.	
Garden	City,
N.Y.:	Doubleday,	1984.
Bruce,	F.	F.	
Jesus:	Lord	and	Savior.	
The	Jesus	Library,	ed.	by	Michael
Green.	Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,	1986.
Erickson,	Millard.	
The	Word	Became	Flesh:	A	Contemporary
Incarnational	Christology.	
Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1991.
Guthrie,	Donald.	
Jesus	the	Messiah.	
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1972.
_____.	
New	Testament	Theology.	
Leicester	and	Downers	Grove,	Ill.:
InterVarsity	Press,	1981,	pp.	219–365.
Harris,	Murray	J.	
Jesus	As	God.	
Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1992.
Hughes,	Philip	Edgcumbe.	
The	True	Image:	The	Origin	and	Destiny	of
Man	in	Christ.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	and	Leicester:	Inter-Varsity
Press,	1989,	pp.	211–414.
Longenecker,	Richard.	
The	Christology	of	Early	Jewish	Christianity.
London:	SCM,	1970.
Marshall,	I.	Howard.	
I	Believe	in	the	Historical	Jesus.	
Grand	Rapids:
Eerdmans,	1977.
McGrath,	Alister	E.	
Understanding	Jesus:	Who	He	Is	and	Why	He
Matters.	
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1987.
Moule,	C.	F.	D.	
The	Origin	of	Christology.	
Cambridge:	Cambridge
University	Press,	1977.
Payne,	Philip	B.	“Jesus’	Implicit	Claim	to	Deity	in	His	Parables.”	
TrinJ,
vol.	2,	n.s.,	no.	1	(Spring	1981),	pp.	3–23.
Reymond,	Robert	L.	
Jesus,	Divine	Messiah.	
Phillipsburg,	N.J.:
Presbyterian	and	Reformed,	1990.
Runia,	Klaas.	
The	Present-Day	Christological	Debate.	
Leicester:	Inter-
Varsity	Press,	1984.
Sproul,	R.	C.	
The	Glory	of	Christ.	
Wheaton,	Ill.:	Tyndale,	1990.
Stein,	R.	H.	“Jesus	Christ.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	582–85.
Wallace,	R.	S.	“Christology.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	221–27.
Walvoord,	John	F.	
Jesus	Christ	Our	Lord.	
Chicago:	Moody,	1969.
Wells,	David	F.	
The	Person	of	Christ:	A	Biblical	and	Historical	Analysis
of	the	Incarnation.	
Westchester,	Ill.:	Crossway,	1984.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
John	1:14:	
And	the	Word	became	flesh	and	dwelt	among	us,	full	of	grace	and
truth;	we	have	beheld	his	glory,	glory	as	of	the	only	Son	from	the	Father.
HYMN
“Fairest	Lord	Jesus”
Fairest	Lord	Jesus,	ruler	of	all	nature,
Son	of	God	and	Son	of	Man!
Thee	will	I	cherish,	thee	will	I	honor,
Thou,	my	soul’s	glory,	joy,	and	crown.
Fair	are	the	meadows,	fair	are	the	woodlands,
Robed	in	the	blooming	garb	of	spring:
Jesus	is	fairer,	Jesus	is	purer,
Who	makes	the	woeful	heart	to	sing.
Fair	is	the	sunshine,	fair	is	the	moonlight,
And	all	the	twinkling,	starry	host:
Jesus	shines	brighter,	Jesus	shines	purer
Than	all	the	angels	heav’n	can	boast.
Beautiful	Savior!	Lord	of	the	nations!
Son	of	God	and	Son	of	Man!
Glory	and	honor,	praise,	adoration,
Now	and	forever	more	be	thine.
FROM	
MüNSTER	GESANGBUCH,	
1677,	TRANSLATED	1850,	1873
NOTES
1
This	is	not	to	say	that	it	would	have	been	
impossible	
for	God	to	bring	Christ	into	the	world	in	any	other	way,	but	only	to	say	that
God,	in	his	wisdom,	decided	that	this	would	be	the	best	way	to	bring	it	about,	and	part	of	that	is	evident	in	the	fact	that	the	virgin
birth	does	help	us	understand	how	Jesus	can	be	fully	God	and	fully	man.	Whether	any	other	means	of	bringing	Christ	into	the
world	would	have	been	“possible”	in	some	absolute	sense	of	“possible,”	Scripture	does	not	tell	us.
2
I	have	quoted	here	the	translation	of	the	RSV,	which	I	think	to	be	correct	(so	NIV	margin).	But	it	is	also	grammatically	possible
to	translate	the	words	as	“so	the	holy	one	to	be	born	will	be	called	the	Son	of	God”	(NIV;	similarly,	NASB).	The	Greek	phrase	is
dio	kai	to	gennōmenon	hagion	klēthēsetai,	huios	theou.	
The	decision	on	which	translation	is	correct	depends	on	whether	we	take
to	gennōmenon	
as	the	subject,	meaning	“the	child	to	be	born,”	or	whether	we	think	that	the	subject	is	
to	hagion,	
“the	holy	one,”
with	the	participle	
gennōmenon	
then	functioning	as	an	adjective,	giving	the	sense	“the	being-born	holy	one”	(this	is	the	way	the
NIV	and	NASB	understand	it).
Recently,	more	extensive	lexical	research	seems	to	indicate	that	the	expression	
to	gennōmenon	
was	a	fairly	common	expression
that	was	readily	understood	to	mean	“the	child	to	be	born.”	Examples	of	this	use	can	be	seen	in	Plotinus,	
Nead,	
3.6.20–24;	Plato,
Menexenus,	
237E;	
Laws,	
6,775C;	Philo,	
On	the	Creation,	
100;	
On	the	Change	of	Names,	
267;	Plutarch,	
Moralia,	
“Advice	to
Bride	and	Groom,”	140F;	“On	Affection	for	Offspring,”	495E.	More	examples	could	probably	be	found	with	a	more	extensive
computer	search,	but	these	should	be	sufficient	to	demonstrate	that	the	mere	grammatical	possibility	of	translating	Luke	1:35	the
way	the	NIV	and	NASB	do	is	not	a	strong	argument	in	favor	of	their	translations,	because	Greek-speaking	readers	in	the	first
century	would	ordinarily	have	understood	the	words	
to	gennōmenon	
as	a	unit	meaning	“the	child	to	be	born.”	Because	of	this	fact,
the	RSV	represents	the	sense	that	first-century	readers	would	have	understood	from	the	sentence:	“therefore	
the	child	to	be	born
will	be	called	holy.”	(I	discovered	these	examples	of	
to	gennōmenon	
by	searching	the	Thesaurus	Linguae	Graecae	data	base	on	the
Ibycus	computer	at	Trinity	Evangelical	Divinity	School.)
3
The	Roman	Catholic	Church	teaches	the	doctrine	of	the	
immaculate	conception.	
This	doctrine	does	not	refer	to	the	conception	of
Jesus	in	Mary’s	womb,	but	to	the	conception	of	
Mary	
in	her	mother’s	womb,	and	teaches	that	Mary	was	free	from	inherited	sin.
On	December	8,	1854,	Pope	Pius	IX	proclaimed,	“The	Most	Holy	Virgin	Mary	was,	in	the	first	moment	of	her	conception	.	.	.	in
view	of	the	merits	of	Jesus	Christ	.	.	.	preserved	free	from	all	stain	of	original	sin”	(Ludwig	Ott,	
Fundamentals	of	Catholic
Dogma,	
trans.	Patrick	Lynch	[Rockford:	Tan,	1960FNT#],	p.	
190).	(The	Catholic	Church	also	teaches	that	“in	consequence	of	a
Special	Privilege	of	Grace	from	God,	Mary	was	free	from	every	personal	sin	during	her	whole	life,”	p.	
203.)
In	response,	we	must	say	that	the	New	Testament	does	highly	honor	Mary	as	one	who	has	“found	favor	with	God”	(Luke	1:30)
and	one	who	is	“Blessed	.	.	.	among	women”	(Luke	1:42),	but	nowhere	does	the	Bible	indicate	that	Mary	was	free	from	inherited
sin.	The	expression,	“Hail,	O	
favored	one,	
the	Lord	is	with	you!”	(Luke	1:28)	simply	means	that	Mary	has	found	much	blessing
from	God;	the	same	word	translated	
“favored”	
in	Luke	1:28	(Gk.	
charitoō
)	is	used	to	refer	to	all	Christians	in	Eph.	1:6:	“his
glorious	grace	which	he	
freely	bestowed	
on	us	in	the	Beloved.”	In	fact,	Ott	says,	“The	doctrine	of	the	Immaculate	Conception	of
Mary	is	not	explicitly	revealed	in	Scripture”	(p.	
200),	though	he	thinks	it	is	implicit	in	Gen.	3:15	and	Luke	1:28,	41.
4
See	
chapter	28
,	and	
chapter	42
,	on	the	nature	of	the	resurrection	body.
5
See	further	discussion	of	this	verse	below,at	the	end	of	
chapter	26
.
6
The	word	
tarassō,	
“troubled,”	is	used,	for	example,	to	speak	of	the	fact	that	Herod	was	“troubled”	when	he	heard	that	the	wise
men	had	come	looking	for	the	new	king	of	the	Jews	(Matt.	2:3);	the	disciples	“were	troubled”	when	they	suddenly	saw	Jesus
walking	on	the	sea	and	thought	he	was	a	ghost	(Matt.	14:26);	Zechariah	was	“troubled”	when	he	suddenly	saw	an	angel	appear	in
the	temple	in	Jerusalem	(Luke	1:12);	and	the	disciples	were	“troubled”	when	Jesus	suddenly	appeared	among	them	after	his
resurrection	(Luke	24:38).	But	the	word	is	also	used	in	John	14:1,	27,	when	Jesus	says,	“Let	not	your	hearts	be	
troubled.”	
When
Jesus	was	troubled	in	his	spirit,	therefore,	we	must	not	think	that	there	was	any	lack	of	faith	or	any	sin	involved,	but	it	was
definitely	a	strong	human	emotion	that	accompanied	a	time	of	extreme	danger.
7
Particularly	with	respect	to	family	life,	it	is	helpful	to	remember	that	Joseph	is	nowhere	mentioned	in	the	Gospels	after	the
incident	in	the	temple	when	Jesus	was	twelve	years	old.	It	is	especially	interesting	that	Joseph	is	omitted	from	the	verses	that	list
Jesus’	mother	and	other	family	members,	even	naming	his	brothers	and	sisters	(see	Matt.	13:55–56;	Mark	6:3;	cf.	Matt.	12:48).	It
would	seem	very	strange,	for	example,	that	“the	mother	of	Jesus”	was	at	the	wedding	at	Cana	in	Galilee	(John	2:1)	but	not	his
father,	if	his	father	were	still	living	(cf.	John	2:12).	This	suggests	that	sometime	after	Jesus	was	twelve	Joseph	had	died,	and	that
for	a	period	in	his	life	Jesus	grew	up	in	a	“single-parent	home.”	This	would	mean	that,	as	he	became	older,	he	assumed	more	and
more	of	the	responsibility	of	male	leadership	in	that	family,	earning	a	living	as	a	“carpenter”	(Mark	6:3)	and	no	doubt	helping	care
for	his	younger	brothers	and	sisters	as	well.	Therefore,	although	Jesus	was	never	married,	he	no	doubt	experienced	a	wide	range
of	family	situations	and	conflicts	similar	to	those	experienced	by	families	today.
8
The	Latin	word	
peccare	
means	“to	sin.”
9
In	this	discussion	I	am	largely	following	the	conclusions	of	Geerhardus	Vos,	
Biblical	Theology	
(Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1948),
pp.	339–42.
10
The	word	
docetism	
comes	from	the	Greek	verb	
dokeō,	
“to	seem,	to	appear	to	be.”	Any	theological	position	that	says	that	Jesus
was	not	really	a	man,	but	only	appeared	to	be	a	man,	is	called	a	“docetic”	position.	Behind	docetism	is	an	assumption	that	the
material	creation	is	inherently	evil,	and	therefore	the	Son	of	God	could	not	have	been	united	to	a	true	human	nature.	No	prominent
church	leader	ever	advocated	docetism,	but	it	was	a	troublesome	heresy	that	had	various	supporters	in	the	first	four	centuries	of
the	church.	Modern	evangelicals	who	neglect	to	teach	on	the	full	humanity	of	Christ	can	unwittingly	support	docetic	tendencies	in
their	hearers.
11
See	
chapter	25
;	also	
chapter	27
.
12
See	
chapter	15
,	and	
chapter	21
.
13
This	is	a	difficult	concept	for	us	to	understand,	because	we	do	not	want	to	say	that	Jesus	acquired	additional	knowledge	or
information	by	becoming	man:	certainly	as	omniscient	God	he	knew	every	fact	there	was	to	know	about	the	experience	of	human
suffering.	But	the	book	of	Hebrews	does	say,	“
Because	
he	himself	has	suffered	and	been	tempted,	he	is	able	to	help	those	who	are
tempted”	(Heb.	2:18),	and	we	must	insist	that	that	statement	is	true—there	is	a	relationship	between	Jesus’	suffering	and	his	ability
to	sympathize	with	us	and	help	us	in	temptation.	Apparently	the	author	is	speaking	not	of	any	additional	factual	or	intellectual
knowledge,	but	of	an	ability	to	recall	a	personal	experience	that	he	had	himself	gone	through,	an	ability	he	would	not	have	if	he
had	not	had	that	personal	experience.	Some	faint	parallel	to	this	might	be	seen	in	the	fact	that	a	man	who	is	a	medical	doctor,	and
has	perhaps	even	written	a	textbook	on	obstetrics,	might	know	far	more	
information	
about	childbirth	than	any	of	his	patients.	Yet,
because	he	is	a	man,	he	will	never	share	in	that	actual	experience.	A	woman	who	has	herself	had	a	baby	(or,	to	give	a	closer
parallel,	a	woman	physician	who	first	writes	a	textbook	and	then	has	a	baby	herself)	can	sympathize	much	more	fully	with	other
women	who	are	having	babies.
14
See	
chapter	29
,	on	the	offices	of	Christ.
15
The	Latin	word	
incarnāre	
means	“to	make	flesh,”	and	is	derived	from	the	prefix	
in-	
(which	has	a	causative	sense,	“to	cause
something	to	be	something”)	and	the	stem	
caro,	carnis-,	
“flesh.”
16
In	the	following	section	I	have	not	distinguished	between	claims	to	deity	made	by	Jesus	himself	and	claims	made	about	him	by
others:	while	such	a	distinction	is	helpful	for	tracing	development	in	people’s	understanding	of	Christ,	for	our	present	purposes
both	kinds	of	statements	are	found	in	our	canonical	New	Testament	Scriptures	and	are	valid	sources	for	building	Christian
doctrine.
17
An	excellent	discussion	of	New	Testament	evidence	for	the	deity	of	Christ,	drawn	especially	from	the	titles	of	Christ	in	the	New
Testament,	is	found	in	Donald	Guthrie,	
New	Testament	Theology	
(Leicester	and	Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,	1981),	pp.
235–365.
18
Titus	1:3,	in	connection	with	the	fact	that	v.	
4	calls	Christ	Jesus	“our	Savior”	and	the	fact	that	it	was	Jesus	Christ	who
commissioned	Paul	to	preach	the	gospel,	might	also	be	considered	another	example	of	the	use	of	the	word	
God	
to	refer	to	Christ.
19
See	
chapter	14
,	for	discussion	of	passages	that	refer	to	Jesus	as	“God.”	See	also	Murray	J.	Harris,	
Jesus	as	God	
(Grand	Rapids:
Baker,	1992),	for	the	most	extensive	exegetical	treatment	ever	published	dealing	with	New	Testament	passages	that	refer	to	Jesus
as	“God.”
20
The	word	
Christ	
is	the	Greek	translation	of	the	Hebrew	word	
Messiah.
21
The	other	“I	am”	sayings	in	John’s	gospel,	where	Jesus	claims	to	be	the	bread	of	life	(6:35),	the	light	of	the	world	(8:12),	the
door	of	the	sheep	(10:7),	the	good	shepherd	(10:11),	the	resurrection	and	the	life	(11:25),	the	way,	the	truth,	and	the	life	(14:6),
and	the	true	vine	(15:1),	also	contribute	to	the	overall	picture	of	deity	that	John	paints	of	Christ:	see	Donald	Guthrie,	
New
Testament	Theology,	
pp.	330–32.
22
See	Donald	Guthrie,	
New	Testament	Theology,	
esp.	p.	
326.
23
I	recognize	that	other	passages	attribute	some	of	Christ’s	miracles	to	the	Holy	Spirit—see	Matt.	12:28;	Luke	4:14,	18,	40.
24
See	
chapter	26
,	on	Mark	13:32,	and	on	the	question	of	how	omniscience	can	be	consistent	with	Christ’s	learning	things	as	a
man.
25
I	do	not	mean	to	imply	that	these	verses	show	that	Jesus’	human	nature	was	omnipresent.	Jesus’	human	nature,	including	his
physical	body,	was	never	more	than	one	place	at	one	time.	It	is	probably	best	to	understand	these	verses	to	refer	to	Jesus’	divine
nature	(see	
chapter	26
,	for	discussion	of	the	distinction	between	Christ’s	two	natures).
26
See	also	Matt.	28:17	where	Jesus	accepted	worship	from	his	disciples	after	his	resurrection.
27
A	very	clear	overview	of	the	history	of	kenotic	theology	is	found	in	the	article	“Kenosis,	a	Kenotic	Theology”	by	S.	M.	Smith,
in	
EDT,	
pp.	600–602.	Surprisingly	(for	the	volume	in	which	his	essay	appears),	Smith	ends	up	endorsing	kenotic	theology	as	a
valid	form	of	orthodox,	biblical	faith	(p.	
602)!
28
Sometimes	the	word	
kenosis	
is	used	in	a	weaker	sense	not	to	apply	to	the	kenosis	theory	in	its	full	sense,	but	simply	to	refer	to	a
more	orthodox	understanding	of	Phil.	2:7,	in	which	it	means	simply	that	Jesus	gave	up	his	glory	and	privilege	for	a	time	while	he
was	on	earth.	(This	is	essentially	the	view	we	have	advocated	in	this	text.)	But	it	does	not	seem	at	all	wise	to	use	the	term
“kenosis”	to	refer	to	such	a	traditional	understanding	of	Phil.	2:7,	for	it	is	too	easily	confused	with	the	full-blown	kenosis	doctrine
that	essentially	denies	the	full	deity	of	Christ.	To	take	a	term	that	formally	applies	to	a	false	doctrinal	teaching	and	then	use	it	to
apply	to	a	scripturally	sound	position	is	just	confusing	to	most	people.
29
S.	M.	Smith,	“Kenosis,	A	Kenotic	Theology,”	p.	
601.
30
Smith	points	out	that	one	of	the	primary	influences	leading	some	to	adopt	kenotic	theology	was	the	growth	of	modern
psychology	in	the	nineteenth	century:	“The	age	was	learning	to	think	in	terms	of	the	categories	of	psychology.	Consciousness	was
a	central	category.	If	at	our	‘center’	is	our	consciousness,	and	if	Jesus	was	both	omniscient	God	and	limited	man,	then	he	had	two
centers	and	was	thus	fundamentally	not	one	of	us.	Christology	was	becoming	inconceivable	for	some”	(ibid.,	pp.	600–601).	In
other	words,	pressures	of	modern	psychological	study	were	making	belief	in	the	combination	of	full	deity	and	full	humanity	in	the
one	person	of	Christ	difficult	to	explain	or	even	intellectually	embarrassing:	how	could	someone	be	so	different	from	us	and	still
be	truly	a	man?
Yet	we	might	respond	that	modern	psychology	is	inherently	limited	in	that	its	only	object	of	study	is	simple	human	beings.	No
modern	psychologist	has	ever	studied	anyone	who	was	perfectly	free	from	sin	(as	Christ	was)	and	who	was	both	fully	God	and
fully	man	(as	Christ	was).	If	we	limit	our	understanding	to	what	modern	psychology	tells	us	is	“possible”	or	“conceivable,”	then
we	will	have	neither	a	sinless	Christ	nor	a	divine	Christ.	In	this	as	in	many	other	points	of	doctrine,	our	understanding	of	what	is
“possible”	must	be	determined	not	by	modern	empirical	study	of	a	finite,	fallen	world,	but	by	the	teachings	of	Scripture	itself.
31
The	book	was	quickly	answered	by	another	series	of	essays,	
The	Truth	of	God	Incarnate,	
ed.	Michael	Green	(Sevenoaks,	Kent,
U.K.:	Hodder	and	Stoughton,	and	Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1977).	Later	the	authors	of	
The	Myth	of	God	Incarnate	
and	several	of
their	critics	published	the	proceedings	of	a	three-day	meeting	in	a	third	book:	Michael	Golder,	ed.,	
Incarnation	and	Myth:	The
Debate	Continued	
(London:	SCM,	1979).
32
See	the	discussion	of	Arianism	in	
chapter	14
.
33
Harold	O.	J.	Brown	says,	“Nestorius’	incarnate	person	was	a	single	person,	not	two	as	his	critics	thought,	but	he	could	not
convince	others	that	it	was	so.	Consequently	he	has	gone	down	in	history	as	a	great	heretic	although	what	he	actually	believed	was
reaffirmed	at	Chalcedon”	(
Heresies,	
p.	176).	Brown’s	extensive	discussion	of	Nestorianism	and	related	issues	on	pp.	172–84	is
very	helpful.
34
There	is	an	unusual	usage	in	John	3:11,	where	Jesus	suddenly	shifts	to	the	plural,	“Truly,	truly,	I	say	to	you,	
we	
speak	of	what
we	know,	and	bear	witness	to	what	we	have	seen.”	Jesus	may	have	been	referring	to	himself	and	some	disciples	with	him	who	are
not	mentioned,	in	contrast	with	the	“we”	of	the	Jewish	rulers	that	Nicodemus	alluded	to	when	he	opened	the	conversation:	“Rabbi,
we	
know	that	you	are	a	teacher	come	from	God”	(John	3:2).	Or	Jesus	may	have	been	speaking	of	himself	together	with	the
witness	of	the	Holy	Spirit,	whose	work	is	the	subject	of	the	conversation	(vv.	5–9).	In	any	case,	Jesus	is	not	referring	to	himself	as
“we,”	but	calls	himself	“I”	in	that	very	sentence.	See	discussion	in	Leon	Morris,	
The	Gospel	According	to	John,	
pp.	221–22.
35
A	variant	form	of	Eutychianism	held	that	the	human	nature	was	simply	lost	in	the	divine,	so	that	the	resulting	single	nature	was
the	divine	nature	only.
36
However,	it	should	be	noted	that	three	localized	groups	of	ancient	churches	rejected	the	Chalcedonian	definition	and	still
endorse	monophysitism	to	this	day:	the	Ethiopian	Orthodox	church,	the	Coptic	Orthodox	church	(in	Egypt),	and	the	Syrian
Jacobite	church.	See	H.	D.	McDonald,	“Monophysitism,”	in	
NDT,	
pp.	442–43.
37
English	translation	taken	from	Philip	Schaff,	
Creeds	of	Christendom,	
2:62–63.
38
Lutheran	theologians,	following	Martin	Luther,	have	sometimes	claimed	that	Jesus’	human	nature,	even	his	human	body,	is	also
everywhere	present	or	“ubiquitous.”	But	this	position	has	not	been	adopted	by	any	other	segment	of	the	Christian	church,	and	it
seems	to	have	been	a	position	that	Luther	himself	took	mainly	in	an	attempt	to	justify	his	view	that	Christ’s	body	was	actually
present	in	the	Lord’s	Supper	(not	in	the	elements	themselves,	but	with	them).
39
A.	N.	S.	Lane	explicitly	denies	the	Chalcedonian	view	of	Christ	on	the	ground	that	it	cannot	be:	“Omniscience	and	ignorance,
omnipotence	and	impotence	cannot	coexist.	The	former	swamps	the	latter”	(“Christology	Beyond	Chalcedon,”	in	
Christ	the	Lord:
Studies	in	Christology	Presented	to	Donald	Guthrie,	
edited	by	Harold	H.	Rowden	(Leicester	and	Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity
Press,	1982),	p.	
270.	He	says	that	Christ	“explicitly	denied	his	omniscience	(Mt.	24:36	=	Mk.	13:32)	but	even	the	clear	words	of
Christ	have	not	sufficed	to	counter	the	pull	of	docetism.	.	.	.	The	affirmation	of	the	omniscience	of	the	historical	Jesus	has	no
biblical	basis	and	indeed	runs	counter	to	the	clear	teaching	of	the	Gospels.	.	.	.	It	has	serious	theological	implications	in	that	it
undermines	his	true	humanity	as	taught	in	Scripture”	(p.	
271).
But	(see	
chapter	26
,	below)	Matt.	24:36	and	Mark	13:32	are	certainly	capable	of	being	understood	to	refer	to	Jesus’	knowledge	in
his	human	nature.	And	when	Lane	says	that	omniscience	and	ignorance	“cannot	coexist”	he	is	simply	pitting	one	part	of	a	biblical
paradox	against	another	and	then	asserting	that	one	part	is	impossible.	On	what	grounds	are	we	justified	in	saying	that	an
omniscient	divine	nature	and	a	human	nature	with	limited	knowledge	“cannot	coexist,”?	Or	that	an	omnipotent	divine	nature	and	a
weak	human	nature	“cannot	coexist”?	Such	assertions	fundamentally	deny	that	infinite	deity	and	finite	humanity	can	exist
together	in	the	same	person—in	other	words,	they	deny	that	Jesus	could	be	
fully	
God	and	
fully	
man	at	the	same	time.	In	this	way,
they	deny	the	essence	of	the	incarnation.
40
Charles	Hodge,	
Systematic	Theology,	
2:405.
41
Ibid.,	pp.	404–5.
42
Ibid.,	p.	
405.
43
In	commenting	on	Mark	13:32,	John	Calvin,	H.	B.	Swete,	an	Anglican	commentator	(
The	Gospel	According	to	St.	Mark
[London:	Macmillan,	1913],	p.	
316),	and	R.	C.	H.	Lenski,	a	Lutheran	commentator	(
The	Interpretation	of	St.	Mark’s	Gospel
[Minneapolis:	Augsburg,	1961	(reprint)],	p.	
590),	all	attribute	this	ignorance	of	Jesus	to	his	human	nature	only,	not	to	his	divine
nature.
44
At	this	point	an	analogy	from	our	human	experience	may	be	somewhat	helpful.	Anyone	who	has	run	in	a	race	knows	that	near
the	end	of	the	race	there	are	conflicting	desires	within.	On	the	one	hand,	the	runner’s	lungs	and	legs	and	arms	seem	to	be	crying
out,	“Stop!	Stop!”	There	is	a	clear	desire	to	stop	because	of	the	physical	pain.	On	the	other	hand,	something	in	the	runner’s	mind
says,	“Go	on!	Go	on!	I	want	to	win!”	We	have	all	known	similar	instances	of	conflicting	desires	within.	Now	if	we,	being	ordinary
human	beings,	can	have	differing	or	distinct	desires	within	us	and	yet	be	one	person,	how	much	more	possible	is	that	for	one	who
was	both	man	and	God	at	the	same	time?	If	we	say	we	do	not	understand	how	that	could	be,	we	simply	admit	our	ignorance	of	the
situation,	for	none	of	us	has	ever	experienced	what	it	is	like	to	be	both	God	and	man	at	the	same	time,	nor	will	we	ever	have	such
an	experience	ourselves.	We	should	not	say	it	is	impossible,	but,	if	we	are	convinced	that	New	Testament	texts	lead	us	to	this
conclusion,	we	should	accept	it	and	agree	with	it.
45
Similar	usage	is	perhaps	seen	in	John	3:13	and	Acts	20:28	(in	this	latter	verse	some	manuscripts	read	“with	his	own	blood”).
46
See	above,	note	
38
,	on	the	Lutheran	view	that	ubiquity	was	also	communicated	from	the	divine	nature	to	the	human.
47
See	the	list	of	“I	am”	statements	
above,	note	
21
,	above.
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	27
The	Atonement
Was	it	necessary	for	Christ	to	die?	Did	Christ’s	entire	earthly	life
earn	any	saving	benefits	for	us?	The	cause	and	nature	of	the
atonement.	Did	Christ	descend	into	hell?
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
We	may	define	the	atonement	as	follows:	
The	atonement	is	the	work	Christ
did	in	his	life	and	death	to	earn	our	salvation.	
This	definition	indicates	that
we	are	using	the	word	
atonement	
in	a	broader	sense	than	it	is	sometimes	used.
Sometimes	it	is	used	to	refer	only	to	Jesus’	dying	and	paying	for	our	sins	on
the	cross.	But,	as	will	be	seen	below,	since	saving	benefits	also	come	to	us
from	Christ’s	life,	we	have	included	that	in	our	definition	as	well.
1
A.	The	Cause	of	the	Atonement
What	was	the	ultimate	cause	that	led	to	Christ’s	coming	to	earth	and	dying	for
our	sins?	To	find	this	we	must	trace	the	question	back	to	something	in	the
character	of	God	himself.	And	here	Scripture	points	to	two	things:	the	
love
and	
justice	
of	God.
The	love	of	God	as	a	cause	of	the	atonement	is	seen	in	the	most	familiar
passage	in	the	Bible:	“For	God	
so	loved	the	world	
that	he	gave	his	only	Son,
that	whoever	believes	in	him	should	not	perish	but	have	eternal	life”	(John
3:16).	But	the	justice	of	God	also	required	that	God	find	a	way	that	the
penalty	due	to	us	for	our	sins	would	be	paid	(for	he	could	not	accept	us	into
fellowship	with	himself	unless	the	penalty	was	paid).	Paul	explains	that	this
was	why	God	sent	Christ	to	be	a	“propitiation”	(Rom.	3:25	NASB)	(that	is,	a
sacrifice	that	bears	God’s	wrath	so	that	God	becomes	“propitious”	or
favorably	disposed	toward	us):	it	was	“
to	show	God’s	righteousness,	
because
in	his	divine	forbearance	he	had	passed	over	former	sins”	(Rom.	3:25).	Here
Paul	says	that	God	had	been	forgiving	sins	in	the	Old	Testament	but	no
penalty	had	been	paid—a	fact	that	would	make	people	wonder	whether	God
was	indeed	just	and	ask	how	he	could	forgive	sins	without	a	penalty.	No	God
who	was	truly	just	could	do	that,	could	he?	Yet	when	God	sent	Christ	to	die
and	pay	the	penalty	for	our	sins,	“it	was	to	prove	at	the	present	time	that	he
himself	is	righteous	and	that	he	justifies	him	who	has	faith	in	Jesus”	(Rom.
3:26).
Therefore	both	the	love	and	the	justice	of	God	were	the	ultimate	cause	of	the
atonement.	It	is	not	helpful	for	us	to	ask	which	is	more	important,	however,
because	without	the	love	of	God,	he	would	never	have	taken	any	steps	to
redeem	us,	yet	without	the	justice	of	God,	the	specific	requirement	that	Christ
should	earn	our	salvation	by	dying	for	our	sins	would	not	have	been	met.
Both	the	love	and	the	justice	of	God	were	equally	important.
B.	The	Necessity	of	the	Atonement
Was	there	any	other	way	for	God	to	save	human	beings	than	by	sending	his
Son	to	die	in	our	place?
Before	answering	this	question,	it	is	important	to	realize	that	it	was	not
necessary	for	God	to	save	any	people	at	all.	When	we	appreciate	that	“God
did	not	spare	the	angels	when	they	sinned,	but	cast	them	into	hell	and
committed	them	to	pits	of	nether	gloom	to	be	kept	until	the	judgment”	(2
Peter	2:4),	then	we	realize	that	God	could	also	have	chosen	with	perfect
justice	to	have	left	us	in	our	sins	awaiting	judgment:	he	could	have	chosen	to
save	no	one,	just	as	he	did	with	the	sinful	angels.	So	in	this	sense	the
atonement	was	not	absolutely	necessary.
But	once	God,	in	his	love,	decided	to	save	some	human	beings,	then	several
passages	in	Scripture	indicate	that	there	was	no	other	way	for	God	to	do	this
than	through	the	death	of	his	Son.	Therefore,	the	atonement	was	not
absolutely	necessary,	but,	as	a	“consequence”	of	God’s	decision	to	save	some
human	beings,	the	atonement	was	absolutely	necessary.	This	is	sometimes
called	the	“consequent	absolute	necessity”	view	of	the	atonement.
In	the	Garden	of	Gethsemane	Jesus	prays,	
“If	it	be	possible,	
let	this	cup	pass
from	me;	nevertheless,	not	as	I	will,	but	as	you	will”	(Matt.	26:39).	We	may
be	confident	that	Jesus	always	prayed	according	to	the	will	of	the	Father,	and
that	he	always	prayed	with	fullness	of	faith.	Thus	it	seems	that	this	prayer,
which	Matthew	takes	pains	to	record	for	us,	shows	that	it	was	
not	possible	
for
Jesus	to	avoid	the	death	on	the	cross	which	was	soon	to	come	to	him	(the
“cup”	of	suffering	that	he	had	said	would	be	his).	If	he	was	going	to
accomplish	the	work	that	the	Father	sent	him	to	do,	and	if	people	were	going
to	be	redeemed	for	God,	then	it	was	necessary	for	him	to	die	on	the	cross.
He	said	something	similar	after	his	resurrection,	when	he	was	talking	with
two	disciples	on	the	road	to	Emmaus.	They	were	sad	that	Jesus	had	died,	but
his	response	was,	“O	foolish	men,	and	slow	of	heart	to	believe	all	that	the
prophets	have	spoken!	Was	it	not	
necessary	
that	the	Christ	should	suffer	these
things	and	enter	into	his	glory?”	(Luke	24:25–26).	Jesus	understood	that
God’s	plan	of	redemption	(which	he	explained	for	the	disciples	from	many
Old	Testament	Scriptures,	Luke	24:27)	made	it	necessary	for	the	Messiah	to
die	for	the	sins	of	his	people.
As	we	saw	above,	Paul	in	Romans	3	also	shows	that	if	God	were	to	be
righteous,	and	still	save	people,	he	had	to	send	Christ	to	pay	the	penalty	for
sins:	“It	was	to	prove	at	the	present	time	that	he	himself	is	righteous	and	that
he	justifies	him	who	has	faith	in	Jesus”	(Rom.	3:26).	The	epistle	to	the
Hebrews	emphasizes	that	Christ	had	to	suffer	for	our	sins:	“He	
had	to	
be
made	like	his	brethren	in	every	respect,	so	that	he	might	become	a	merciful
and	faithful	high	priest	in	the	service	of	God,	to	make	expiation	[lit.
‘propitiation’]	for	the	sins	of	the	people”	(Heb.	2:17).	The	author	of	Hebrews
also	argues	that	since	“it	is	impossible	that	the	blood	of	bulls	and	goats	should
take	away	sins”	(Heb.	10:4),	a	better	sacrifice	is	required	(Heb.	9:23).	Only
the	blood	of	Christ,	that	is,	his	death,	would	be	able	really	to	take	away	sins
(Heb.	9:25–26).	There	was	no	other	way	for	God	to	save	us	than	for	Christ	to
die	in	our	place.
C.	The	Nature	of	the	Atonement
In	this	section	we	consider	two	aspects	of	Christ’s	work:	(1)	Christ’s
obedience	for	us,	in	which	he	obeyed	the	requirements	of	the	law	in	our	place
and	was	perfectly	obedient	to	the	will	of	God	the	Father	as	our	representative,
and	(2)	Christ’s	sufferings	for	us,	in	which	he	took	the	penalty	due	for	our
sins	and	as	a	result	died	for	our	sins.
It	is	important	to	notice	that	in	both	of	these	categories	the	primary	emphasis
and	the	primary	influence	of	Christ’s	work	of	redemption	is	not	on	us,	but	on
God	the	Father.	Jesus	obeyed	the	Father	in	our	place	and	perfectly	met	the
demands	of	the	law.	And	he	suffered	in	our	place,	receiving	in	himself	the
penalty	that	God	the	Father	would	have	visited	upon	us.	In	both	cases,	the
atonement	is	viewed	as	objective;	that	is,	something	that	has	primary
influence	directly	on	God	himself.	Only	secondarily	does	it	have	application
to	us,	and	this	is	only	because	there	was	a	definite	event	in	the	relationship
between	God	the	Father	and	God	the	Son	that	secured	our	salvation.
1.
	Christ’s	Obedience	for	Us	(Sometimes	Called	His	“Active	Obedience”).
If	Christ	had	only	earned	forgiveness	of	sins	for	us,	then	we	would	not	merit
heaven.	Our	guilt	would	have	been	removed,	but	we	would	simply	be	in	the
position	of	Adam	and	Eve	before	they	had	done	anything	good	or	bad	and
before	they	had	passed	a	time	of	probation	successfully.	To	be	established	in
righteousness	forever	and	to	have	their	fellowship	with	God	made	sure
forever,	Adam	and	Eve	had	to	obey	God	perfectly	over	a	period	of	time.	Then
God	would	have	looked	on	their	faithful	obedience	with	pleasure	and	delight,
and	they	would	have	lived	with	him	in	fellowship	forever.
2
For	this	reason,	Christ	had	to	live	a	life	of	perfect	obedience	to	God	in	order
to	earn	righteousness	for	us.	He	had	to	obey	the	law	for	his	whole	life	on	our
behalf	so	that	the	positive	merits	of	his	perfect	obedience	would	be	counted
for	us.	Sometimes	this	is	called	Christ’s	“active	obedience,”	while	his
suffering	and	dying	for	our	sins	is	called	his	“passive	obedience.”
3
	Paul	says
his	goal	is	that	he	may	be	found	in	Christ,	“
not	having	a	righteousness	of
[his]	own,	
based	on	law,	but	
that	which	is	through	faith	in	Christ,	
the
righteousness	from	God	that	depends	on	faith”	(Phil.	3:9).	It	is	not	just	moral
neutrality	that	Paul	knows	he	needs	from	Christ	(that	is,	a	clean	slate	with	sins
forgiven),	but	a	positive	moral	righteousness.	And	he	knows	that	that	cannot
come	from	himself,	but	must	come	through	faith	in	Christ.	Similarly,	Paul
says	that	Christ	has	been	made	
“our	righteousness”	
(1	Cor.	1:30).	And	he
quite	explicitly	says,	“For	as	by	one	man’s	disobedience	many	were	made
sinners,	so	by	one	man’s	obedience	many	will	be	
made	righteous”	
(Rom.
5:19).
Some	theologians	have	not	taught	that	Christ	needed	to	achieve	a	lifelong
record	of	perfect	obedience	for	us.	They	have	simply	emphasized	that	Christ
had	to	die	and	thereby	pay	the	penalty	for	our	sins.
4
	But	such	a	position	does
not	adequately	explain	why	Christ	did	more	than	just	die	for	us;	he	also
became	our	“righteousness”	before	God.	Jesus	said	to	John	the	Baptist,	before
he	was	baptized	by	him,	“It	is	fitting	for	us	
to	fulfil	all	righteousness”	
(Matt.
3:15).
It	might	be	argued	that	Christ	had	to	live	a	life	of	perfect	righteousness	for	his
own	sake,	not	for	ours,	before	he	could	be	a	sinless	sacrifice	for	us.	But	Jesus
had	no	need	to	live	a	life	of	perfect	obedience	for	his	own	sake—he	had
shared	love	and	fellowship	with	the	Father	for	all	eternity	and	was	in	his	own
character	eternally	worthy	of	the	Father’s	good	pleasure	and	delight.	He	rather
had	to	“fulfill	all	righteousness”	for	our	sake;	that	is,	for	the	sake	of	the
people	whom	he	was	representing	as	their	head.	Unless	he	had	done	this	for
us,	we	would	have	no	record	of	obedience	by	which	we	would	merit	God’s
favor	and	merit	eternal	life	with	him.	Moreover,	if	Jesus	had	needed	only
sinlessness	and	not	also	a	life	of	perfect	obedience,	he	could	have	died	for	us
when	he	was	a	young	child	rather	than	when	he	was	thirty-three	years	old.
By	way	of	application,	we	ought	to	ask	ourselves	whose	lifelong	record	of
obedience	we	would	rather	rely	on	for	our	standing	before	God,	Christ’s	or
our	own?	As	we	think	about	the	life	of	Christ,	we	ought	to	ask	ourselves,	was
it	good	enough	to	deserve	God’s	approval?	And	are	we	willing	to	rely	on	his
record	of	obedience	for	our	eternal	destiny?
2.	Christ’s	Sufferings	for	Us	(Sometimes	Called	His	“Passive
Obedience”).
	In	addition	to	obeying	the	law	perfectly	for	his	whole	life	on
our	behalf,	Christ	also	took	on	himself	the	sufferings	necessary	to	pay	the
penalty	for	our	sins.
a.	Suffering	for	His	Whole	Life:
	In	a	broad	sense	the	penalty	Christ	bore	in
paying	for	our	sins	was	suffering	in	both	his	body	and	soul	throughout	his
life.	Though	Christ’s	sufferings	culminated	in	his	death	on	the	cross	(see
below),	his	whole	life	in	a	fallen	world	involved	suffering.	For	example,	Jesus
endured	tremendous	suffering	during	the	temptation	in	the	wilderness	(Matt.
4:1–11),	when	he	was	assaulted	for	forty	days	by	the	attacks	of	Satan.
5
	He
also	suffered	in	growing	to	maturity,	“Although	he	was	a	Son,	he	learned
obedience	through	what	he	
suffered”	
(Heb.	5:8).	He	knew	suffering	in	the
intense	opposition	he	faced	from	Jewish	leaders	throughout	much	of	his
earthly	ministry	(see	Heb.	12:3–4).	We	may	suppose	too	that	he	experienced
suffering	and	grief	at	the	death	of	his	earthly	father,
6
	and	certainly	he
experienced	grief	at	the	death	of	his	close	friend	Lazarus	(John	11:35).	In
predicting	the	coming	of	the	Messiah,	Isaiah	said	he	would	be	“a	
man	of
sorrows,	
and	acquainted	with	grief”	(Isa.	53:3).
b.	The	Pain	of	the	Cross:
	The	sufferings	of	Jesus	intensified	as	he	drew	near
to	the	cross.	He	told	his	disciples	of	something	of	the	agony	he	was	going
through	when	he	said,	“My	soul	is	very	sorrowful,	even	to	death”	(Matt.
26:38).	It	was	especially	on	the	cross	that	Jesus’	sufferings	for	us	reached
their	climax,	for	it	was	there	that	he	bore	the	penalty	for	our	sin	and	died	in
our	place.	Scripture	teaches	us	that	there	were	four	different	aspects	of	the
pain	that	Jesus	experienced:
(1)Physical	Pain	and	Death:
	We	do	not	need	to	hold	that	Jesus	suffered
more	physical	pain	than	any	human	being	has	ever	suffered,	for	the	Bible
nowhere	makes	such	a	claim.	But	we	still	must	not	forget	that	death	by
crucifixion	was	one	of	the	most	horrible	forms	of	execution	ever	devised	by
man.
Many	readers	of	the	Gospels	in	the	ancient	world	would	have	witnessed
crucifixions	and	thus	would	have	had	a	painfully	vivid	mental	picture	upon
reading	the	simple	words	“And	they	crucified	him”	(Mark	15:24).	A	criminal
who	was	crucified	was	essentially	forced	to	inflict	upon	himself	a	very	slow
death	by	suffocation.	When	the	criminal’s	arms	were	outstretched	and
fastened	by	nails	to	the	cross,	he	had	to	support	most	of	the	weight	of	his
body	with	his	arms.	The	chest	cavity	would	be	pulled	upward	and	outward,
making	it	difficult	to	exhale	in	order	to	be	able	to	draw	a	fresh	breath.	But
when	the	victim’s	longing	for	oxygen	became	unbearable,	he	would	have	to
push	himself	up	with	his	feet,	thus	giving	more	natural	support	to	the	weight
of	his	body,	releasing	some	of	the	weight	from	his	arms,	and	enabling	his
chest	cavity	to	contract	more	normally.	By	pushing	himself	upward	in	this
way	the	criminal	could	fend	off	suffocation,	but	it	was	extremely	painful
because	it	required	putting	the	body’s	weight	on	the	nails	holding	the	feet,	and
bending	the	elbows	and	pulling	upward	on	the	nails	driven	through	the
wrists.
7
	The	criminal’s	back,	which	had	been	torn	open	repeatedly	by	a
previous	flogging,	would	scrape	against	the	wooden	cross	with	each	breath.
Thus	Seneca	(first	century	A.D.)	spoke	of	a	crucified	man	“drawing	the
breath	of	life	amid	long-drawn-out	agony”	(Epistle	101,	to	Lucilius,	section
14).
A	physician	writing	in	the	
Journal	of	the	American	Medical	Association	
in
1986	explained	the	pain	that	would	have	been	experienced	in	death	by
crucifixion:
Adequate	exhalation	required	lifting	the	body	by	pushing	up	on	the
feet	and	by	flexing	the	elbows.	.	.	.	However,	this	maneuver	would
place	the	entire	weight	of	the	body	on	the	tarsals	and	would	produce
searing	pain.	Furthermore,	flexion	of	the	elbows	would	cause	rotation
of	the	wrists	about	the	iron	nails	and	cause	fiery	pain	along	the
damaged	median	nerves.	.	.	.	Muscle	cramps	and	paresthesias	of	the
outstretched	and	uplifted	arms	would	add	to	the	discomfort.	As	a
result,	each	respiratory	effort	would	become	agonizing	and	tiring	and
lead	eventually	to	asphyxia.
8
In	some	cases,	crucified	men	would	survive	for	several	days,	nearly
suffocating	but	not	quite	dying.	This	was	why	the	executioners	would
sometimes	break	the	legs	of	a	criminal,	so	that	death	would	come	quickly,	as
we	see	in	John	19:31–33:
Since	it	was	the	day	of	Preparation,	in	order	to	prevent	the	bodies
from	remaining	on	the	cross	on	the	sabbath	(for	that	sabbath	was	a
high	day),	the	Jews	asked	Pilate	that	their	legs	might	be	broken,	and
that	they	might	be	taken	away.	So	the	soldiers	came	and	broke	the
legs	of	the	first,	and	of	the	other	who	had	been	crucified	with	him;	but
when	they	came	to	Jesus	and	saw	that	he	was	already	dead,	they	did
not	break	his	legs.
(2)	The	Pain	of	Bearing	Sin:
	More	awful	than	the	pain	of	physical	suffering
that	Jesus	endured	was	the	psychological	pain	of	bearing	the	guilt	for	our	sin.
In	our	own	experience	as	Christians	we	know	something	of	the	anguish	we
feel	when	we	know	we	have	sinned.	The	weight	of	guilt	is	heavy	on	our
hearts,	and	there	is	a	bitter	sense	of	separation	from	all	that	is	right	in	the
universe,	an	awareness	of	something	that	in	a	very	deep	sense	ought	not	to	be.
In	fact,	the	more	we	grow	in	holiness	as	God’s	children,	the	more	intensely
we	feel	this	instinctive	revulsion	against	evil.
Now	Jesus	was	perfectly	holy.	He	hated	sin	with	his	entire	being.	The	thought
of	evil,	of	sin,	contradicted	everything	in	his	character.	Far	more	than	we	do,
Jesus	instinctively	rebelled	against	evil.	Yet	in	obedience	to	the	Father,	and
out	of	love	for	us,	Jesus	took	on	himself	all	the	sins	of	those	who	would
someday	be	saved.	Taking	on	himself	all	the	evil	against	which	his	soul
rebelled	created	deep	revulsion	in	the	center	of	his	being.	All	that	he	hated
most	deeply	was	poured	out	fully	upon	him.
Scripture	frequently	says	that	our	sins	were	put	on	Christ:	“The	L
ORD
	has	laid
on	him	the	iniquity	of	us	all”	(Isa.	53:6),	and	“He	
bore	the	sin	
of	many”	(Isa.
53:12).	John	the	Baptist	calls	Jesus	“the	Lamb	of	God,	who	takes	away	the	sin
of	the	world”	(John	1:29).	Paul	declares	that	God	made	Christ	
“to	be	sin”	
(2
Cor.	5:21)	and	that	Christ	became	“a	curse	for	us”	(Gal.	3:13).	The	author	of
Hebrews	says	that	Christ	was	“offered	once	to	bear	the	sins	of	many”	(Heb.
9:28).	And	Peter	says,	“He	himself	
bore	our	sins	
in	his	body	on	the	tree”	(1
Peter	2:24).
9
The	passage	from	2	Corinthians	quoted	above,	together	with	the	verses	from
Isaiah,	indicate	that	it	was	God	the	Father	who	put	our	sins	on	Christ.	How
could	that	be?	In	the	same	way	in	which	Adam’s	sins	were	imputed	to	us,
10
	so
God	
imputed	
our	sins	to	Christ;	that	is,	he	
thought	of	them	as	belonging	to
Christ,	
and,	since	God	is	the	ultimate	judge	and	definer	of	what	really	is	in	the
universe,	when	God	thought	of	our	sins	as	belonging	to	Christ	then	in	fact
they	actually	did	belong	to	Christ.	This	does	not	mean	that	God	thought	that
Christ	had	himself	committed	the	sins,	or	that	Christ	himself	actually	had	a
sinful	nature,	but	rather	that	the	guilt	for	our	sins	(that	is,	the	liability	to
punishment)	was	thought	of	by	God	as	belonging	to	Christ	rather	than	to	us.
Some	have	objected	that	it	was	not	fair	for	God	to	do	this,	to	transfer	the	guilt
of	sin	from	us	to	an	innocent	person,	Christ.	Yet	we	must	remember	that
Christ	voluntarily	took	on	himself	the	guilt	for	our	sins,	so	this	objection	loses
much	of	its	force.	Moreover,	God	himself	(Father,	Son,	and	Holy	Spirit)	is	the
ultimate	standard	of	what	is	just	and	fair	in	the	universe,	and	he	decreed	that
the	atonement	would	take	place	in	this	way,	and	that	it	did	in	fact	satisfy	the
demands	of	his	own	righteousness	and	justice.
(3)	Abandonment:
	The	physical	pain	of	crucifixion	and	the	pain	of	taking	on
himself	the	absolute	evil	of	our	sins	were	aggravated	by	the	fact	that	Jesus
faced	this	pain	alone.	In	the	Garden	of	Gethsemane,	when	Jesus	took	with
him	Peter,	James	and	John,	he	confided	something	of	his	agony	to	them:	“My
soul	is	very	sorrowful,	even	to	death;	remain	here,	and	watch”	(Mark	14:34).
This	is	the	kind	of	confidence	one	would	disclose	to	a	close	friend,	and	it
implies	a	request	for	support	in	his	hour	of	greatest	trial.	Yet	as	soon	as	Jesus
was	arrested,	“all	the	disciples	forsook	him	and	fled”	(Matt.	26:56).
Here	also	there	is	a	very	faint	analogy	in	our	experience,	for	we	cannot	live
long	without	tasting	the	inward	ache	of	rejection,	whether	it	be	rejection	by	a
close	friend,	by	a	parent	or	child,	or	by	a	wife	or	husband.	Yet	in	all	those
cases	there	is	at	least	a	sense	that	we	could	have	done	something	differently,
that	at	least	in	small	part	we	may	be	at	fault.	It	was	not	so	with	Jesus	and	the
disciples,	for,	“having	loved	his	own	who	were	in	the	world,	he	loved	them	to
the	end”	(John	13:1).	He	had	done	nothing	but	love	them;	in	return,	they	all
abandoned	him.
But	far	worse	than	desertion	by	even	the	closest	of	human	friends	was	the	fact
that	Jesus	was	deprived	of	the	closeness	to	the	Father	that	had	been	the
deepest	joy	of	his	heart	for	all	his	earthly	life.	When	Jesus	cried	out	“Eli,	Eli,
lama	sabach-thani?”	that	is,	“My	God,	my	God,	why	have	you	forsaken	me?”
(Matt.	27:46),	he	showed	that	he	was	finally	cut	off	from	the	sweet	fellowship
with	his	heavenly	Father	that	had	been	the	unfailing	source	of	his	inward
strength	and	the	element	of	greatest	joy	in	a	life	filled	with	sorrow.	As	Jesus
bore	our	sins	on	the	cross,	he	was	abandoned	by	his	heavenly	Father,	who	is
“of	purer	eyes	than	to	behold	evil”	(Hab.	1:13).	He	faced	the	weight	of	the
guilt	of	millions	of	sins	alone.
(4)	Bearing	the	Wrath	of	God:
	Yet	more	difficult	than	these	three	previous
aspects	of	Jesus’	pain	was	the	pain	of	bearing	the	wrath	of	God	upon	himself.
As	Jesus	bore	the	guilt	of	our	sins	alone,	God	the	Father,	the	mighty	Creator,
the	Lord	of	the	universe,	poured	out	on	Jesus	the	fury	of	his	wrath:	Jesus
became	the	object	of	the	intense	hatred	of	sin	and	vengeance	against	sin
which	God	had	patiently	stored	up	since	the	beginning	of	the	world.
Romans	3:25	tells	us	that	God	put	forward	Christ	as	a	
“propitiation”	
(NASB)
a	word	that	means	“a	sacrifice	that	bears	God’s	wrath	to	the	end	and	in	so
doing	changes	God’s	wrath	toward	us	into	favor.”	Paul	tells	us	that	“This	was
to	show	God’s	righteousness,	because	in	his	divine	forbearance	he	had	passed
over	former	sins;	it	was	to	prove	at	the	present	time	that	he	himself	is
righteous	and	that	he	justifies	him	who	has	faith	in	Jesus”	(Rom.	3:25–26).
God	had	not	simply	forgiven	sin	and	forgotten	about	the	punishment	in
generations	past.	He	had	forgiven	sins	and	stored	up	his	righteous	anger
against	those	sins.	But	at	the	cross	the	fury	of	all	that	stored-up	wrath	against
sin	was	unleashed	against	God’s	own	Son.
Many	theologians	outside	the	evangelical	world	have	strongly	objected	to	the
idea	that	Jesus	bore	the	wrath	of	God	against	sin.
11
	Their	basic	assumption	is
that	since	God	is	a	God	of	love,	it	would	be	inconsistent	with	his	character	to
show	wrath	against	the	human	beings	he	has	created	and	for	whom	he	is	a
loving	Father.	But	evangelical	scholars	have	convincingly	argued	that	the	idea
of	the	wrath	of	God	is	solidly	rooted	in	both	the	Old	and	New	Testaments:
“The	whole	of	the	argument	of	the	opening	part	of	Romans	is	that	all	men,
Gentiles	and	Jews	alike,	are	sinners,	and	that	they	come	under	the	wrath	and
the	condemnation	of	God.”
12
Three	other	crucial	passages	in	the	New	Testament	refer	to	Jesus’	death	as	a
“propitiation”:	Hebrews	2:17;	1	John	2:2;	and	4:10.	The	Greek	terms	(the
verb	
hilaskomai,	
“to	make	propitiation”	and	the	noun	
hilasmos,	
“a	sacrifice	of
propitiation”)	used	in	these	passages	have	the	sense	of	“a	sacrifice	that	turns
away	the	wrath	of	God—and	thereby	makes	God	propitious	(or	favorable)
toward	us.”
13
	This	is	the	consistent	meaning	of	these	words	outside	the	Bible
where	they	were	well	understood	in	reference	to	pagan	Greek	religions.	These
verses	simply	mean	that	Jesus	bore	the	wrath	of	God	against	sin.
It	is	important	to	insist	on	this	fact,	because	it	is	the	heart	of	the	doctrine	of
the	atonement.	It	means	that	there	is	an	eternal,	unchangeable	requirement	in
the	holiness	and	justice	of	God	that	sin	be	paid	for.	Furthermore,	before	the
atonement	ever	could	have	an	effect	on	our	subjective	consciousness,	it	first
had	an	effect	on	God	and	his	relation	to	the	sinners	he	planned	to	redeem.
Apart	from	this	central	truth,	the	death	of	Christ	really	cannot	be	adequately
understood	(see	discussion	of	other	views	of	the	atonement	below).
Although	we	must	be	cautious	in	suggesting	any	analogies	to	the	experience
Christ	went	through	(for	his	experience	was	and	always	will	be	without
precedent	or	comparison),	nonetheless,	all	our	understanding	of	Jesus’
suffering	comes	in	some	sense	by	way	of	analogous	experiences	in	our	life—
for	that	is	how	God	teaches	us	in	Scripture.
14
	Once	again	our	human
experience	provides	a	very	faint	analogy	that	helps	us	understand	what	it
means	to	bear	the	wrath	of	God.	Perhaps	as	children	we	have	faced	the	wrath
of	a	human	father	when	we	have	done	wrong,	or	perhaps	as	adults	we	have
known	the	anger	of	an	employer	because	of	a	mistake	we	have	made.	We	are
inwardly	shaken,	disturbed	by	the	crashing	of	another	personality,	filled	with
displeasure,	into	our	very	selves,	and	we	tremble.	We	can	hardly	imagine	the
personal	disintegration	that	would	threaten	if	the	outpouring	of	wrath	came
not	from	some	finite	human	being	but	from	Almighty	God.	If	even	the
presence	of	God	when	he	does	not	manifest	wrath	arouses	fear	and	trembling
in	people	(cf.	Heb.	12:21,	28–29),	how	terrible	it	must	be	to	face	the	presence
of	a	wrathful	God	(Heb.	10:31).
With	this	in	mind,	we	are	now	better	able	to	understand	Jesus’	cry	of
desolation,	“My	God,	my	God,	why	have	you	forsaken	me?”	(Matt.	27:46b).
The	question	does	not	mean,	“Why	have	you	left	me	forever?”	for	Jesus	knew
that	he	was	leaving	the	world,	that	he	was	going	to	the	Father	(John	14:28;
16:10,	17).	Jesus	knew	that	he	would	rise	again	(John	2:19;	Luke	18:33;	Mark
9:31;	et	al.).	It	was	“for	the	joy	that	was	set	before	him”	that	Jesus	“endured
the	cross,	despising	the	shame,	and	is	seated	at	the	right	hand	of	the	throne	of
God”	(Heb.	12:2).	Jesus	knew	that	he	could	still	call	God	“my	God.”	This	cry
of	desolation	is	not	a	cry	of	total	despair.	Furthermore,	“Why	have	you
forsaken	me?”	does	not	imply	that	Jesus	wondered	why	he	was	dying.	He	had
said,	“The	Son	of	man	also	came	not	to	be	served	but	to	serve,	and	to	give	his
life	as	a	ransom	for	many”	(Mark	10:45).	Jesus	knew	that	he	was	dying	for
our	sins.
Jesus’	cry	is	a	quotation	from	Psalm	22:1,	a	psalm	in	which	the	psalmist	asks
why	God	is	so	far	from	helping	him,	why	God	delays	in	rescuing	him:
My	God,	my	God,	why	have	you	forsaken	me?
Why	are	you	so	far	from	helping	me,	from	the	words	of	my	groaning?
O	my	God,	I	cry	by	day,	but	you	do	not	answer;
and	by	night,	but	find	no	rest.	(Ps.	22:1–2)
Yet	the	psalmist	was	eventually	rescued	by	God,	and	his	cry	of	desolation
turned	into	a	hymn	of	praise	(vv.	22–31).	Jesus,	who	knew	the	words	of
Scripture	as	his	own,	knew	well	the	context	of	Psalm	22.	In	quoting	this
psalm,	he	is	quoting	a	cry	of	desolation	that	also	has	implicit	in	its	context	an
unremitting	faith	in	the	God	who	will	ultimately	deliver	him.	Nevertheless,	it
remains	a	very	real	cry	of	anguish	because	the	suffering	has	gone	on	so	long
and	no	release	is	in	sight.
With	this	context	for	the	quotation	it	is	better	to	understand	the	question
“Why	have	you	forsaken	me?”	as	meaning,	“Why	have	you	left	me	
for	so
long?”	
This	is	the	sense	it	has	in	Psalm	22.	Jesus,	in	his	human	nature,	knew
he	would	have	to	bear	our	sins,	to	suffer	and	to	die.	But,	in	his	human
consciousness,	he	probably	did	not	know	how	long	this	suffering	would	take.
Yet	to	bear	the	guilt	of	millions	of	sins	even	for	a	moment	would	cause	the
greatest	anguish	of	soul.	To	face	the	deep	and	furious	wrath	of	an	infinite	God
even	for	an	instant	would	cause	the	most	profound	fear.	But	Jesus’	suffering
was	not	over	in	a	minute—or	two—or	ten.	When	would	it	end?	Could	there
be	yet	more	weight	of	sin?	Yet	more	wrath	of	God?	Hour	after	hour	it	went	on
—the	dark	weight	of	sin	and	the	deep	wrath	of	God	poured	over	Jesus	in
wave	after	wave.	Jesus	at	last	cried	out,	“My	God,	my	God,	why	have	you
forsaken	me?”	Why	must	this	suffering	go	on	so	long?	Oh	God,	my	God,	will
you	ever	bring	it	to	an	end?
Then	at	last	Jesus	knew	his	suffering	was	nearing	completion.	He	knew	he
had	consciously	borne	all	the	wrath	of	the	Father	against	our	sins,	for	God’s
anger	had	abated	and	the	awful	heaviness	of	sin	was	being	removed.	He	knew
that	all	that	remained	was	to	yield	up	his	spirit	to	his	heavenly	Father	and	die.
With	a	shout	of	victory	Jesus	cried	out,	“It	is	finished!”	(John	19:30).	Then
with	a	loud	voice	he	once	more	cried	out,	“Father,	into	your	hands	I	commit
my	spirit!”	(Luke	23:46).	And	then	he	voluntarily	gave	up	the	life	that	no	one
could	take	from	him	(John	10:17–18),	and	he	died.	As	Isaiah	had	predicted,
“he	poured	out	his	soul	to	death”	and	“bore	the	sin	of	many”	(Isa.	53:12).	God
the	Father	saw	“the	fruit	of	the	travail	of	his	soul”	and	was	“satisfied”	(Isa.
53:11).
c.	Further	Understanding	of	the	Death	of	Christ:
(1)	The	Penalty	Was	Inflicted	By	God	the	Father:
	If	we	ask,	“Who
required	Christ	to	pay	the	penalty	for	our	sins?”	the	answer	given	by	Scripture
is	that	the	penalty	was	inflicted	by	God	the	Father	as	he	represented	the
interests	of	the	Trinity	in	redemption.	It	was	God’s	justice	that	required	that
sin	be	paid	for,	and,	among	the	members	of	the	Trinity,	it	was	God	the	Father
whose	role	was	to	require	that	payment.	God	the	Son	voluntarily	took	upon
himself	the	role	of	bearing	the	penalty	for	sin.	Referring	to	God	the	Father,
Paul	says,	“For	our	sake	he	made	him	to	be	sin	who	knew	no	sin	[that	is,
Christ],	so	that	in	him	we	might	become	the	righteousness	of	God”	(2	Cor.
5:21).	Isaiah	said,	“The	L
ORD
	has	laid	on	him	the	iniquity	of	us	all”	(Isa.
53:6).	He	goes	on	to	describe	the	sufferings	of	Christ:	“Yet	it	was	the	will	of
the	L
ORD
	to	bruise	him;	he	has	put	him	to	grief”	(Isa.	53:10).
Herein	we	see	something	of	the	amazing	love	of	both	God	the	Father	and	God
the	Son	in	redemption.	Not	only	did	Jesus	know	that	he	would	bear	the
incredible	pain	of	the	cross,	but	God	the	Father	also	knew	that	he	would	have
to	inflict	this	pain	on	his	own	deeply	loved	Son.	“God	shows	his	love	for	us	in
that	while	we	were	yet	sinners	Christ	died	for	us”	(Rom.	5:8).
(2)	Not	Eternal	Suffering	but	Complete	Payment:
	If	we	had	to	pay	the
penalty	for	our	own	sins,	we	would	have	to	suffer	eternally	in	separation	from
God.
15
	However,	Jesus	did	not	suffer	eternally.	There	are	two	reasons	for	this
difference:	(a)	If	we	suffered	for	our	own	sins,	we	would	never	be	able	to
make	ourselves	right	with	God	again.	There	would	be	no	hope	because	there
would	be	no	way	to	live	again	and	earn	perfect	righteousness	before	God,	and
there	would	be	no	way	to	undo	our	sinful	nature	and	make	it	right	before	God.
Moreover,	we	would	continue	to	exist	as	sinners	who	would	not	suffer	with
pure	hearts	of	righteousness	before	God,	but	would	suffer	with	resentment
and	bitterness	against	God,	thus	continually	compounding	our	sin.	(b)	Jesus
was	able	to	bear	all	the	wrath	of	God	against	our	sin	and	to	bear	it	to	the	end.
No	mere	man	could	ever	have	done	this,	but	by	virtue	of	the	union	of	divine
and	human	natures	in	himself,	Jesus	was	able	to	bear	all	the	wrath	of	God
against	sin	and	bear	it	to	the	end.	Isaiah	predicted	that	God	“shall	see	the	fruit
of	the	travail	of	his	soul	
and	be	satisfied”	
(Isa.	53:11).	When	Jesus	knew	that
he	had	paid	the	full	penalty	for	our	sin,	he	said,	
“It	is	finished”	
(John	19:30).
If	Christ	had	not	paid	the	full	penalty,	there	would	still	be	condemnation	left
for	us.	But	since	he	has	paid	the	full	penalty	that	is	due	to	us,	“There	is
therefore	now	no	condemnation	for	those	who	are	in	Christ	Jesus”	(Rom.
8:1).
It	should	help	us	at	this	point	to	realize	that	nothing	in	the	eternal	character	of
God	and	nothing	in	the	laws	God	had	given	for	mankind	required	that	there
be	eternal	suffering	to	pay	for	man’s	sins.	In	fact,	if	there	is	eternal	suffering,
it	simply	shows	that	the	penalty	has	never	been	fully	paid,	and	that	the
evildoer	continues	to	be	a	sinner	by	nature.	But	when	Christ’s	sufferings	at
last	came	to	an	end	on	the	cross,	it	showed	that	he	had	borne	the	full	measure
of	God’s	wrath	against	sin	and	there	was	no	penalty	left	to	pay.	It	also	showed
that	he	was	himself	righteous	before	God.	In	this	way	the	fact	that	Christ
suffered	for	a	limited	time	rather	than	eternally	shows	that	his	suffering	was	a
sufficient	payment	for	sins.	The	author	of	Hebrews	repeats	this	theme	again
and	again,	emphasizing	the	completion	and	the	finality	of	Christ’s	redemptive
work:
Nor	was	it	to	offer	himself	repeatedly,	as	the	high	priest	enters	the
Holy	Place	yearly	with	blood	not	his	own;	for	then	he	would	have	had
to	suffer	repeatedly	since	the	foundation	of	the	world.	But	as	it	is,	he
has	appeared	once	for	all	at	the	end	of	the	age	to	put	away	sin	by	the
sacrifice	of	himself.	.	.	.	Christ,	having	been	offered	once	
to	bear	the
sins	of	many,	
will	appear	a	second	time,	not	to	deal	with	sin	but	to
save	those	who	are	eagerly	waiting	for	him.	(Heb.	9:25–28)
This	New	Testament	emphasis	on	the	completion	and	finality	of	Christ’s
sacrificial	death	stands	in	contrast	to	the	Roman	Catholic	teaching	that	in	the
mass	there	is	a	repetition	of	the	sacrifice	of	Christ.
16
	Because	of	this	official
teaching	of	the	Roman	Catholic	Church,	many	Protestants	since	the
Reformation,	and	still	today,	are	convinced	that	they	cannot	in	good
conscience	actually	participate	in	the	Roman	Catholic	mass,	because	it	would
seem	to	be	an	endorsement	of	the	Catholic	view	that	the	sacrifice	of	Christ	is
repeated	every	time	the	mass	is	offered.
The	New	Testament	emphasis	on	the	completion	and	finality	of	Christ’s
sacrifice	of	himself	for	us	has	much	practical	application,	because	it	assures
us	that	there	is	no	more	penalty	for	sin	left	for	us	to	pay.	The	penalty	has
entirely	been	paid	by	Christ,	and	we	should	have	no	remaining	fear	of
condemnation	or	punishment.
(3)	The	Meaning	of	the	Blood	of	Christ:
	The	New	Testament	frequently
connects	the	blood	of	Christ	with	our	redemption.	For	example,	Peter	says,
“You	know	that	you	were	ransomed	from	the	futile	ways	inherited	from	your
fathers,	not	with	perishable	things	such	as	silver	or	gold,	but	with	the	precious
blood	of	Christ,	like	that	of	a	lamb	without	blemish	or	spot”	(1	Peter	1:18–
19).
The	blood	of	Christ	is	the	clear	outward	evidence	that	his	life	blood	was
poured	out	when	he	died	a	sacrificial	death	to	pay	for	our	redemption—“the
blood	of	Christ”	means	his	death	in	its	saving	aspects.
17
	Although	we	may
think	that	Christ’s	blood	(as	evidence	that	his	life	had	been	given)	would	have
exclusive	reference	to	the	removal	of	our	judicial	guilt	before	God—for	this	is
its	primary	reference—the	New	Testament	authors	also	attribute	to	it	several
other	effects.	By	the	blood	of	Christ	our	consciences	are	cleansed	(Heb.	9:14),
we	gain	bold	access	to	God	in	worship	and	prayer	(Heb.	10:19),	we	are
progressively	cleansed	from	remaining	sin	(1	John	1:7;	cf.	Rev.	1:5b),	we	are
able	to	conquer	the	accuser	of	the	brethren	(Rev.	12:10–11),	and	we	are
rescued	out	of	a	sinful	way	of	life	(1	Peter	1:18–19).
18
Scripture	speaks	so	much	about	the	blood	of	Christ	because	its	shedding	was
very	clear	evidence	that	his	life	was	being	given	in	judicial	execution	(that	is,
he	was	condemned	to	death	and	died	paying	a	penalty	imposed	both	by	an
earthly	human	judge	and	by	God	himself	in	heaven).	Scripture’s	emphasis	on
the	blood	of	Christ	also	shows	the	clear	connection	between	Christ’s	death
and	the	many	sacrifices	in	the	Old	Testament	that	involved	the	pouring	out	of
the	life	blood	of	the	sacrificial	animal.	These	sacrifices	all	pointed	forward	to
and	prefigured	the	death	of	Christ.
(4)	Christ’s	Death	as	“Penal	Substitution”:
	The	view	of	Christ’s	death
presented	here	has	frequently	been	called	the	theory	of	
“penal	substitution.”
Christ’s	death	was	“penal”	in	that	he	bore	a	penalty	when	he	died.	His	death
was	also	a	“substitution”	in	that	he	was	a	substitute	for	us	when	he	died.	This
has	been	the	orthodox	understanding	of	the	atonement	held	by	evangelical
theologians,	in	contrast	to	other	views	that	attempt	to	explain	the	atonement
apart	from	the	idea	of	the	wrath	of	God	or	payment	of	the	penalty	for	sin	(see
below).
This	view	of	the	atonement	is	sometimes	called	the	theory	of	
vicarious
atonement.	
A	“vicar”	is	someone	who	stands	in	the	place	of	another	or	who
represents	another.	Christ’s	death	was	therefore	“vicarious”	because	he	stood
in	our	place	and	represented	us.	As	our	representative,	he	took	the	penalty	that
we	deserve.
d.	New	Testament	Terms	Describing	Different	Aspects	of	the	Atonement:
The	atoning	work	of	Christ	is	a	complex	event	that	has	several	effects	on	us.
It	can	therefore	be	viewed	from	several	different	aspects.	The	New	Testament
uses	different	words	to	describe	these;	we	shall	examine	four	of	the	more
important	terms.
The	four	terms	show	how	Christ’s	death	met	the	four	needs	that	we	have	as
sinners:
1.	We	deserve	to	
die	
as	the	penalty	for	sin.
2.	We	deserve	to	
bear	God’s	wrath	
against	sin.
3.	We	are	
separated	
from	God	by	our	sins.
4.	We	are	in	
bondage	to	sin	
and	to	the	kingdom	of	Satan.
These	four	needs	are	met	by	Christ’s	death	in	the	following	ways:
(1)	Sacrifice:
	To	pay	the	penalty	of	death	that	we	deserved	because	of	our
sins,	Christ	died	as	a	sacrifice	for	us.	“He	has	appeared	once	for	all	at	the	end
of	the	age	to	put	away	sin	by	the	sacrifice	of	himself”	(Heb.	9:26).
(2)	Propitiation:
	To	remove	us	from	the	wrath	of	God	that	we	deserved,
Christ	died	as	a	propitiation	for	our	sins.	“In	this	is	love,	not	that	we	loved
God,	but	that	He	loved	us	and	sent	His	Son	to	be	the	propitiation	for	our	sins”
(1	John	4:10	NASB).
(3)	Reconciliation:
	To	overcome	our	separation	from	God,	we	needed
someone	to	provide	reconciliation	and	thereby	bring	us	back	into	fellowship
with	God.	Paul	says	that	God	“through	Christ	reconciled	us	to	himself	and
gave	us	the	ministry	of	reconciliation;	that	is,	in	Christ	God	was	reconciling
the	world	to	himself”	(2	Cor.	5:18–19).
(4)	Redemption:
	Because	we	as	sinners	are	in	bondage	to	sin	and	to	Satan,
we	need	someone	to	provide	redemption	and	thereby	“redeem”	us	out	of	that
bondage.	When	we	speak	of	redemption,	the	idea	of	a	“ransom”	comes	into
view.	A	ransom	is	the	price	paid	to	redeem	someone	from	bondage	or
captivity.	Jesus	said	of	himself,	“For	the	Son	of	man	also	came	not	to	be
served	but	to	serve,	and	to	give	his	life	
as	a	ransom	for	many”	
(Mark	10:45).
If	we	ask	to	whom	the	ransom	was	paid,	we	realize	that	the	human	analogy	of
a	ransom	payment	does	not	fit	the	atonement	of	Christ	in	every	detail.	Though
we	were	in	bondage	to	sin	and	to	Satan,	there	was	no	“ransom”	paid	either	to
“sin”	or	to	Satan	himself,	for	they	did	not	have	power	to	demand	such
payment,	nor	was	Satan	the	one	whose	holiness	was	offended	by	sin	and	who
required	a	penalty	to	be	paid	for	sin.	As	we	saw	earlier,	the	penalty	for	sin
was	paid	by	Christ	and	received	and	accepted	by	God	the	Father.	But	we
hesitate	to	speak	of	paying	a	“ransom”	to	God	the	Father,	because	it	was	not
he	who	held	us	in	bondage	but	Satan	and	our	own	sins.	Therefore	at	this	point
the	idea	of	a	ransom	payment	cannot	be	pressed	in	every	detail.	It	is	sufficient
to	note	that	a	price	was	paid	(the	death	of	Christ)	and	the	result	was	that	we
were	“redeemed”	from	bondage.
We	were	redeemed	from	bondage	to	Satan	because	“the	whole	world	is	in	the
power	of	the	evil	one”	(1	John	5:19),	and	when	Christ	came	he	died	to
“deliver	all	those	who	through	fear	of	death	were	subject	to	lifelong	bondage”
(Heb.	2:15).	In	fact,	God	the	Father	“has	delivered	us	from	the	dominion	of
darkness	and	transferred	us	to	the	kingdom	of	his	beloved	Son”	(Col.	1:13).
As	for	deliverance	from	bondage	to	sin,	Paul	says,	“So	you	also	must	consider
yourselves	dead	to	sin	and	alive	to	God	in	Christ	Jesus.	.	.	.	For	sin	will	have
no	dominion	over	you,	since	you	are	not	under	law	but	under	grace”	(Rom.
6:11,	14).	We	have	been	delivered	from	bondage	to	the	guilt	of	sin	and	from
bondage	to	its	ruling	power	in	our	lives.
e.	Other	Views	of	the	Atonement:
	In	contrast	to	the	penal	substitution	view
of	the	atonement	presented	in	this	chapter,	several	other	views	have	been
advocated	in	the	history	of	the	church.
(1)	The	Ransom	to	Satan	Theory:
	This	view	was	held	by	Origen	(c.	A.D.
185—c.	254),	a	theologian	from	Alexandria	and	later	Caesarea,	and	after	him
by	some	others	in	the	early	history	of	the	church.	According	to	this	view,	the
ransom	Christ	paid	to	redeem	us	was	paid	to	Satan,	in	whose	kingdom	all
people	were	by	virtue	of	sin.
This	theory	finds	no	direct	confirmation	in	Scripture	and	has	few	supporters
in	the	history	of	the	church.	It	falsely	thinks	of	Satan	rather	than	God	as	the
one	who	required	that	a	payment	be	made	for	sin	and	thus	completely
neglects	the	demands	of	God’s	justice	with	respect	to	sin.	It	views	Satan	as
having	much	more	power	than	he	actually	does,	namely,	power	to	demand
whatever	he	wants	from	God,	rather	than	as	one	who	has	been	cast	down	from
heaven	and	has	no	right	to	demand	anything	of	God.	Nowhere	does	Scripture
say	that	we	as	sinners	owe	anything	to	Satan,	but	it	repeatedly	says	that	God
requires	of	us	a	payment	for	our	sins.	This	view	also	fails	to	deal	with	the
texts	that	speak	of	Christ’s	death	as	a	propitiation	offered	to	God	the	Father
for	our	sins,	or	with	the	fact	that	God	the	Father	represented	the	Trinity	in
accepting	the	payment	for	sins	from	Christ	(see	discussion	above).
(2)	The	Moral	Influence	Theory:
	First	advocated	by	Peter	Abelard	(1079–
1142),	a	French	theologian,	the	moral	influence	theory	of	the	atonement	holds
that	God	did	not	require	the	payment	of	a	penalty	for	sin,	but	that	Christ’s
death	was	simply	a	way	in	which	God	showed	how	much	he	loved	human
beings	by	identifying	with	their	sufferings,	even	to	the	point	of	death.	Christ’s
death	therefore	becomes	a	great	teaching	example	that	shows	God’s	love	to	us
and	draws	from	us	a	grateful	response,	so	that	in	loving	him	we	are	forgiven.
The	great	difficulty	with	this	viewpoint	is	that	it	is	contrary	to	so	many
passages	of	Scripture	that	speak	of	Christ	dying	for	sin,	bearing	our	sin,	or
dying	as	a	propitiation.	Moreover,	it	robs	the	atonement	of	its	objective
character,	because	it	holds	that	the	atonement	had	no	effect	on	God	himself.
Finally,	it	has	no	way	of	dealing	with	our	guilt—if	Christ	did	not	die	to	pay
for	our	sins,	we	have	no	right	to	trust	in	him	for	forgiveness	of	sins.
(3)	The	Example	Theory:
	The	example	theory	of	the	atonement	was	taught
by	the	Socinians,	the	followers	of	Faustus	Socinus	(1539–1604),	an	Italian
theologian	who	settled	in	Poland	in	1578	and	attracted	a	wide	following.
19
The	example	theory,	like	the	moral	influence	theory,	also	denies	that	God’s
justice	requires	payment	for	sin;	it	says	that	Christ’s	death	simply	provides	us
with	an	example	of	how	we	should	trust	and	obey	God	perfectly,	even	if	that
trust	and	obedience	leads	to	a	horrible	death.	Whereas	the	moral	influence
theory	says	that	Christ’s	death	teaches	us	how	much	God	loves	us,	the
example	theory	says	that	Christ’s	death	teaches	us	how	we	should	live.
Support	for	this	view	could	be	found	in	1	Peter	2:21,	“For	to	this	you	have
been	called,	because	Christ	also	suffered	for	you,	leaving	you	an	example,
that	you	should	follow	in	his	steps.”
While	it	is	true	that	Christ	is	an	example	for	us	even	in	his	death,	the	question
is	whether	this	fact	is	the	complete	explanation	of	the	atonement.	The
example	theory	fails	to	account	for	the	many	Scriptures	that	focus	on	Christ’s
death	as	a	payment	for	sin,	the	fact	that	Christ	bore	our	sins,	and	the	fact	that
he	was	the	propitiation	for	our	sins.	These	considerations	alone	mean	that	the
theory	must	be	rejected.	Moreover,	this	view	really	ends	up	arguing	that	man
can	save	himself	by	following	Christ’s	example	and	by	trusting	and	obeying
God	just	as	Christ	did.	Thus	it	fails	to	show	how	the	guilt	of	our	sin	can	be
removed,	because	it	does	not	hold	that	Christ	actually	paid	the	penalty	for	our
sins	or	made	provision	for	our	guilt	when	he	died.
(4)	The	Governmental	Theory:
	The	governmental	theory	of	the	atonement
was	first	taught	by	a	Dutch	theologian	and	jurist,	Hugo	Grotius	(1583–1645).
This	theory	holds	that	God	did	not	actually	have	to	require	payment	for	sin,
but,	since	he	was	omnipotent	God,	he	could	have	set	aside	that	requirement
and	simply	forgiven	sins	without	the	payment	of	a	penalty.	Then	what	was	the
purpose	of	Christ’s	death?	It	was	God’s	demonstration	of	the	fact	that	his	laws
had	been	broken,	that	he	is	the	moral	lawgiver	and	governor	of	the	universe,
and	that	some	kind	of	penalty	would	be	required	whenever	his	laws	were
broken.	Thus	Christ	did	not	exactly	pay	the	penalty	for	the	actual	sins	of	any
people,	but	simply	suffered	to	show	that	when	God’s	laws	are	broken	there
must	be	some	penalty	paid.
The	problem	with	this	view	again	is	that	it	fails	to	account	adequately	for	all
the	Scriptures	that	speak	of	Christ	bearing	our	sins	on	the	cross,	of	God	laying
on	Christ	the	iniquity	of	us	all,	of	Christ	dying	specifically	for	our	sins,	and	of
Christ	being	the	propitiation	for	our	sins.	Moreover,	it	takes	away	the
objective	character	of	the	atonement	by	making	its	purpose	not	the
satisfaction	of	God’s	justice	but	simply	that	of	influencing	us	to	realize	that
God	has	laws	that	must	be	kept.	This	view	also	implies	that	we	cannot	rightly
trust	in	Christ’s	completed	work	for	forgiveness	of	sin,	because	he	has	not
actually	made	payment	for	those	sins.	Moreover,	it	makes	the	actual	earning
of	forgiveness	for	us	something	that	happened	in	God’s	own	mind	apart	from
the	death	of	Christ	on	the	cross—he	had	already	decided	to	forgive	us	without
requiring	any	penalty	from	us	and	then	punished	Christ	only	to	demonstrate
that	he	was	still	the	moral	governor	of	the	universe.	But	this	means	that	Christ
(in	this	view)	did	not	actually	earn	forgiveness	or	salvation	for	us,	and	thus
the	value	of	his	redemptive	work	is	greatly	minimized.	Finally,	this	theory
fails	to	take	adequate	account	of	the	unchangeableness	of	God	and	the	infinite
purity	of	his	justice.	To	say	that	God	can	forgive	sins	without	requiring	any
penalty	(in	spite	of	the	fact	that	throughout	Scripture	sin	always	requires	the
payment	of	a	penalty)	is	seriously	to	underestimate	the	absolute	character	of
the	justice	of	God.
f.	Did	Christ	Descend	Into	Hell?
20
	It	is	sometimes	argued	that	Christ
descended	into	hell	after	he	died.	The	phrase	“he	descended	into	hell”	does
not	occur	in	the	Bible.	But	the	widely	used	Apostles’	Creed	reads,	“was
crucified,	dead,	and	buried,	he	descended	into	hell;	the	third	day	he	rose	again
from	the	dead.”	Does	this	mean	that	Christ	endured	further	suffering	after	his
death	on	the	cross?	As	we	shall	see	below,	an	examination	of	the	biblical
evidence	indicates	that	he	did	not.	But	before	looking	at	the	relevant	biblical
texts,	it	is	appropriate	to	examine	the	phrase	“he	descended	into	hell”	in	the
Apostles’	Creed.
(1)	The	Origin	of	the	Phrase,	“He	Descended	Into	Hell”:
	A	murky
background	lies	behind	much	of	the	history	of	the	phrase	itself.	Its	origins,
where	they	can	be	found,	are	far	from	praiseworthy.	The	great	church
historian	Philip	Schaff	has	summarized	the	development	of	the	Apostles’
Creed	in	an	extensive	chart,	which	is	reproduced	on	the	following	pages.
21
This	chart	shows	that,	unlike	the	Nicene	Creed	and	the	Chalcedonian
Definition,	the	Apostles’	Creed	was	not	written	or	approved	by	a	single
church	council	at	one	specific	time.	Rather,	it	gradually	took	shape	from
about	A.D.	200	to	750.
It	is	surprising	to	find	that	the	phrase	“he	descended	into	hell”	was	not	found
in	any	of	the	early	versions	of	the	Creed	(in	the	versions	used	in	Rome,	in	the
rest	of	Italy,	and	in	Africa)	until	it	appeared	in	one	of	two	versions	from
Rufinus	in	A.D.	390.	Then	it	was	not	included	again	in	any	version	of	the
Creed	until	A.D.	650.	Moreover,	Rufinus,	the	only	person	who	included	it
before	A.D.	650,	did	not	think	that	it	meant	that	Christ	descended	into	hell,
but	understood	the	phrase	simply	to	mean	that	Christ	was	“buried.”
22
	In	other
words,	he	took	it	to	mean	that	Christ	“descended	into	the	grave.”	(The	Greek
form	has	
hadēs,	
which	can	mean	just	“grave,”	not	
geenna,	
“hell,	place	of
punishment.”).	We	should	also	note	that	the	phrase	only	appears	in	one	of	the
two	versions	of	the	Creed	that	we	have	from	Rufinus:	it	was	not	in	the	Roman
form	of	the	Creed	that	he	preserved.
This	means,	therefore,	that	until	A.D.	650	no	version	of	the	Creed	included
this	phrase	with	the	intention	of	saying	that	Christ	“descended	into	hell”—the
only	version	to	include	the	phrase	before	A.D.	650	gives	it	a	different
meaning.	At	this	point	one	wonders	if	the	term	
apostolic	
can	in	any	sense	be
applied	to	this	phrase,	or	if	it	really	has	a	rightful	place	in	a	creed	whose	title
claims	for	itself	descent	from	the	earliest	apostles	of	Christ.
This	survey	of	the	historical	development	of	the	phrase	also	raises	the
possibility	that	when	the	phrase	first	began	to	be	more	commonly	used,	it	may
have	been	in	other	versions	(now	lost	to	us)	that	did	not	have	the	expression
“and	buried.”	If	so,	it	probably	would	have	meant	to	others	just	what	it	meant
to	Rufinus:	“descended	into	the	grave.”	But	later	when	the	phrase	was
incorporated	into	different	versions	of	the	Creed	that	already	had	the	phrase
“and	buried,”	some	other	explanation	had	to	be	given	to	it.	This	mistaken
insertion	of	the	phrase	after	the	words	“and	buried”—apparently	done	by
someone	around	A.D.	650—led	to	all	sorts	of	attempts	to	explain	“he
descended	into	hell”	in	some	way	that	did	not	contradict	the	rest	of	Scripture.
Some	have	taken	it	to	mean	that	Christ	suffered	the	pains	of	hell	while	on	the
cross.	Calvin,	for	example,	says	that	“Christ’s	descent	into	hell”	refers	to	the
fact	that	he	not	only	died	a	bodily	death	but	that	“it	was	expedient	at	the	same
time	for	him	to	undergo	the	severity	of	God’s	vengeance,	to	appease	his	wrath
and	satisfy	his	just	judgment.”
23
Similarly,	the	Heidelberg	Catechism,	Question	44,	asks,
Why	is	it	added:	He	descended	into	Hades?
Answer:	That	in	my	greatest	temptations	I	may	be	assured	that	Christ,
my	Lord,	by	his	inexpressible	anguish,	pains,	and	terrors	which	he
suffered	in	his	soul	on	the	cross	and	before,	has	redeemed	me	from	the
anguish	and	torment	of	hell.
24
But	is	this	a	satisfactory	explanation	of	the	phrase,	“he	descended	into	hell”?
While	it	is	true	that	Christ	suffered	the	outpouring	of	God’s	wrath	on	the
cross,	this	explanation	does	not	really	fit	the	phrase	in	the	Apostles’	Creed
—“descended”	hardly	represents	this	idea,	and	the	placement	of	the	phrase
after	“was	crucified,	dead,	and	buried”	makes	this	an	artificial	and
unconvincing	interpretation.
Others	have	understood	it	to	mean	that	Christ	continued	in	the	“state	of	death”
until	his	resurrection.	The	Westminster	Larger	Catechism,	Question	50,	says,
Christ’s	humiliation	after	his	death	consisted	in	his	being	buried,	and
continuing	in	the	state	of	the	dead,	and	under	the	power	of	death	till
the	third	day;	which	hath	been	otherwise	expressed	in	these	words,	He
descended	into	hell.
Though	it	is	true	that	Christ	continued	in	the	state	of	death	until	the	third	day,
once	again	it	is	a	strained	and	unpersuasive	explanation	of	“he	descended	into
hell,”	for	the	placement	of	the	phrase	would	then	give	the	awkward	sense,	“he
was	crucified,	dead,	and	buried;	he	descended	to	being	dead.”	This
interpretation	does	not	explain	what	the	words	first	meant	in	this	sequence	but
is	rather	an	unconvincing	attempt	to	salvage	some	theologically	acceptable
sense	out	of	them.
Moreover,	the	English	word	“hell”	has	no	such	sense	as	simply	“being	dead”
(though	the	Greek	word	
hadēs	
can	mean	this),	so	this	becomes	a	doubly
artificial	explanation	for	English-speaking	people.
Finally,	some	have	argued	that	the	phrase	means	just	what	it	appears	to	mean
on	first	reading:	that	Christ	actually	did	descend	into	hell	after	his	death	on
the	cross.	It	is	easy	to	understand	the	Apostles’	Creed	to	mean	just	this
(indeed,	that	is	certainly	the	natural	sense),	but	then	another	question	arises:
Can	this	idea	be	supported	from	Scripture?
(2)	Possible	Biblical	Support	for	a	Descent	Into	Hell:
	Support	for	the	idea
that	Christ	descended	into	hell	has	been	found	primarily	in	five	passages:
Acts	2:27;	Romans	10:6–7;	Ephesians	4:8–9;	1	Peter	3:18–20;	and	1	Peter
4:6.	(A	few	other	passages	have	been	appealed	to,	but	less	convincingly.)
25
On	closer	inspection,	do	any	of	those	passages	clearly	establish	this	teaching?
(a)	Acts	2:27.	
This	is	part	of	Peter’s	sermon	on	the	Day	of	Pentecost,	where
he	is	quoting	Psalm	16:10.	In	the	King	James	Version	the	verse	reads:
“because	thou	wilt	not	
leave	my	soul	in	hell,	
neither	wilt	thou	suffer	thine
Holy	One	to	see	corruption.”
Does	this	mean	that	Christ	entered	hell	after	he	died?	Not	necessarily,	because
another	sense	is	certainly	possible	for	these	verses.	The	word	“hell”	here
represents	a	New	Testament	Greek	term	(
hadēs
)	and	an	Old	Testament
Hebrew	term	(
sh
e
	’ôl,	
popularly	translated	as	sheol)	that	can	mean	simply	“the
grave”	or	“death”	(the	state	of	being	dead).	Thus,	the	NIV	translates:
“Because	you	will	not	
abandon	me	to	the	grave,	
nor	will	you	let	your	Holy
One	see	decay”	(Acts	2:27).	This	sense	is	preferable	because	the	context
emphasizes	that	Christ’s	body	rose	from	the	grave,	unlike	David’s,	which
remained	in	the	grave.	The	reasoning	is:	“My	body	also	will	live	in	hope”	(v.
26),	“because	you	will	not	abandon	me	to	the	grave”	(v.	27).	Peter	is	using
David’s	psalm	to	show	that	Christ’s	body	did	not	decay—he	is	therefore
unlike	David,	who	“died	and	was	buried,	and	his	tomb	is	here	to	this	day”	(v.
29	NIV).	Therefore	this	passage	about	Christ’s	resurrection	from	the	grave
does	not	convincingly	support	the	idea	that	Christ	descended	into	hell.
(b)	Romans	10:6–7.	
These	verses	contain	two	rhetorical	questions,	again	Old
Testament	quotations	(from	Deut.	30:13):	“Do	not	say	in	your	heart,	‘Who
will	ascend	into	heaven?’	(that	is,	to	bring	Christ	down)	or	‘Who	will	descend
into	the	abyss?’	(that	is,	to	bring	Christ	up	from	the	dead).”	But	this	passage
hardly	teaches	that	Christ	descended	into	hell.	The	point	of	the	passage	is	that
Paul	is	telling	people	not	to	ask	these	questions,	because	Christ	is	not	far
away—he	is	near—and	faith	in	him	is	as	near	as	confessing	with	our	mouth
and	believing	in	our	heart	(v.	9).	These	prohibited	questions	are	questions	of
unbelief,	not	assertions	of	what	Scripture	teaches.	However,	some	may	object
that	Paul	would	not	have	anticipated	that	his	readers	would	ask	such	questions
unless	it	was	widely	known	that	Christ	did	in	fact	descend	“into	the	abyss.”
However,	even	if	this	were	true,	Scripture	would	not	be	saying	or	implying
that	Christ	went	into	“hell”	(in	the	sense	of	a	place	of	punishment	for	the
dead,	ordinarily	expressed	by	Gk.	
geenna
),	but	rather	that	he	went	into	“the
abyss”	(Gk.	
abyssos,	
a	term	which	often	in	the	LXX	is	used	of	the	depths	of
the	ocean	[Gen.	1:2;	7:11;	8:2;	Deut.	8:7;	Ps.	106(107):26],	but	it	can	also
apparently	refer	just	to	the	realm	of	the	dead	[Ps.	70(71):20]).
26
Paul	here	uses	the	word	“deep”	(
abyssos
)	as	a	contrast	to	“heaven”	in	order	to
give	the	sense	of	a	place	that	is	unreachable,	inaccessible	to	human	beings.
The	contrast	is	not,	“Who	shall	go	to	find	Christ	in	a	place	of	great	blessing
(heaven)	or	a	place	of	great	punishment	(hell)?”	but	rather,	“Who	shall	go	to
find	Christ	in	a	place	that	is	inaccessibly	high	(heaven)	or	in	a	place	that	is
inaccessibly	low	(the	deep,	or	the	realm	of	death)?”	No	clear	affirmation	or
denial	of	a	“descent	into	hell”	can	be	found	in	this	passage.
(c)	Ephesians	4:8–9.	
Here	Paul	writes,	“In	saying,	‘He	ascended,’	what	does
it	mean	but	that	he	had	also	descended	into	the	lower	parts	of	the	earth?”
Does	this	mean	that	Christ	“descended”	to	hell?	It	is	at	first	unclear	what	is
meant	by	“the	lower	parts	of	the	earth,”	but	another	translation	seems	to	give
the	best	sense:	“What	does	‘he	ascended’	mean	except	that	he	also	descended
to	the	
lower,	earthly	regions?”	
(NIV).	Here	the	NIV	takes	“descended”	to
refer	to	Christ’s	coming	to	earth	as	a	baby	(the	Incarnation).	The	last	four
words	are	an	acceptable	understanding	of	the	Greek	text,	taking	the	phrase
“the	lower	regions	
of	
the	earth”	to	mean	“lower	regions	
which	are	
the	earth”
(the	grammatical	form	in	Greek	would	then	be	called	a	genitive	of
apposition).	We	do	the	same	thing	in	English—for	example,	in	the	phrase	“the
city	of	Chicago,”	we	mean	“the	city	which	is	Chicago.”
The	NIV	rendering	is	preferable	in	this	context	because	Paul	is	saying	that	the
Christ	who	went	up	to	heaven	(in	his	ascension)	is	the	same	one	who	earlier
came	down	from	heaven	(v.	
10).	That	“descent”	from	heaven	occurred,	of
course,	when	Christ	came	to	be	born	as	a	man.	So	the	verse	speaks	of	the
incarnation,	not	of	a	descent	into	hell.
27
(d)	1	Peter	3:18–20.	
For	many	people	this	is	the	most	puzzling	passage	on
this	entire	subject.	Peter	tells	us	that	Christ	was	“put	to	death	in	the	flesh	but
made	alive	in	the	spirit;	
in	which	he	went	and	preached	to	the	spirits	in
prison,	
who	formerly	did	not	obey,	when	God’s	patience	waited	in	the	days	of
Noah,	during	the	building	of	the	ark”	(RSV).
Does	this	refer	to	Christ	preaching	in	hell?
Some	have	taken	“he	went	and	preached	to	the	spirits	in	prison”	to	mean	that
Christ	went	into	hell	and	preached	to	the	spirits	who	were	there—either
proclaiming	the	gospel	and	offering	a	second	chance	to	repent,	or	just
proclaiming	that	he	had	triumphed	over	them	and	that	they	were	eternally
condemned.
But	these	interpretations	fail	to	explain	adequately	either	the	passage	itself	or
its	setting	in	this	context.	Peter	does	not	say	that	Christ	preached	to	spirits
generally,	but	only	to	those	“who	formerly	did	not	obey	.	.	.	
during	the
building	of	the	ark.”	
Such	a	limited	audience—those	who	disobeyed	during
the	building	of	the	ark—would	be	a	strange	group	for	Christ	to	travel	to	hell
and	preach	to.	If	Christ	proclaimed	his	triumph,	why	only	to	these	sinners	and
not	to	all?	And	if	he	offered	a	second	chance	for	salvation,	why	only	to	these
sinners	and	not	to	all?	Even	more	difficult	for	this	view	is	the	fact	that
Scripture	elsewhere	indicates	that	there	is	no	opportunity	for	repentance	after
death	(Luke	16:26;	Heb.	10:26–27).
Moreover,	the	context	of	1	Peter	3	makes	“preaching	in	hell”	unlikely.	Peter	is
encouraging	his	readers	to	witness	boldly	to	hostile	unbelievers	around	them.
He	just	told	them	to	“always	be	prepared	to	give	an	answer	to	everyone	who
asks	you”	(1	Peter	3:15	NIV).	This	evangelistic	motif	would	lose	its	urgency
if	Peter	were	teaching	a	second	chance	for	salvation	after	death.	And	it	would
not	fit	at	all	with	a	“preaching”	of	condemnation.
Does	it	refer	to	Christ	preaching	to	fallen	angels?
To	give	a	better	explanation	for	these	difficulties,	several	commentators	have
proposed	taking	“spirits	in	prison”	to	mean	demonic	spirits,	the	spirits	of
fallen	angels,	and	have	said	that	Christ	proclaimed	condemnation	to	these
demons.	This	(it	is	claimed)	would	comfort	Peter’s	readers	by	showing	them
that	the	demonic	forces	oppressing	them	would	also	be	defeated	by	Christ.
However,	Peter’s	readers	would	have	to	go	through	an	incredibly	complicated
reasoning	process	to	draw	this	conclusion	when	Peter	does	not	explicitly
teach	it.	They	would	have	to	reason	from	(1)	some	demons	who	sinned	long
ago	were	condemned,	to	(2)	other	demons	are	now	inciting	your	human
persecutors,	to	(3)	those	demons	will	likewise	be	condemned	someday,	to	(4)
therefore	your	persecutors	will	finally	be	judged	as	well.	Finally	Peter’s
readers	would	get	to	Peter’s	point:	(5)	Therefore	don’t	fear	your	persecutors.
Those	who	hold	this	“preaching	to	fallen	angels”	view	must	assume	that
Peter’s	readers	would	“read	between	the	lines”	and	conclude	all	this	(points
2–5)	from	the	simple	statement	that	Christ	“preached	to	the	spirits	in	prison,
who	formerly	did	not	obey”	(1	Peter	3:19–20).	But	does	it	not	seem	too
farfetched	to	say	that	Peter	knew	his	readers	would	read	all	this	into	the	text?
Moreover,	Peter	emphasizes	hostile	
persons,	
not	demons,	in	the	context	(1
Peter	3:14,	16).	And	where	would	Peter’s	readers	get	the	idea	that	angels
sinned	“during	the	building	of	the	ark”?	There	is	nothing	of	that	in	the
Genesis	story	about	the	building	of	the	ark.	And	(in	spite	of	what	some	have
claimed),	if	we	look	at	all	the	traditions	of	Jewish	interpretation	of	the	flood
story,	we	find	no	mention	of	angels	sinning	specifically	“during	the	building
of	the	ark.”
28
	Therefore	the	view	that	Peter	is	speaking	of	Christ’s
proclamation	of	judgment	to	fallen	angels	is	really	not	persuasive	either.
Does	it	refer	to	Christ’s	proclaiming	release	to	Old	Testament	saints?
Another	explanation	is	that	Christ,	after	his	death,	went	and	proclaimed
release	to	Old	Testament	believers	who	had	been	unable	to	enter	heaven	until
the	completion	of	Christ’s	redemptive	work.
But	again	we	may	question	whether	this	view	adequately	accounts	for	what
the	text	actually	says.	It	does	not	say	that	Christ	preached	to	those	who	were
believers	or	faithful	to	God,	but	to	those	“who	formerly	
did	not	obey”—
the
emphasis	is	on	their	disobedience.	Moreover,	Peter	does	not	specify	Old
Testament	believers	generally,	but	only	those	who	were	disobedient	“in	the
days	of	Noah,	during	the	building	of	the	ark”	(1	Peter	3:20).
Finally,	Scripture	gives	us	no	clear	evidence	to	make	us	think	that	full	access
to	the	blessings	of	being	in	God’s	presence	in	heaven	were	withheld	from	Old
Testament	believers	when	they	died—indeed,	several	passages	suggest	that
believers	who	died	before	Christ’s	death	did	enter	into	the	presence	of	God	at
once	because	their	sins	were	forgiven	by	trusting	in	the	Messiah	who	was	to
come	(Gen.	5:24;	2	Sam.	12:23;	Pss.	16:11;	17:15;	23:6;	Eccl.	12:7;	Matt.
22:31–32;	Luke	16:22;	Rom.	4:1–8;	Heb.	11:5).
A	more	satisfying	explanation.
The	most	satisfactory	explanation	of	1	Peter	3:19–20	seems	rather	to	be	one
proposed	(but	not	really	defended)	long	ago	by	Augustine:	the	passage	refers
not	to	something	Christ	did	between	his	death	and	resurrection,	but	to	what	he
did	“in	the	spiritual	realm	of	existence”	(or	“through	the	Spirit”)	
at	the	time	of
Noah.	
When	Noah	was	building	the	ark,	Christ	“in	spirit”	was	preaching
through	Noah	to	the	hostile	unbelievers	around	him.
29
This	view	gains	support	from	two	other	statements	of	Peter.	In	1	Peter	1:11,
he	says	that	the	“Spirit	of	Christ”	was	speaking	in	the	Old	Testament
prophets.	This	suggests	that	Peter	could	readily	have	thought	that	the	“Spirit
of	Christ”	was	speaking	through	Noah	as	well.	Then	in	2	Peter	2:5,	he	calls
Noah	a	
“preacher	
of	righteousness”	(NIV),	using	the	noun	(
kēryx
)	that	comes
from	the	same	root	as	the	verb	“preached”	(
ekēryxen
)	in	1	Peter	3:19.	So	it
seems	likely	that	when	Christ	“preached	to	the	spirits	in	prison”	he	did	so
through	Noah	in	the	days	before	the	flood.
The	people	to	whom	Christ	preached	through	Noah	were	unbelievers	on	the
earth	at	the	time	of	Noah,	but	Peter	calls	them	“spirits	in	prison”	because	they
are	now	in	the	prison	of	hell—even	though	they	were	not	just	“spirits”	but
persons	on	earth	when	the	preaching	was	done.	(The	NASB	says	Christ
preached	“to	the	spirits	now	in	prison.”)	We	can	speak	the	same	way	in
English:	“I	knew	President	Clinton	when	he	was	a	college	student”	is	an
appropriate	statement,	even	though	he	was	not	president	when	he	was	in
college.	The	sentence	means,	“I	knew	the	man	who	is	now	President	Clinton
when	he	was	still	a	student	in	college.”	So	“Christ	preached	to	the	spirits	in
prison”	means	“Christ	preached	to	people	who	are	now	spirits	in	prison	when
they	were	still	persons	on	earth.”
30
This	interpretation	is	very	appropriate	to	the	larger	context	of	1	Peter	3:13–22.
The	parallel	between	the	situation	of	Noah	and	the	situation	of	Peter’s	readers
is	clear	at	several	points:
Noah
	
	
	
Peter’s	readers
Righteous	minority
	
	
	
Righteous	minority
Surrounded	by	hostile	unbelievers
	
	
	
Surrounded	by	hostile	unbelievers
God’s	judgment	was	near
	
	
	
God’s	judgment	may	come	soon
	
	
	
	
(1	Peter	4:5,	7;	2	Peter	3:10)
Noah	witnessed	boldly	(by
Christ’s	power)
	
	
	
They	should	witness	boldly	by
Christ’s	power
	
	
	
	
(1	Peter	3:14,	16–17;	3:15;	4:11)
Noah	was	finally	saved
	
	
	
They	will	finally	be	saved
	
	
	
	
(1	Peter	3:13–14;	4:13;	5:10)
Such	an	understanding	of	the	text	seems	to	be	by	far	the	most	likely	solution
to	a	puzzling	passage.	Yet	this	means	that	our	fourth	possible	support	for	a
descent	of	Christ	into	hell	also	turns	up	negative—the	text	speaks	rather	of
something	Christ	did	on	earth	at	the	time	of	Noah.
(e)	1	Peter	4:6.	
This	fifth	and	final	passage	says,	“For	this	is	why	the	gospel
was	preached	even	to	the	dead,	that	though	judged	in	the	flesh	like	men,	they
might	live	in	the	spirit	like	God.”
Does	this	verse	mean	that	Christ	went	to	hell	and	preached	the	gospel	to	those
who	had	died?	If	so,	it	would	be	the	only	passage	in	the	Bible	that	taught	a
“second	chance”	for	salvation	after	death	and	would	contradict	passages	such
as	Luke	16:19–31	and	Hebrews	9:27,	which	clearly	seem	to	deny	this
possibility.	Moreover,	the	passage	does	not	explicitly	say	that	Christ	preached
to	people	after	they	had	died,	and	could	rather	mean	that	the	gospel	in	general
was	preached	(this	verse	does	not	even	say	that	Christ	preached)	to	people
who	are	now	dead,	but	that	it	was	preached	to	them	while	they	were	still	alive
on	earth.
This	is	a	common	explanation,	and	it	seems	to	fit	this	verse	much	better.	It
finds	support	in	the	second	word	of	the	verse,	“this,”	which	refers	back	to	the
final	judgment	mentioned	at	the	end	of	verse	5.	Peter	is	saying	that	it	was
because	of	the	final	judgment	that	the	gospel	was	preached	to	the	dead.
This	would	comfort	the	readers	concerning	their	Christian	friends	who	had
already	died.	They	may	have	wondered,	“Did	the	gospel	benefit	them,	since	it
didn’t	save	them	from	death?”	Peter	answers	that	the	reason	the	gospel	was
preached	to	those	who	had	died	was	not	to	save	them	from	physical	death
(they	were	“judged	in	the	flesh	like	men”)	but	to	save	them	from	final
judgment	(they	will	“live	in	the	spirit	like	God”).	Therefore,	the	fact	that	they
had	died	did	not	indicate	that	the	gospel	had	failed	in	its	purpose—for	they
would	surely	live	forever	in	the	spiritual	realm.
Thus,	“the	dead”	are	people	who	have	died	and	are	now	dead,	even	though
they	were	alive	and	on	earth	when	the	gospel	was	preached	to	them.	(The
NIV	translates,	“For	this	is	the	reason	the	gospel	was	preached	even	to	
those
who	are	now	dead,”	
and	NASB	has	“those	who	are	dead.”)	This	avoids	the
doctrinal	problem	of	a	“second	chance”	of	salvation	after	death	and	fits	both
the	wording	and	the	context	of	the	verse.
We	conclude,	therefore,	that	this	last	passage,	when	viewed	in	its	context,
turns	out	to	provide	no	convincing	support	for	the	doctrine	of	a	descent	of
Christ	into	hell.
At	this	point,	people	on	all	sides	of	the	question	of	whether	Christ	actually
descended	into	hell	should	be	able	to	agree	at	least	that	the	idea	of	Christ’s
“descent	into	hell”	is	not	taught	clearly	or	explicitly	in	any	passage	of
Scripture.	And	many	people	(including	the	present	author)	will	conclude	that
this	idea	is	not	taught	in	Scripture	at	all.	But	beyond	the	question	of	whether
any	passage	positively	teaches	this	idea,	we	must	ask	whether	it	is	contrary	to
any	passages	of	Scripture.
(3)	Biblical	Opposition	to	a	“Descent	Into	Hell”:
	In	addition	to	the	fact	that
there	is	little	if	any	biblical	support	for	a	descent	of	Christ	into	hell,	there	are
some	New	Testament	texts	that	argue	against	the	possibility	of	Christ’s	going
to	hell	after	his	death.
Jesus’	words	to	the	thief	on	the	cross,	“Today	you	will	be	with	me	in
Paradise”	(Luke	23:43),	imply	that	after	Jesus	died	his	soul	(or	spirit)	went
immediately	to	the	presence	of	the	Father	in	heaven,	even	though	his	body
remained	on	earth	and	was	buried.	Some	people	deny	this	by	arguing	that
“Paradise”	is	a	place	distinct	from	heaven,	but	in	both	of	the	other	New
Testament	uses	the	word	clearly	means	“heaven”:	in	2	Corinthians	12:4	it	is
the	place	to	which	Paul	was	caught	up	in	his	revelation	of	heaven,	and	in
Revelation	2:7	it	is	the	place	where	we	find	the	tree	of	life—which	is	clearly
heaven	in	Revelation	22:2	and	14.
31
In	addition,	the	cry	of	Jesus,	“It	is	finished”	(John	19:30)	strongly	suggests
that	Christ’s	suffering	was	finished	at	that	moment	and	so	was	his	alienation
from	the	Father	because	of	bearing	our	sin.	This	implies	that	he	would	not
descend	into	hell,	but	would	go	at	once	into	the	Father’s	presence.
Finally,	the	cry,	“Father,	into	your	hands	I	commit	my	spirit”	(Luke	23:46),
also	suggests	that	Christ	expected	(correctly)	the	immediate	end	of	his
suffering	and	estrangement	and	the	welcoming	of	his	spirit	into	heaven	by
God	the	Father	(note	Stephen’s	similar	cry	in	Acts	7:59).
These	texts	indicate,	then,	that	Christ	in	his	death	experienced	the	same	things
believers	in	this	present	age	experience	when	they	die:	his	dead	body
remained	on	earth	and	was	buried	(as	ours	will	be),	but	his	spirit	(or	soul)
passed	immediately	into	the	presence	of	God	in	heaven	(just	as	ours	will).
Then	on	the	first	Easter	morning,	Christ’s	spirit	was	reunited	with	his	body
and	he	was	raised	from	the	dead—just	as	Christians	who	have	died	will	(when
Christ	returns)	be	reunited	to	their	bodies	and	raised	in	their	perfect
resurrection	bodies	to	new	life.
32
This	fact	has	pastoral	encouragement	for	us:	we	need	not	fear	death,	not	only
because	eternal	life	lies	on	the	other	side,	but	also	because	we	know	that	our
Savior	himself	has	gone	through	exactly	the	same	experience	we	will	go
through—he	has	prepared,	even	sanctified	the	way,	and	we	follow	him	with
confidence	each	step	of	that	way.	This	is	much	greater	comfort	regarding
death	than	could	ever	be	given	by	any	view	of	a	descent	into	hell.
(4)	Conclusion	Regarding	the	Apostles’	Creed	and	the	Question	of
Christ’s	Possible	Descent	Into	Hell:
	Does	the	phrase	“he	descended	into
hell”	deserve	to	be	retained	in	the	Apostles’	Creed	alongside	the	great
doctrines	of	the	faith	on	which	all	can	agree?	The	single	argument	in	its	favor
seems	to	be	the	fact	that	it	has	been	around	so	long.	But	an	old	mistake	is	still
a	mistake—and	as	long	as	it	has	been	around	there	has	been	confusion	and
disagreement	over	its	meaning.
On	the	other	side,	there	are	several	compelling	reasons	against	keeping	the
phrase.	It	has	no	clear	warrant	from	Scripture	and	indeed	seems	to	be
contradicted	by	some	passages	in	Scripture.	It	has	no	claim	to	being
“apostolic”	and	no	support	(in	the	sense	of	a	“descent	into	hell”)	from	the	first
six	centuries	of	the	church.	It	was	not	in	the	earliest	versions	of	the	Creed	and
was	only	included	in	it	later	because	of	an	apparent	misunderstanding	about
its	meaning.	Unlike	every	other	phrase	in	the	Creed,	it	represents	not	some
major	doctrine	on	which	all	Christians	agree,	but	rather	a	statement	about
which	most	Christians	seem	to	disagree.
33
	It	is	at	best	confusing	and	in	most
cases	misleading	for	modern	Christians.	My	own	judgment	is	that	there	would
be	all	gain	and	no	loss	if	it	were	dropped	from	the	Creed	once	for	all.
Concerning	the	doctrinal	question	of	whether	Christ	did	descend	into	hell
after	he	died,	the	answer	from	several	passages	of	Scripture	seems	clearly	to
be	no.
D.	The	Extent	of	the	Atonement
One	of	the	differences	between	Reformed	theologians	and	other	Catholic	and
Protestant	theologians	has	been	the	question	of	the	extent	of	the	atonement.
The	question	may	be	put	this	way:	when	Christ	died	on	the	cross,	did	he	pay
for	the	sins	of	the	entire	human	race	or	only	for	the	sins	of	those	who	he	knew
would	ultimately	be	saved?
Non-Reformed	people	argue	that	the	gospel	offer	in	Scripture	is	repeatedly
made	to	all	people,	and	for	this	offer	to	be	genuine,	the	payment	for	sins	must
have	already	been	made	and	must	be	actually	available	for	all	people.	They
also	say	that	if	the	people	whose	sins	Christ	paid	for	are	limited,	then	the	free
offer	of	the	gospel	also	is	limited,	and	the	offer	of	the	gospel	cannot	be	made
to	all	mankind	without	exception.
On	the	other	hand,	Reformed	people	argue	that	if	Christ’s	death	actually	paid
for	the	sins	of	every	person	who	ever	lived,	then	there	is	no	penalty	left	for
anyone	
to	pay,	and	it	necessarily	follows	that	all	people	will	be	saved,	without
exception.	For	God	could	not	condemn	to	eternal	punishment	anyone	whose
sins	are	already	paid	for:	that	would	be	demanding	double	payment,	and	it
would	therefore	be	unjust.	In	answer	to	the	objection	that	this	compromises
the	free	offer	of	the	gospel	to	every	person,	Reformed	people	answer	that	we
do	not	know	who	they	are	who	will	come	to	trust	in	Christ,	for	only	God
knows	that.	As	far	as	we	are	concerned,	the	free	offer	of	the	gospel	is	to	be
made	to	everybody	without	exception.	We	also	know	that	everyone	who
repents	and	believes	in	Christ	will	be	saved,	so	all	are	called	to	repentance	(cf.
Acts	17:30).	The	fact	that	God	foreknew	who	would	be	saved,	and	that	he
accepted	Christ’s	death	as	payment	for	their	sins	only,	does	not	inhibit	the	free
offer	of	the	gospel,	for	who	will	respond	to	it	is	hidden	in	the	secret	counsels
of	God.	That	we	do	not	know	who	will	respond	no	more	constitutes	a	reason
for	not	offering	the	gospel	to	all	than	not	knowing	the	extent	of	the	harvest
prevents	the	farmer	from	sowing	seed	in	his	fields.
Finally,	Reformed	people	argue	that	God’s	purposes	in	redemption	are	agreed
upon	within	the	Trinity	and	they	are	certainly	accomplished.	Those	whom
God	planned	to	save	are	the	same	people	for	whom	Christ	also	came	to	die,
and	to	those	same	people	the	Holy	Spirit	will	certainly	apply	the	benefits	of
Christ’s	redemptive	work,	even	awakening	their	faith	(John	1:12;	Phil.	1:29;
cf.	Eph.	2:2)	and	calling	them	to	trust	in	him.	What	God	the	Father	purposed,
God	the	Son	and	the	Holy	Spirit	agreed	to	and	surely	carried	out.
1.
	Scripture	Passages	Used	to	Support	the	Reformed	View.
	Several
Scripture	passages	speak	of	the	fact	that	Christ	died	for	his	people.	“The	good
shepherd	lays	down	his	life	
for	the	sheep”	
(John	10:11).	“I	lay	down	my	life
for	the	sheep”	(John	10:15).	Paul	speaks	of	“the	church	of	God	which	he
obtained	with	the	blood	of	his	own	Son”	(Acts	20:28).	He	also	says,	“He	who
did	not	spare	his	own	Son	but	gave	him	up	for	us	all,	will	he	not	also	give	us
all	things	with	him?”	(Rom.	8:32).	This	passage	indicates	a	connection
between	God’s	purpose	in	giving	up	his	Son	“for	us	all”	and	giving	us	“all
things”	that	pertain	to	salvation	as	well.	In	the	next	sentence	Paul	clearly
limits	the	application	of	this	to	those	who	will	be	saved	because	he	says,
“Who	shall	bring	any	charge	against	God’s	elect?”	(Rom.	8:33)	and	in	the
next	verse	mentions	Christ’s	death	as	a	reason	why	no	one	shall	bring	a
charge	against	the	elect	(8:34).	In	another	passage,	Paul	says,	“Husbands,	love
your	wives,	as	Christ	loved	the	church	and	gave	himself	up	
for	her”	
(Eph.
5:25).
Moreover,	Christ	during	his	earthly	ministry	is	aware	of	a	group	of	people
whom	the	Father	has	given	to	him.	“All	that	the	Father	gives	me	will	come	to
me;	and	him	who	comes	to	me	I	will	not	cast	out	.	.	.	this	is	the	will	of	him
who	sent	me,	that	I	should	lose	nothing	of	all	that	he	has	given	me,	but	raise	it
up	at	the	last	day”	(John	6:37–39).	He	also	says,	“I	am	not	praying	for	the
world	but	for	those	whom	you	have	given	me,	for	they	are	yours”	(John	17:9).
He	then	goes	on	from	this	specific	reference	to	the	disciples	to	say,	“I	do	not
pray	for	these	only,	but	also	for	those	who	believe	in	me	through	their	word”
(John	17:20).
Finally,	some	passages	speak	of	a	definite	transaction	between	the	Father	and
the	Son	when	Christ	died,	a	transaction	that	had	specific	reference	to	those
who	would	believe.	For	example,	Paul	says,	“God	shows	his	love	for	us	in
that	while	we	were	yet	sinners	Christ	died	
for	us”	
(Rom.	5:8).	He	adds,	“For
if	while	we	were	enemies	
we	were	reconciled	to	God	by	the	death	of	his	Son,
much	more,	now	that	we	are	reconciled,	shall	we	be	saved	by	his	life”	(Rom.
5:10).	This	reconciliation	to	God	occurred	with	respect	to	the	specific	people
who	would	be	saved,	and	it	occurred	“while	we	were	enemies.”	Similarly,
Paul	says,	“
For	our	sake	
he	made	him	to	be	sin	who	knew	no	sin,	so	that	in
him	we	might	become	the	righteousness	of	God”	(2	Cor.	5:21;	cf.	Gal.	1:4;
Eph.	1:7).	And	“Christ	redeemed	
us	
from	the	curse	of	the	law,	having	become
a	curse	
for	us”	
(Gal.	3:13).
Further	support	for	the	Reformed	view	is	found	in	the	consideration	that	all
the	blessings	of	salvation,	including	faith,	repentance,	and	all	of	the	works	of
the	Holy	Spirit	in	applying	redemption,	were	also	secured	by	Christ’s
redemptive	work	specifically	for	his	people.	Those	for	whom	he	earned
forgiveness	also	have	had	those	other	benefits	earned	for	them	(cf.	Eph.	1:3–
4;	2:8;	Phil.	1:29).
34
What	I	have	called	“the	Reformed	view”	in	this	section	is	commonly	referred
to	as	“limited	atonement.”
35
	However,	most	theologians	who	hold	this
position	today	do	not	prefer	the	term	“limited	atonement”	because	it	is	so
easily	subject	to	misunderstanding,	as	if	this	view	somehow	held	that	Christ’s
atoning	work	was	deficient	in	some	way.	The	term	that	is	usually	preferred	is
particular	redemption,	
since	this	view	holds	that	Christ	died	for	particular
people	(specifically,	those	who	would	be	saved	and	whom	he	came	to
redeem),	that	he	foreknew	each	one	of	them	individually	(cf.	Eph.	1:3–5)	and
had	them	individually	in	mind	in	his	atoning	work.
36
The	opposite	position,	that	Christ’s	death	actually	paid	for	the	sins	of	all
people	who	ever	lived,	is	called	“general	redemption”	or	“unlimited
atonement.”
2.	Scripture	Passages	Used	to	Support	the	Non-Reformed	View	(General
Redemption	or	Unlimited	Atonement).
	A	number	of	Scripture	passages
indicate	that	in	some	sense	Christ	died	for	the	whole	world.	John	the	Baptist
said,	“Behold,	the	Lamb	of	God,	who	takes	away	the	sin	
of	the	world!”	
(John
1:29).	And	John	3:16	tells	us	that	“God	so	loved	the	world	that	he	gave	his
only	Son,	that	whoever	believes	in	him	should	not	perish	but	have	eternal
life.”	Jesus	said,	“The	bread	which	I	shall	give	for	the	life	of	the	world	is	my
flesh”	(John	6:51).	Paul	says	that	in	Christ	“God	was	reconciling	
the	world	
to
himself”	(2	Cor.	5:19).	We	read	of	Christ	that	“he	is	the	expiation	[lit.
‘propitiation’]	for	our	sins,	and	not	for	ours	only	but	also	for	the	sins	of	
the
whole	world”	
(1	John	2:2).	Paul	writes	that	Christ	Jesus	“gave	himself	as	a
ransom	
for	all”	
(1	Tim.	2:6).	And	the	author	of	Hebrews	says	that	Jesus	was
for	a	little	while	made	lower	than	the	angels	“so	that	by	the	grace	of	God	he
might	taste	death	for	every	one”	(Heb.	2:9).
Other	passages	appear	to	speak	of	Christ	dying	for	those	who	will	not	be
saved.	Paul	says,	“Do	not	let	what	you	eat	cause	the	ruin	of	one	for	whom
Christ	died”	(Rom.	14:15).	In	a	similar	context	he	tells	the	Corinthians	not	to
eat	publicly	at	an	idol’s	temple	because	they	might	encourage	those	who	are
weak	in	their	faith	to	violate	their	consciences	and	eat	food	offered	to	idols.
He	then	says,	“And	so	by	your	knowledge	this	weak	man	is	destroyed,	the
brother	
for	whom	Christ	died”	
(1	Cor.	8:11).	Peter	writes	about	false	teachers
as	follows:	“But	false	prophets	also	arose	among	the	people,	just	as	there	will
be	false	teachers	among	you,	who	will	secretly	bring	in	destructive	heresies,
even	denying	the	Master	who	bought	them,	
bringing	upon	themselves	swift
destruction”	(2	Peter	2:1;	cf.	Heb.	10:29).
3.	Some	Points	of	Agreement	and	Some	Conclusions	About	Disputed
Texts.
	It	would	be	helpful	first	to	list	the	points	on	which	both	sides	agree:
1.	Not	all	will	be	saved.
2.	A	free	offer	of	the	gospel	can	rightly	be	made	to	every	person	ever	born.	It
is	completely	true	that	“whoever	will”	may	come	to	Christ	for	salvation,	and
no	one	who	comes	to	him	will	be	turned	away.	This	free	offer	of	the	gospel	is
extended	in	good	faith	to	every	person.
3.	All	agree	that	Christ’s	death	in	itself,	because	he	is	the	infinite	Son	of	God,
has	infinite	merit	and	is	in	itself	sufficient	to	pay	the	penalty	of	the	sins	of	as
many	or	as	few	as	the	Father	and	the	Son	decreed.	The	question	is	not	about
the	intrinsic	merits	of	Christ’s	sufferings	and	death,	but	about	the	number	of
people	for	whom	the	Father	and	the	Son	thought	Christ’s	death	to	be
sufficient	payment	at	the	time	Christ	died.
Beyond	these	points	of	agreement,	however,	a	difference	remains	concerning
the	following	question:	“When	Christ	died,	did	he	
actually	pay	the	penalty
only	for	the	sins	of	those	who	would	believe	in	him,	or	for	the	sins	of	every
person	who	ever	lived?”	On	this	question	it	seems	that	those	who	hold	to
particular	redemption	have	stronger	arguments	on	their	side.	First,	an
important	point	that	is	not	generally	answered	by	advocates	of	the	general
redemption	view	is	that	people	who	are	eternally	condemned	to	hell	suffer	the
penalty	for	all	of	their	own	sins,	and	therefore	their	penalty	could	not	have
been	fully	taken	by	Christ.	Those	who	hold	the	general	redemption	view
sometimes	answer	that	people	suffer	in	hell	because	of	the	sin	of	rejecting
Christ,	even	though	their	other	sins	were	paid	for.	But	this	is	hardly	a
satisfactory	position,	for	(1)	some	have	never	rejected	Christ	because	they
have	never	heard	of	him,	and	(2)	the	emphasis	of	Scripture	when	it	speaks	of
eternal	punishment	is	not	on	the	fact	that	the	people	suffer	because	they	have
rejected	Christ,	but	on	the	fact	that	they	suffer	because	of	their	own	sins	in
this	life	(see	Rom.	5:6–8,	13–16,	et	al.).	This	significant	point	seems	to	tip	the
argument	decisively	in	favor	of	the	particular	redemption	position.
Another	significant	point	in	favor	of	particular	redemption	is	the	fact	that
Christ	completely	earned	our	salvation,	paying	the	penalty	for	all	our	sins.	He
did	not	just	redeem	us	potentially,	but	actually	redeemed	us	as	individuals
whom	he	loved.	A	third	weighty	point	in	favor	of	particular	redemption	is	that
there	is	eternal	unity	in	the	counsels	and	plans	of	God	and	in	the	work	of	the
Father,	Son,	and	Holy	Spirit	in	accomplishing	their	plans	(see	Rom.	8:28–30).
With	regard	to	Scripture	passages	used	to	support	general	redemption,	the
following	may	be	said:	Several	passages	that	speak	about	“the	world”	simply
mean	that	sinners	generally	will	be	saved,	without	implying	that	every	single
individual	in	the	world	will	be	saved.	So	the	fact	that	Christ	is	the	Lamb	of
God	who	takes	away	the	sin	of	the	world	(John	1:29)	does	not	mean	(on
anybody’s	interpretation)	that	Christ	actually	removes	the	sins	of	every	single
person	in	the	world,	for	both	sides	agree	that	not	all	are	saved.	Similarly,	the
fact	that	God	was	in	Christ	reconciling	the	world	to	himself	(2	Cor.	5:19)	does
not	mean	that	every	single	person	in	the	world	was	reconciled	to	God,	but	that
sinners	generally	were	reconciled	to	God.	Another	way	of	putting	these	two
passages	would	be	to	say	that	Jesus	was	the	Lamb	of	God	who	takes	away	the
sin	of	sinners,	or	that	God	was	in	Christ	reconciling	sinners	to	himself.	This
does	not	mean	that	all	sinners	will	be	saved	or	were	reconciled,	but	simply
that	these	groups	in	general,	but	not	necessarily	every	single	person	in	them,
were	the	objects	of	God’s	redeeming	work:	it	essentially	means	that	“God	so
loved	sinners	that	he	gave	his	only	Son	.	.	.”	without	implying	that	every
sinner	in	the	whole	world	will	be	saved.
The	passages	that	speak	about	Christ	dying	“for”	the	whole	world	are	best
understood	to	refer	to	the	free	offer	of	the	gospel	that	is	made	to	all	people.
When	Jesus	says,	“The	bread	which	I	shall	give	
for	the	life	of	the	world	
is	my
flesh”	(John	6:51),	it	is	in	the	context	of	speaking	of	himself	as	the	Bread	that
came	down	from	heaven,	which	is	offered	to	people	and	which	they	may,	if
they	are	willing,	receive	for	themselves.	Earlier	in	the	same	discussion	Jesus
said	that	“the	bread	of	God	is	that	which	comes	down	from	heaven,	and	gives
life	to	the	world”	(John	6:33).	This	may	be	understood	in	the	sense	of
bringing	redeeming	life	into	the	world	but	not	meaning	that	every	single
person	in	the	world	will	have	that	redeeming	life.	Jesus	then	speaks	of	himself
as	inviting	others	to	come	and	take	up	this	living	bread:	“He	who	comes	to	me
shall	not	hunger,	and	he	who	believes	in	me	shall	never	thirst.	.	.	.	This	is	the
bread	which	comes	down	from	heaven,	that	a	man	may	eat	of	it	and	not	die.	I
am	the	living	bread	which	came	down	from	heaven;	if	any	one	eats	of	this
bread,	he	will	live	for	ever;	and	the	bread	which	I	shall	give	for	the	life	of	the
world	is	my	flesh”	(John	6:35,	50–51).	Jesus	gives	his	flesh	to	bring	life	into
the	world	and	to	offer	life	to	the	world,	but	to	say	that	Jesus	came	to	offer
eternal	life	to	the	world	(a	point	on	which	both	sides	agree)	is	not	to	say	that
he	actually	paid	the	penalty	for	the	sins	of	everyone	who	would	ever	live,	for
that	is	a	separate	question.
When	John	says	that	Christ	“is	the	propitiation	for	our	sins,	and	not	for	ours
only	but	also	for	the	sins	of	the	whole	world”	(1	John	2:2,	author’s
translation),	he	may	simply	be	understood	to	mean	that	Christ	is	the	atoning
sacrifice	that	the	gospel	now	
makes	available	for	
the	sins	of	everyone	in	the
world.	The	preposition	“for”	(Gk.	
peri	
plus	genitive)	is	ambiguous	with
respect	to	the	specific	sense	in	which	Christ	is	the	propitiation	“for”	the	sins
of	the	world.	
Peri	
simply	means	“concerning”	or	“with	respect	to”	but	is	not
specific	enough	to	define	the	exact	way	in	which	Christ	is	the	sacrifice	with
respect	to	the	sins	of	the	world.	It	would	be	entirely	consistent	with	the
language	of	the	verse	to	think	that	John	is	simply	saying	that	Christ	is	the
atoning	sacrifice	who	is	available	to	pay	for	the	sins	of	anyone	in	the	world.
37
Likewise,	when	Paul	says	that	Christ	“gave	himself	as	a	ransom	
for	all”	
(1
Tim.	2:6),	we	are	to	understand	this	to	mean	a	ransom	available	for	all	people,
without	exception.
38
When	the	author	of	Hebrews	says	that	Christ	was	made	lower	than	the	angels
“so	that	by	the	grace	of	God	he	might	taste	death	for	every	one”	(Heb.	2:9),
the	passage	is	best	understood	to	refer	to	every	one	of	Christ’s	people,	every
one	who	is	redeemed.	It	does	not	say	everyone	“in	the	whole	world”	or	any
such	expression,	and	in	the	immediate	context	the	author	is	certainly	speaking
of	those	who	are	redeemed	(see	“bringing	many	sons	to	glory”	[v.	
10];	“those
who	are	sanctified”	[v.	
11];	and	“the	children	God	has	given	me”	[v.	
13]).	The
Greek	word	
pas,	
here	translated	“every	one,”	is	also	used	in	a	similar	sense	to
mean	“all	of	God’s	people”	in	Hebrews	8:11,	“for	
all	
shall	know	me,”	and	in
Hebrews	12:8,	“If	you	are	left	without	discipline,	in	which	
all	
have
participated,	then	you	are	illegitimate	children	and	not	sons.”	In	both	cases
the	“all”	is	not	explicitly	restricted	by	a	specific	phrase	such	as	“all	of	God’s
people,”	but	this	is	clearly	the	sense	in	the	overall	context.	Of	course,	in	other
contexts,	the	same	word	“all”	can	mean	“all	people	without	exception,”	but
this	must	be	determined	from	the	individual	context	in	each	case.
When	Paul	speaks	in	Romans	14:15	and	1	Corinthians	8:11	about	the
possibility	of	destroying	one	for	whom	Christ	died,	it	seems	best	here	as	well
to	think	of	the	word	“for”	in	the	sense	that	Christ	died	
“to	make	salvation
available	for”	
these	people	or	“to	bring	the	free	offer	of	the	gospel	to”	these
people	who	are	associated	with	the	fellowship	of	the	church.	He	does	not
seem	to	have	in	mind	the	specific	question	of	the	inter-trinitarian	decision
regarding	whose	sins	the	Father	counted	Christ’s	death	as	a	payment	for.
Rather,	he	is	speaking	of	those	to	whom	the	gospel	has	been	offered.	In
another	passage,	when	Paul	calls	the	weak	man	a	“brother	for	whom	Christ
died”	in	1	Corinthians	8:11,	he	is	not	necessarily	pronouncing	on	the	inward
spiritual	condition	of	a	person’s	heart,	but	is	probably	just	speaking	according
to	what	is	often	called	the	“judgment	of	charity”	by	which	people	who	are
participating	in	the	fellowship	of	the	church	can	rightly	be	referred	to	as
brothers	and	sisters.
39
When	Peter	speaks	of	false	teachers	who	bring	in	destructive	heresies,	“even
denying	the	Master	who	bought	them”	(2	Peter	2:1),	it	is	unclear	whether	the
word	“Master”	(Gk.	
despotōs
)	refers	to	Christ	(as	in	Jude	4)	or	to	God	the
Father	(as	in	Luke	2:29;	Acts	4:24;	Rev.	6:10).	In	either	case,	the	Old
Testament	allusion	is	probably	to	Deuteronomy	32:6,	where	Moses	says	to	the
rebellious	people	who	have	turned	away	from	God,	“Is	not	he	your	Father
who	has	bought	you?”	
(author’s	translation).
40
	Peter	is	drawing	an	analogy
between	the	past	false	prophets	who	arose	among	the	Jews	and	those	who	will
be	false	teachers	within	the	churches	to	which	he	writes:	“But	false	prophets
also	arose	among	the	people,	just	as	there	will	be	false	teachers	among	you,
who	will	secretly	bring	in	destructive	heresies,	even	denying	the	Master	who
bought	them”	(2	Peter	2:1).	In	line	with	this	clear	reference	to	false	prophets
in	the	Old	Testament,	Peter	also	alludes	to	the	fact	that	the	rebellious	Jews
turned	away	from	God	who	“bought”	them	out	of	Egypt	in	the	exodus.	From
the	time	of	the	exodus	onward,	any	Jewish	person	would	have	considered
himself	or	herself	one	who	was	“bought”	by	God	in	the	exodus	and	therefore
a	person	of	God’s	own	possession.	In	this	sense,	the	false	teachers	arising
among	the	people	were	denying	God	their	Father,	to	whom	they	rightfully
belonged.
41
	So	the	text	means	not	that	Christ	had	redeemed	these	false
prophets,	but	simply	that	they	were	rebellious	Jewish	people	(or	church
attenders	in	the	same	position	as	the	rebellious	Jews)	who	were	rightly	owned
by	God	because	they	had	been	brought	out	of	the	land	of	Egypt	(or	their
forefathers	had),	but	they	were	ungrateful	to	him.	Christ’s	specific	redemptive
work	on	the	cross	is	not	in	view	in	this	verse.
42
With	regard	to	the	verses	that	talk	of	Christ’s	dying	for	his	sheep,	his	church,
or	his	people,	non-Reformed	people	may	answer	that	these	passages	do	not
deny	that	he	died	to	pay	the	penalty	for	others	as	well.	In	response,	while	it	is
true	that	they	do	not	explicitly	deny	that	Christ	died	for	others	as	well,	their
frequent	reference	to	his	death	for	his	people	would	at	least	strongly	suggest
that	this	is	a	correct	inference.	Even	if	they	do	not	absolutely	imply	such	a
particularizing	of	redemption,	these	verses	do	at	least	seem	to	be	most
naturally	interpreted	in	this	way.
In	conclusion,	it	seems	to	me	that	the	Reformed	position	of	“particular
redemption”	is	most	consistent	with	the	overall	teaching	of	Scripture.	But
once	that	has	been	said,	several	points	of	caution	need	to	be	raised.
4.	Points	of	Clarification	and	Caution	Regarding	This	Doctrine.
	It	is
important	to	state	some	points	of	clarification	and	also	some	areas	in	which
we	can	rightly	object	to	the	way	in	which	some	advocates	of	particular
redemption	have	expressed	their	arguments.	It	is	also	important	to	ask	what
the	pastoral	implications	are	for	this	teaching.
1.	It	seems	to	be	a	mistake	to	state	the	question	as	Berkhof	does
43
	and	focus
on	the	purpose	of	the	Father	and	the	Son,	rather	than	on	what	actually
happened	in	the	atonement.	If	we	confine	the	discussion	to	the	purpose	of	the
atonement,	then	this	is	just	another	form	of	the	larger	dispute	between
Calvinists	and	Arminians	over	whether	God’s	purpose	is	(a)	to	save	all
people,	a	purpose	that	is	frustrated	by	man’s	will	to	rebel—the	Arminian
position—or	whether	God’s	purpose	is	(b)	to	save	those	whom	he	has	chosen
—the	Calvinist	position.	This	question	will	not	be	decided	at	the	narrow	point
of	the	question	of	the	extent	of	the	atonement,	for	the	specific	scriptural	texts
on	that	point	are	too	few	and	can	hardly	be	said	to	be	conclusive	on	either
side.	One’s	decisions	on	these	passages	will	tend	to	be	determined	by	one’s
view	of	the	larger	question	as	to	what	Scripture	as	a	whole	teaches	about	the
nature	of	the	atonement	and	about	the	broader	issues	of	God’s	providence,
sovereignty,	and	the	doctrine	of	election.	Whatever	decisions	are	made	on
those	larger	topics	will	apply	specifically	to	this	point,	and	people	will	come
to	their	conclusions	accordingly.
Rather	than	focusing	on	the	purpose	of	the	atonement,	therefore,	the	question
is	rightfully	asked	about	the	atonement	itself:	Did	Christ	pay	for	the	sins	of	all
unbelievers	who	will	be	eternally	condemned,	and	did	he	pay	for	their	sins
fully	and	completely	on	the	cross?	It	seems	that	we	have	to	answer	no	to	that
question.
2.	The	statements	“Christ	died	for	his	people	only”	and	“Christ	died	for	all
people”	are	both	true	in	some	senses,	and	too	often	the	argument	over	this
issue	has	been	confused	because	of	various	senses	that	can	be	given	to	the
word	“for”	in	these	two	statements.
The	statement	“Christ	died	for	his	people	only”	can	be	understood	to	mean
that	“Christ	died	to	actually	pay	the	penalty	for	all	the	sins	of	his	people
only.”	In	that	sense	it	is	true.	But	when	non-Reformed	people	hear	the
sentence	“Christ	died	for	his	people	only,”	they	often	hear	in	it,	“Christ	died
so	that	he	could	make	the	gospel	available	only	to	a	chosen	few,”	and	they	are
troubled	over	what	they	see	as	a	real	threat	to	the	free	offer	of	the	gospel	to
every	person.	Reformed	people	who	hold	to	particular	redemption	should
recognize	the	potential	for	misunderstanding	that	arises	with	the	sentence
“Christ	died	for	his	people	only,”	and,	out	of	concern	for	the	truth	and	out	of
pastoral	concern	to	affirm	the	free	offer	of	the	gospel	and	to	avoid
misunderstanding	in	the	body	of	Christ,	they	should	be	more	precise	in	saying
exactly	what	they	mean.	The	simple	sentence,	“Christ	died	for	his	people
only,”	while	true	in	the	sense	explained	above,	is	seldom	understood	in	that
way	when	people	unfamiliar	with	Reformed	doctrine	hear	it,	and	it	therefore
is	better	not	to	use	such	an	ambiguous	sentence	at	all.
On	the	other	hand,	the	sentence,	“Christ	died	for	all	people,”	is	true	if	it
means,	“Christ	died	to	make	salvation	available	to	all	people”	or	if	it	means,
“Christ	died	to	bring	the	free	offer	of	the	gospel	to	all	people.”	In	fact,	this	is
the	kind	of	language	Scripture	itself	uses	in	passages	like	John	6:51;	1
Timothy	2:6;	and	1	John	2:2.
44
	It	really	seems	to	be	only	nit-picking	that
creates	controversies	and	useless	disputes	when	Reformed	people	insist	on
being	such	purists	in	their	speech	that	they	object	any	time	someone	says	that
“Christ	died	for	all	people.”	There	are	certainly	acceptable	ways	of
understanding	that	sentence	that	are	consistent	with	the	speech	of	the
scriptural	authors	themselves.
Similarly,	I	do	not	think	we	should	rush	to	criticize	an	evangelist	who	tells	an
audience	of	unbelievers,	“Christ	died	for	your	sins,”	if	it	is	made	clear	in	the
context	that	it	is	necessary	to	trust	in	Christ	before	one	can	receive	the
benefits	of	the	gospel	offer.	In	that	sense	the	sentence	is	simply	understood	to
mean	“Christ	died	to	offer	you	forgiveness	for	your	sins”	or	“Christ	died	to
make	available	forgiveness	for	your	sins.”	The	important	point	here	is	that
sinners	realize	that	salvation	is	available	for	everyone	and	that	payment	of
sins	is	available	for	everyone.
At	this	point	some	Reformed	theologians	will	object	and	will	warn	us	that	if
we	say	to	unbelievers,	“Christ	died	for	your	sins,”	the	unbelievers	will	draw
the	conclusion,	“Therefore	I	am	saved	no	matter	what	I	do.”	But	this	does	not
seem	to	be	a	problem	in	actual	fact,	for	whenever	evangelicals	(Reformed	or
non-Reformed)	speak	about	the	gospel	to	unbelievers,	they	are	always	very
clear	on	the	fact	that	the	death	of	Christ	has	no	benefit	for	a	person	unless	that
person	believes	in	Christ.	Therefore,	the	problem	seems	to	be	more	something
that	Reformed	people	
think	
unbelievers	should	believe	(if	they	were
consistent	in	reasoning	back	into	the	secret	counsels	of	God	and	the
relationship	between	the	Father	and	Son	in	the	counsels	of	the	Trinity	at	the
point	of	Christ’s	propitiatory	sacrifice	on	the	cross).	But	unbelievers	simply
do	not	reason	that	way:	they	know	that	they	must	exercise	faith	in	Christ
before	they	will	experience	any	benefits	from	his	saving	work.	Moreover,	it	is
far	more	likely	that	people	will	understand	the	sentence	“Christ	died	for	your
sins”	in	the	doctrinally	correct	sense	that	“Christ	died	in	order	to	offer	you
forgiveness	for	your	sins”	rather	than	in	the	doctrinally	incorrect	sense,
“Christ	died	and	completely	paid	the	penalty	already	for	all	your	sins.”
45
3.	In	terms	of	the	practical,	pastoral	effects	of	our	words,	both	those	who	hold
to	particular	redemption	and	those	who	hold	to	general	redemption	agree	at
several	key	points:
a.	Both	sincerely	want	to	avoid	implying	that	people	will	be	saved	whether
they	believe	in	Christ	or	not.	Non-Reformed	people	sometimes	accuse
Reformed	people	of	saying	that	the	elect	will	be	saved	irrespective	of
responding	to	the	gospel,	but	this	is	clearly	a	misrepresentation	of	the
Reformed	position.	On	the	other	hand,	Reformed	people	think	that	those	who
hold	to	general	redemption	are	in	danger	of	implying	that	everybody	will	be
saved	whether	they	believe	in	Christ	or	not.	But	this	is	not	a	position	that	non-
Reformed	people	actually	hold,	and	it	is	always	precarious	to	criticize	people
for	a	position	that	they	do	not	say	they	hold,	just	because	you	think	that	they
should	hold	that	position	if	they	were	consistent	with	their	other	views.
b.	Both	sides	want	to	avoid	implying	that	there	might	be	some	people	who
come	to	Christ	for	salvation	but	are	turned	away	because	Christ	did	not	die
for	them.	No	one	wants	to	say	or	imply	to	an	unbeliever,	“Christ	might	have
died	for	your	sins	(and	then	again	he	might	not	have!).”	Both	sides	want	to
clearly	affirm	that	all	who	come	to	Christ	for	salvation	will	in	fact	be	saved.
“Him	who	comes	to	me	I	will	not	cast	out”	(John	6:37).
c.	Both	sides	want	to	avoid	implying	that	God	is	hypocritical	or	insincere
when	he	makes	the	free	offer	of	the	gospel.	It	is	a	genuine	offer,	and	it	is
always	true	that	all	who	wish	to	come	to	Christ	for	salvation	and	who	do
actually	come	to	him	will	be	saved.
d.	Finally,	we	may	ask	why	this	matter	is	so	important	after	all.	Although
Reformed	people	have	sometimes	made	belief	in	particular	redemption	a	test
of	doctrinal	orthodoxy,	it	would	be	healthy	to	realize	that	Scripture	itself
never	singles	this	out	as	a	doctrine	of	major	importance,	nor	does	it	once
make	it	the	subject	of	any	explicit	theological	discussion.	Our	knowledge	of
the	issue	comes	only	from	incidental	references	to	it	in	passages	whose
concern	is	with	other	doctrinal	or	practical	matters.	In	fact,	this	is	really	a
question	that	probes	into	the	inner	counsels	of	the	Trinity	and	does	so	in	an
area	in	which	there	is	very	little	direct	scriptural	testimony—a	fact	that	should
cause	us	to	be	cautious.	A	balanced	pastoral	perspective	would	seem	to	be	to
say	that	this	teaching	of	particular	redemption	
seems	
to	us	to	be	true,	that	it
gives	logical	consistency	to	our	theological	system,	and	that	it	can	be	helpful
in	assuring	people	of	Christ’s	love	for	them	individually	and	of	the
completeness	of	his	redemptive	work	for	them;	but	that	it	also	is	a	subject	that
almost	inevitably	leads	to	some	confusion,	some	misunderstanding,	and	often
some	wrongful	argumentativeness	and	divisiveness	among	God’s	people—all
of	which	are	negative	pastoral	considerations.	Perhaps	that	is	why	the	apostles
such	as	John	and	Peter	and	Paul,	in	their	wisdom,	placed	almost	no	emphasis
on	this	question	at	all.	And	perhaps	we	would	do	well	to	ponder	their
example.
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
In	what	ways	has	this	chapter	enabled	you	to	appreciate	Christ’s	death
more	than	you	did	before?	Has	it	given	you	more	or	less	confidence	in
the	fact	that	your	sins	have	actually	been	paid	for	by	Christ?
2
.	
If	the	ultimate	cause	of	the	atonement	is	found	in	the	love	and	justice	of
God,	then	was	there	anything	in	you	that	required	God	to	love	you	or	to
take	steps	to	save	you	(when	he	looked	forward	and	thought	of	you	as	a
sinner	in	rebellion	against	him)?	Does	your	answer	to	this	question	help
you	to	appreciate	the	character	of	God’s	love	for	you	as	a	person	who	did
not	at	all	deserve	that	love?	How	does	that	realization	make	you	feel	in
your	relationship	to	God?
3
.	
Do	you	think	that	Christ’s	sufferings	were	enough	to	pay	for	your	sins?
Are	you	willing	to	rely	on	his	work	to	pay	for	all	your	sins?	Do	you
think	he	is	a	sufficient	Savior,	worthy	of	your	trust?	When	he	invites
you,	“Come	to	me	.	.	.	and	I	will	give	you	rest”	(Matt.	11:28),	do	you
now	trust	him?	Will	you	now	and	always	rely	on	him	with	your	whole
heart	for	complete	salvation?
4
.	
If	Christ	bore	all	the	guilt	for	our	sins,	all	the	wrath	of	God	against	sin,
and	all	the	penalty	of	the	death	that	we	deserved,	then	will	God	ever	turn
his	wrath	against	you	as	a	believer	(see	Rom.	8:31–39)?	Can	any	of	the
hardships	or	sufferings	that	you	experience	in	life	be	due	to	the	wrath	of
God	against	you?	If	not,	then	why	do	we	as	Christians	experience
difficulties	and	sufferings	in	this	life	(see	Rom.	8:28;	Heb.	12:3–11)?
5
.	
Do	you	think	Christ’s	life	was	good	enough	to	deserve	God’s	approval?
Are	you	willing	to	rely	on	it	for	your	eternal	destiny?	Is	Jesus	Christ	a
reliable	enough	and	good	enough	Savior	for	you	to	trust	him?	Which
would	you	rather	trust	in	for	your	eternal	standing	before	God:	your	own
life	or	Christ’s?
6
.	
If	Christ	has	indeed	redeemed	you	from	bondage	to	sin	and	to	the
kingdom	of	Satan,	are	there	areas	of	your	life	in	which	you	could	more
fully	realize	this	to	be	true?	Could	this	realization	give	you	more
encouragement	in	your	Christian	life?
7
.	
Do	you	think	it	was	fair	for	Christ	to	be	your	substitute	and	to	pay	your
penalty?	When	you	think	about	him	acting	as	your	substitute	and	dying
for	you,	what	attitude	and	emotion	is	called	forth	in	your	heart?
SPECIAL	TERMS
active	obedience
	
particular	redemption
atonement
	
passive	obedience
blood	of	Christ
	
penal	substitution
consequent	absolute	necessity
	
propitiation
example	theory
	
ransom	to	Satan	theory
general	redemption
	
reconciliation
governmental	theory
	
redemption
impute
	
sacrifice
limited	atonement
	
unlimited	atonement
moral	influence	theory
	
vicarious	atonement
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the	
bibliography	to
chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be	found	in	
Appendix	4
.)
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92			Litton,	221–36
1930			Thomas,	49–72,	414–26
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1847			Finney,	258–82
1875–76			Pope,	2:141–88,	263–316
1892–94			Miley,	2:65–240
1940			Wiley,	2:217–300
1960			Purkiser,	243–68
1983			Carter,	1:483–505
1983–			Cottrell,	3:401–60
1987–90			Oden,	2:317–450
3.			Baptist
1767			Gill,	1:562–83;	2:1–68
1887			Boyce,	295–341
1907			Strong,	701–6,	713–75
1917			Mullins,	304–37
1983–85			Erickson,	761–841
1987–94			Lewis/Demarest,	2:371–436
4.			Dispensational
1947			Chafer,	3:35–164,	183–205;	5:177–230
1949			Thiessen,	229–42
1986			Ryrie,	275–309,	318–23
5.			Lutheran
1917–24			Pieper,	2:280–330,	342–82
1934			Mueller,	287–95,	305–13
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1559			Calvin,	1:503–34	(2.16–17)
1724–58			Edwards,	1:574–80;	2:766–78
1861			Heppe,	448–87,	488–94
1871–73			Hodge,	2:480–591,	610–25
1878			Dabney,	485–553
1887–1921			Warfield,	
SSW,	
1:167–77;	
SSW,	
2:308–
20;	
BD,	
327–438;	
PWC,	
325–530;	
CC,	
393–444
1889			Shedd,	2b:353–489;	3:401–70
1937–66			Murray,	
CW,	
1:36–39,	59–85;	2:142–57;
RAA,	
9–57
1938			Berkhof,	331–43,	361–99
1962			Buswell,	2:70–133
7.			Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988–92			Williams,	1:353–80
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955			Ott,	175–79,	182–92,	211–19
2.			Roman	Catholic:	Post-Vatican	II
1980			McBrien,	1:417–23;	2:865–901
Other	Works
Bauckham,	Richard	J.	“Descent	into	Hell.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	194–95.
Berkouwer,	G.	C.	
The	Work	of	Christ.	
Trans.	by	Cornelius	Lambregtse.
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1965.
Brown,	John.	
The	Sufferings	and	Glories	of	the	Messiah.	
Evanston,	Ind.:
Sovereign	Grace	Publishers,	1959	(reprint	of	1852	edition).
Campbell,	John	McLeod.	
The	Nature	of	the	Atonement.	
6th	ed.	London
and	New	York:	Macmillan,	1886	(first	published	in	1856).
Elwell,	Walter.	“Atonement,	Extent	of	the.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	98–100.
Green,	Michael.	
The	Empty	Cross	of	Jesus.	
The	Jesus	Library,	ed.	by
Michael	Green.	Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,	1984.
Grensted,	L.	W.	
A	Short	History	of	the	Doctrine	of	the	Atonement.
Manchester:	University	Press,	and	London:	Longmans,	1962.
Hodge,	Archibald	A.	
The	Atonement.	
London:	T.	Nelson,	1868.
McDonald,	H.	D.	
The	Atonement	of	the	Death	of	Christ.	
Grand	Rapids:
Baker,	1985.
McGrath,	Alister	E.	
Luther’s	Theology	of	the	Cross:	Martin	Luther’s
Theological	Breakthrough.	
Oxford:	Basil	Blackwell,	1985.
_____.	
The	Mystery	of	the	Cross.	
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1988.
_____.	
What	Was	God	Doing	on	the	Cross?	
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,
1993.
Martin,	Hugh.	
The	Atonement:	In	Its	Relations	to	the	Covenant,	the
Priesthood,	the	Intercession	of	Our	Lord.	
Philadelphia:	Smith	and
English,	1871.
Morey,	Robert	A.	
Studies	in	the	Atonement.	
Southbridge,	Mass.:	Crowne,
1989.
Morris,	Leon.	
The	Apostolic	Preaching	of	the	Cross.	
3d	ed.	Grand
Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1965.
_____.	“Atonement.”	In	
EDT,	
p.	97.
_____.	
The	Atonement:	Its	Meaning	and	Significance.	
Leicester	and
Downers	Grove,	Ill:	InterVarsity	Press,	1983.
_____.	“Atonement,	Theories	of	the.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	100–102.
_____.	
The	Cross	in	the	New	Testament.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1965.
_____.	
The	Cross	of	Jesus.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	and	Exeter:
Paternoster,	1988.
Murray,	John.	
Redemption	Accomplished	and	Applied.	
Grand	Rapids:
Eerdmans,	1955,	pp.	9–78.
Owen,	John.	
The	Death	of	Death	in	the	Death	of	Christ.	
Carlisle,	Pa.:
Banner	of	Truth,	1959.
Smeaton,	George.	
The	Doctrine	of	the	Atonement	as	Taught	by	Christ
Himself.	
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1953	(reprint	of	1871	edition).
Smeaton,	George.	
The	Apostles’	Doctrine	of	the	Atonement.	
Grand
Rapids:	Zondervan,	1957	(reprint	of	1870	edition).
Stott,	John	R.	W.	
The	Cross	of	Christ.	
Leicester	and	Downers	Grove,	Ill.:
InterVarsity	Press,	1986.
Turretin,	Francis.	
The	Atonement	of	Christ.	
Trans.	by	James	R.	Willson.
Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1978	(reprint	of	1859	edition;	first	published	in
Latin	in	1674).
Wallace,	Ronald	S.	
The	Atoning	Death	of	Christ.	
Westchester,	Ill.:
Crossway,	1981.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
Romans	3:23–26:	
Since	all	have	sinned	and	fall	short	of	the	glory	of	God,
they	are	justified	by	his	grace	as	a	gift,	through	the	redemption	which	is	in
Christ	Jesus,	whom	God	put	forward	as	an	expiation	[lit.	‘propitiation’]	by
his	blood,	to	be	received	by	faith.	This	was	to	show	God’s	righteousness,
because	in	his	divine	forbearance	he	had	passed	over	former	sins;	it	was	to
prove	at	the	present	time	that	he	himself	is	righteous	and	that	he	justifies	him
who	has	faith	in	Jesus.
HYMN
“When	I	Survey	the	Wondrous	Cross”
When	I	survey	the	wondrous	cross
On	which	the	Prince	of	Glory	died,
My	richest	gain	I	count	but	loss,
And	pour	contempt	on	all	my	pride.
Forbid	it,	Lord,	that	I	should	boast,
Save	in	the	death	of	Christ	my	God:
All	the	vain	things	that	charm	me	most,
I	sacrifice	them	to	his	blood.
See,	from	his	head,	his	hands,	his	feet,
Sorrow	and	love	flow	mingled	down:
Did	e’er	such	love	and	sorrow	meet,
Or	thorns	compose	so	rich	a	crown?
His	dying	crimson,	like	a	robe,
Spread	o’er	his	body	on	the	tree;
Then	am	I	dead	to	all	the	globe,
And	all	the	globe	is	dead	to	me.
Were	the	whole	realm	of	nature	mine,
That	were	a	present	far	too	small;
Love	so	amazing,	so	divine,
Demands	my	soul,	my	life,	my	all.
AUTHOR:	ISAAC	WATTS,	1707
NOTES
1
Of	course,	there	are	also	saving	benefits	that	come	to	us	from	Christ’s	resurrection	and	ascension,	from	his	continuing	high
priestly	work	of	intercession	for	us,	and	from	his	second	coming.	These	are	discussed	as	separate	topics	in	subsequent	chapters	of
this	book.	For	the	sake	of	clarity,	I	have	here	included	under	the	title	“atonement”	only	those	things	that	Christ	did	for	our
salvation	during	his	earthly	life	and	in	his	death.
2
See	discussion	of	the	covenant	of	works	in	
chapter	25
.
3
Some	have	objected	that	this	“active”	and	“passive”	terminology	is	not	entirely	satisfactory,	because	even	in	paying	for	our	sins
Christ	was	in	one	sense	actively	accepting	the	suffering	given	him	by	the	Father	and	was	even	active	in	laying	down	his	own	life
(John	10:18).	Moreover,	both	aspects	of	Christ’s	obedience	continued	through	his	whole	life:	his	active	obedience	included
faithful	obedience	from	birth	up	to	and	including	the	point	of	his	death;	and	his	suffering	on	our	behalf,	which	found	its	climax	in
the	crucifixion,	continued	through	his	whole	life	(see	discussion	below).	Nevertheless,	the	distinction	between	active	and	passive
obedience	is	still	useful	because	it	helps	us	appreciate	the	two	aspects	of	Christ’s	work	for	us.	(See	the	discussion	in	John	Murray,
Redemption	Accomplished	and	Applied	
[Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1955],	pp.	20–24.)	R.	L.	Reymond	prefers	the	terms	
preceptive
(for	active)	and	
penal	
(for	passive),	in	his	article	“Obedience	of	Christ,”	
EDT,	
p.	785.
4
For	example,	I	could	find	no	discussion	of	the	active	obedience	of	Christ	in	the	seven-volume	
Systematic	Theology	
by	Lewis
Sperry	Chafer	(Dallas:	Dallas	Seminary	Press,	1947–48)	or	in	Millard	Erickson’s	
Christian	Theology,	
pp.	761–800.
5
In	Mark	1:13	the	present	participle	
peirazomenos,	
“being	tempted,”	modifies	the	imperfect	main	verb	of	the	clause	(
ēn,	
“was”),
indicating	that	Jesus	was	continually	being	tempted	throughout	the	forty	days	in	which	he	was	in	the	wilderness.
6
Although	Scripture	does	not	explicitly	say	that	Joseph	died	during	Jesus’	life,	we	hear	nothing	of	him	after	Jesus	is	twelve	years
old:	see	discussion	in	chapter	26,	p.	
689,	n.	7.
7
The	Greek	word	usually	translated	“hand”	(
cheir:	
Luke	24:39–40;	John	20:20)	can	sometimes	refer	to	the	arm	(BAGD,	p.	
880;
LSJ,	p.	
1983,	2).	A	nail	through	the	hands	would	not	have	been	able	to	support	the	weight	of	the	body,	for	the	hands	would	have
torn.
8
William	Edwards,	M.D.,	et	al.,	
JAMA	
vol.	255,	no.	11	(March	21,	1986),	p.	
1461.
9
See	Grudem,	
1	Peter,	
pp.	133–34,	for	a	detailed	answer	to	Deissmann’s	view	that	1	Peter	2:24	means	that	Christ	“carried	our	sins
up	to	the	cross”	but	did	not	himself	bear	the	guilt	for	our	sins	on	the	cross.	Influenced	by	Deissmann,	BAGD,	p.	
63,	3,	surprisingly
deny	that	the	verb	
anapherō,	
which	is	used	in	1	Peter	2:24	can	mean	“bear,”	but	Polybius	1.36.3	and	Thucydides	3.38.3	provide
extrabiblical	examples	of	that	meaning,	and	it	certainly	has	that	meaning	in	the	LXX	of	Isa.	53:4,	11,	12,	and	in	the	quotation	of
Isa.	53:12	in	Heb.	9:28;	cf.	LSJ,	p.	
125,	3.
10
See	
chapter	24
,	for	a	discussion	of	the	imputation	of	Adam’s	sin	to	us.
11
See	the	detailed	linguistic	argument	of	C.	H.	Dodd,	
The	Bible	and	the	Greeks	
(London:	Hodder	and	Stoughton,	1935),	pp.	82–
95.	Dodd	argues	that	the	idea	of	propitiation	was	common	in	pagan	religions	but	foreign	to	the	thought	of	Old	Testament	and	New
Testament	writers.
12
Leon	Morris,	“Propitiation,”	
EDT,	
p.	888	(includes	brief	bibliography).	Morris’s	own	work	has	represented	the	best	of
evangelical	scholarship	on	this	question:	see	his	
The	Apostolic	Preaching	of	the	Cross,	
3d	ed.	(London:	Tyndale	Press,	1965),	pp.
144–213.	See	also	the	discussion	of	the	wrath	of	God	in	
chapter	12
.
13
Under	the	influence	of	scholars	who	denied	that	the	idea	of	propitiation	was	in	the	New	Testament,	the	RSV	translated	
hilasmos
as	“expiation,”	a	word	that	means	“an	action	that	cleanses	from	sin”	but	includes	no	concept	of	appeasing	God’s	wrath.
14
See	the	discussion	of	anthropomorphic	language	in	Scripture	to	teach	us	about	God	in	
chapter	11
.
15
See	
chapter	56
,	on	eternal	punishment.
16
	Ludwig	Ott,	
Fundamentals	of	Catholic	Dogma,	
p.	408,	says,	“In	the	Sacrifice	of	the	Mass	and	in	the	Sacrifice	of	the	Cross	the
Sacrificial	Gift	and	the	Primary	Sacrificing	Priest	are	identical;	only	the	nature	and	the	mode	of	the	offering	are	different.	.	.	.
according	to	the	Thomistic	view,	
in	every	Mass	Christ	also	performs	an	actual	immediate	sacrificial	activity,	
which,	however,
must	not	be	conceived	as	a	totality	of	many	successive	acts	but	as	one	single	uninterrupted	sacrificial	act	of	the	Transfigured
Christ.	The	purpose	of	the	Sacrifice	is	the	same	in	the	Sacrifice	of	the	Mass	as	in	the	Sacrifice	of	the	Cross;	primarily	the
glorification	of	God,	secondarily	atonement,	thanksgiving	and	appeal.”
17
So	Leon	Morris,	
The	Apostolic	Preaching	of	the	Cross,	
pp.	112–26.
18
This	paragraph	has	been	taken	from	Wayne	Grudem,	
The	First	Epistle	of	Peter,	
p.	84.
19
The	Socinians	were	anti-trinitarian	since	they	denied	the	deity	of	Christ:	their	thought	led	to	modern	Unitarianism.
20
The	following	section	is	taken	from	Wayne	Grudem,	“He	Did	Not	Descend	Into	Hell:	A	Plea	for	Following	Scripture	Instead	of
the	Apostles’	Creed,”	
JETS	
vol.	34,	no.	1	(March,	1991),	pp.	103–13.
21
This	chart	is	taken	from	
The	Creeds	of	Christendom,	
2:52–55.
22
See	Schaff,	
Creeds,	
1,21,	n.	6;	see	also	46,	n.	2.	Schaff	notes	that	the	phrase	was	found	somewhat	earlier	(around	A.D.	360),	but
then	it	was	not	in	any	orthodox	creeds	or	any	versions	of	the	Apostles’	Creed	but	in	some	creeds	of	the	Arians—people	who
denied	the	full	deity	of	Christ,	holding	that	the	Son	was	created	by	the	Father	(see	Schaff,	
Creeds,	
2.46,	n.	2).	(Schaff	does	not
give	documentation	for	this	reference	to	Arian	creeds.)
It	should	be	noted	that	Schaff	throughout	his	
Creeds	of	Christendom	
has	several	editorial	comments	defending	an	actual	descent
of	Christ	into	hell	after	his	death	on	the	cross.	Thus,	for	example,	he	says	that	“Rufinus	himself,	however,	misunderstood	it	by
making	it	to	mean	the	same	as	buried”	(1.21,	n.	6)—thus	Schaff	assumes	that	to	understand	the	phrase	to	mean	“he	descended	into
the	grave”	is	to	
mis
understand	it	(see	also	2.46,	n.	2;	3.321,	n.	1).
23
John	Calvin,	
Institutes	of	the	Christian	Religion,	
1.515	(2.16.10).
24
Schaff,	
Creeds,	
3.321.
25
For	example,	Matt.	12:40,	which	says	that	Christ	will	be	three	days	and	nights	“in	the	heart	of	the	earth,”	simply	refers	to	the
fact	that	he	was	in	the	grave	between	his	death	and	resurrection	(cf.,	in	the	LXX,	Ps.	45[46]:2	with	Jonah	2:3).
26
1	Clem.	28:3	uses	
abyssos	
instead	of	the	Septuagint’s	
hadēs	
to	translate	Ps.	139:8,	“If	I	make	my	bed	in	Sheol,	thou	art	there!”
In	the	New	Testament,	the	term	is	used	only	in	Luke	8:31;	Rom.	10:7;	and	seven	times	in	Revelation	(there	it	refers	to	the
“bottomless	pit”).	Therefore,	although	the	term	can	refer	to	the	abode	of	condemned	demons	(as	in	Revelation),	this	is	not	its
common	sense	in	the	LXX	or	a	necessary	sense	in	its	New	Testament	usage.	The	primary	force	of	the	term	is	a	place	that	is	deep,
unfathomable	to	human	beings,	ordinarily	unable	to	be	reached	by	them.	(C.	E.	B.	Cranfield,	
A	Critical	and	Exegetical
Commentary	on	the	Epistle	to	the	Romans,	
2.525,	notes	that	
abyssos	
is	the	ordinary	LXX	translation	for	Hebrew	
tehōm,	
and	that
tehōm	
is	used	in	the	Mishnah	[Pesahim	7:7;	Nazir	9:2]	to	refer	to	a	grave	that	had	been	unknown.)
27
Referring	to	Eph.	4:9,	H.	Bietenhard	says,	“In	modern	exposition	the	reference	of	this	passage	to	the	
descensus	ad	inferos	
(“he
descended	into	hell”	in	the	Apostles’	Creed)	is	almost	without	exception	rejected”	(
NIDNTT,	
2:210).
28
For	an	extensive	discussion	of	Jewish	interpretations	of	the	sin	of	the	“sons	of	God”	in	Gen.	6:2,	4,	and	of	the	identity	of	those
who	sinned	while	the	ark	was	being	built,	see	“Christ	Preaching	Through	Noah:	1	Peter	3:19–20	in	the	Light	of	Dominant	Themes
in	Jewish	Literature,”	in	Wayne	Grudem,	
The	First	Epistle	of	Peter,	
pp.	203–39.	(This	appendix	has	a	lengthy	discussion	of	1
Peter	3:19–20,	which	I	have	only	briefly	summarized	here.)
29
This	section	is	a	brief	summary	of	a	more	extensive	discussion	of	this	passage	in	Wayne	Grudem,	
The	First	Epistle	of	Peter,	
pp.
157–62	and	203–39.
30
My	student	Tet-Lim	Yee	has	called	my	attention	to	another	very	similar	expression	elsewhere	in	Scripture:	Naomi	speaks	of
how	kindly	Ruth	and	Orpah	“have	dealt	with	the	dead”	(Ruth	1:8),	referring	to	their	treatment	of	their	husbands	while	the
husbands	were	still	alive.
31
Further	support	for	this	idea	is	found	in	the	fact	that	though	the	word	
paradeisos,	
“paradise,”	could	simply	mean	“pleasant
garden”	(esp.	used	in	the	LXX	of	the	Garden	of	Eden),	it	also	frequently	meant	“heaven”	or	“a	place	of	blessedness	in	the
presence	of	God”:	see	Isa.	51:3;	Ezek.	28:13;	31:8–9;	T.	Levi	18:10;	1	Enoch	20:7;	32:3;	Sib.	Or.	3:48.	This	was	increasingly	the
sense	of	the	term	in	intertestamental	Jewish	literature	(for	several	more	references	see	Joachim	Jeremias,	
paradeisos,	TDNT	
5
[1967],	pp.	765–73,	esp.	767,	nn.	16–23).
32
John	20:17	(“Do	not	hold	me,	for	I	have	not	yet	ascended	to	the	Father”)	is	best	understood	to	mean	that	Jesus	in	his	new
resurrected	state,	with	a	resurrection	body,	had	not	yet	ascended	back	to	heaven;	therefore,	Mary	should	not	try	to	hold	on	to
Jesus’	body.	The	perfect	tense	of	
anabebēka,	
“ascended,”	gives	the	sense,	“I	have	not	yet	ascended	and	remained	in	the	place
where	I	ascended”	or	“I	am	not	yet	in	the	ascended	state”	(the	latter	phrase	is	from	D.	A.	Carson,	
The	Gospel	According	to	John
[Leicester:	Inter-Varsity	Press,	and	Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1991],	p.	
644).
33
Randall	E.	Otto	adopts	a	similar	recommendation:	“To	include	such	a	mysterious	article	in	the	creed,	which	is	supposed	to	be	a
summary	of	the	basic	and	vital	tenets	of	the	faith,	seems	very	unwise”	(“
Descendit	in	Inferna:	
A	Reformed	Review	of	a	Doctrinal
Conundrum,”	
WTJ	
52	[1990],	p.	
150).
34
I	am	not	aware	of	any	Arminians	who	hold	what	I	have	called	the	“Reformed	view,”	the	view	that	is	commonly	called
“particular	redemption”	or	“limited	atonement.”	But	it	does	not	seem	logically	impossible	for	someone	to	hold	a	traditional
Arminian	position	(that	God	foreknew	who	would	believe	and	predestined	them	on	the	basis	of	that	foreknowledge)	coupled	with
the	belief	that	Christ’s	death	actually	paid	the	penalty	for	the	sins	of	those	who	God	knew	would	believe	and	not	for	any	others.
This	is	just	to	say	that,	while	“limited	atonement”	is	necessarily	part	of	a	Reformed	viewpoint	because	it	logically	follows	from
the	overall	sovereignty	of	God	in	the	entire	work	of	redemption,	one	could	(in	theory	at	least)	hold	to	“limited	atonement”	and	not
adopt	a	Reformed	position	on	other	points	concerning	God’s	sovereignty	in	life	generally	or	in	salvation	in	particular.
35
Thus,	it	is	the	“L”	in	the	acronym	“TULIP,”	which	represents	the	so-called	“five	points	of	Calvinism,”	five	doctrinal	positions
that	distinguish	Calvinists	or	Reformed	theologians	from	many	other	Protestants.	The	five	points	represented	by	the	word	are:
Total	depravity,	Unconditional	election,	Limited	atonement,	Irresistible	grace,	and	Perseverance	of	the	saints.	(This	book
advocates	these	five	doctrinal	points,	but	it	attempts	in	each	case	to	point	out	the	arguments	in	favor	of	an	opposing	position	and
to	provide	an	appropriate	bibliography	representing	both	views;	for	the	individual	points	see	the	following	chapters:	
24	[T]
,	
32
[U]
,	
27	[L]
,	
34	[I]
,	and	
40	[P]
.)
36
Reformed	people	argue	that	it	is	the	other	view	that	really	limits	the	power	of	the	atonement	because	on	that	view	the	atonement
does	not	actually	guarantee	salvation	for	God’s	people	but	only	makes	salvation	possible	for	all	people.	In	other	words,	if	the
atonement	is	not	limited	with	respect	to	the	number	of	people	to	which	it	applies,	then	it	must	be	limited	with	respect	to	what	it
actually	accomplishes.
37
Compare	a	similar	sense	for	the	phrase	“for	sins”	(Gk.	
peri	harmartiōn
)	in	Heb.	10:26	where	the	author	says	that	if	someone
continues	on	sinning	deliberately	after	receiving	the	knowledge	of	the	truth	“there	no	longer	remains	a	sacrifice	for	sins.”	This
does	not	mean	that	Christ’s	sacrifice	no	longer	exists,	but	it	is	no	longer	available	for	that	person	who	has	willfully	spurned	it	and
put	himself	beyond	the	realm	of	willing	repentance.	Here	“sacrifice	for	sins”	means	“a	sacrifice	available	to	be	claimed	for	the
payment	of	sins.”	In	the	same	way	1	John	2:2	can	mean	“the	propitiation	
available	for	
the	sins	of	the	whole	world	[esp.	with
reference	to	Gentiles	as	well	as	Jews].”
38
When	Paul	says	that	God	“is	the	Savior	of	all	men,	especially	of	those	who	believe”	(1	Tim.	4:10),	he	is	referring	to	God	the
Father,	not	to	Christ,	and	probably	uses	the	word	“Savior”	in	the	sense	of	“one	who	preserves	people’s	lives	and	rescues	them
from	danger”	rather	than	the	sense	of	“one	who	forgives	their	sins,”	for	surely	Paul	does	not	mean	that	every	single	person	will	be
saved.	However,	another	possible	meaning	is	that	God	“is	the	Savior	of	all	sorts	of	people—that	is,	of	people	who	believe”	(for	a
defense	of	this	view	see	George	W.	Knight	III,	
The	Pastoral	Epistles,	
pp.	203–4).
39
Another	possible	interpretation	of	these	two	passages	is	that	“destroy”	means	ruin	the	ministry	or	Christian	growth	of	someone
who	will	nonetheless	remain	a	believer	but	whose	principles	will	be	compromised.	That	sense	would	certainly	fit	the	context	well
in	both	cases,	but	one	argument	against	it	is	that	the	Greek	word	
apollymi,	
“destroy,”	which	is	used	in	both	cases,	seems	a	stronger
word	than	would	be	appropriate	if	that	were	Paul’s	intention.	The	same	word	is	used	often	of	eternal	destruction	(see	John	3:16;
Rom.	2:12;	1	Cor.	1:18;	15:18;	2	Cor.	2:15;	4:3;	2	Peter	3:9).	However,	the	context	of	1	Cor.	8:11	may	indicate	a	different	sense
than	these	other	passages,	for	this	verse	does	not	talk	about	God	“destroying”	someone	but	about	other	human	beings	doing
something	to	“destroy”	another—which	suggests	a	weaker	sense	for	the	term	here.
40
Though	the	Septuagint	does	not	use	Peter’s	term	
agorazō	
but	rather	
kataomai,	
the	words	are	synonymous	in	many	cases,	and
both	can	mean	“buy,	purchase”;	the	Hebrew	term	in	Deut.	32:6	is	
qānāh,	
which	frequently	means	“purchase,	buy”	in	the	Old
Testament.
41
This	is	the	view	taken	by	John	Gill,	
The	Cause	of	God	and	Truth	
(Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1980;	repr.	of	1855	ed.;	first	published
1735),	p.	
61.	Gill	discusses	other	possible	interpretations	of	the	passage,	but	this	seems	most	persuasive.	We	should	realize	that	in
both	of	his	epistles,	Peter	very	frequently	portrays	the	churches	to	which	he	is	writing	in	terms	of	the	rich	imagery	of	the	people	of
God	in	the	Old	Testament:	see	W.	Grudem,	
The	First	Epistle	of	Peter,	
p.	113.
42
The	Greek	word	
despotēs,	
“Master,”	is	elsewhere	used	of	God	in	contexts	that	emphasize	his	role	as	Creator	and	Ruler	of	the
world	(Acts	4:24;	Rev.	6:10).
43
Berkhof	says,	“The	question	does	relate	to	the	design	of	the	atonement.	Did	the	Father	in	sending	Christ,	and	did	Christ	in
coming	into	the	world,	to	make	atonement	for	sin,	do	this	with	the	design	or	for	the	purpose	of	saving	only	the	elect	or	all	men?
That	is	the	question,	and	that	only	is	the	question”	(
Systematic	Theology,	
p.	394).
44
Berkhof	says	that	1	Tim.	2:2	refers	to	“the	revealed	will	of	God	that	both	Jews	and	Gentiles	should	be	saved”	(ibid.,	p.	
396).
45
I	am	not	here	arguing	that	we	should	be	careless	in	our	language;	I	am	arguing	that	we	should	not	rush	to	criticize	when	other
Christians	unreflectively	use	ambiguous	language	without	intending	to	contradict	any	teaching	of	Scripture.
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	28
Resurrection	and	Ascension
What	was	Christ’s	resurrection	body	like?	What	is	its	significance
for	us?	What	happened	to	Christ	when	he	ascended	into	heaven?
What	is	meant	by	the	states	of	Jesus	Christ?
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
A.	Resurrection
1.
	New	Testament	Evidence.
	The	Gospels	contain	abundant	testimony	to	the
resurrection	of	Christ	(see	Matt.	28:1–20;	Mark	16:1–8;	Luke	24:1–53;	John
20:1–21:25).	In	addition	to	these	detailed	narratives	in	the	four	gospels,	the
book	of	Acts	is	a	story	of	the	apostles’	proclamation	of	the	resurrection	of
Christ	and	of	continued	prayer	to	Christ	and	trust	in	him	as	the	one	who	is
alive	and	reigning	in	heaven.	The	Epistles	depend	entirely	on	the	assumption
that	Jesus	is	a	living,	reigning	Savior	who	is	now	the	exalted	head	of	the
church,	who	is	to	be	trusted,	worshiped,	and	adored,	and	who	will	some	day
return	in	power	and	great	glory	to	reign	as	King	over	the	earth.	The	book	of
Revelation	repeatedly	shows	the	risen	Christ	reigning	in	heaven	and	predicts
his	return	to	conquer	his	enemies	and	reign	in	glory.	Thus	the	entire	New
Testament	bears	witness	to	the	resurrection	of	Christ.
1
2.	The	Nature	of	Christ’s	Resurrection.
	Christ’s	resurrection	was	not
simply	a	coming	back	from	the	dead,	as	had	been	experienced	by	others
before,	such	as	Lazarus	(John	11:1–44),	for	then	Jesus	would	have	been
subject	to	weakness	and	aging	and	eventually	would	have	died	again	just	as
all	other	human	beings	die.	Rather,	when	he	rose	from	the	dead	Jesus	was	the
“first	fruits”
2
	(1	Cor.	15:20,	23)	of	a	new	kind	of	human	life,	a	life	in	which
his	body	was	made	perfect,	no	longer	subject	to	weakness,	aging,	or	death,
but	able	to	live	eternally.
It	is	true	that	two	of	Jesus’	disciples	did	not	recognize	him	when	they	walked
with	him	on	the	road	to	Emmaus	(Luke	24:13–32),	but	Luke	specifically	tells
us	that	this	was	because	“their	eyes	were	kept	from	recognizing	him”	(Luke
24:16),	and	later	“their	eyes	were	opened	and	they	recognized	him”	(Luke
24:31).	Mary	Magdalene	failed	to	recognize	Jesus	only	for	a	moment	(John
20:14–16),	but	it	may	have	been	still	quite	dark	and	she	was	not	at	first
looking	at	him—she	had	come	the	first	time	“while	it	was	still	dark”	(John
20:1),	and	she	“turned”	to	speak	to	Jesus	once	she	recognized	him	(John
20:16).
On	other	occasions	the	disciples	seemed	to	have	recognized	Jesus	fairly
quickly	(Matt.	28:9,	17;	John	20:19–20,	26–28;	21:7,	12).	When	Jesus
appeared	to	the	eleven	disciples	in	Jerusalem,	they	were	initially	startled	and
frightened	(Luke	24:33,	37),	yet	when	they	saw	Jesus’	hands	and	his	feet	and
watched	him	eat	a	piece	of	fish,	they	were	convinced	that	he	had	risen	from
the	dead.	These	examples	indicate	that	there	was	a	considerable	degree	of
continuity	between	the	physical	appearance	of	Jesus	before	his	death	and	after
his	resurrection.	Yet	Jesus	did	not	look	exactly	as	he	had	before	he	died,	for	in
addition	to	the	initial	amazement	of	the	disciples	at	what	they	apparently
thought	could	not	happen,	there	was	probably	sufficient	difference	in	his
physical	appearance	for	Jesus	not	to	be	immediately	recognized.	Perhaps	that
difference	in	appearance	was	simply	the	difference	between	a	man	who	had
lived	a	life	of	suffering,	hardship,	and	grief,	and	one	whose	body	was	restored
to	its	full	youthful	appearance	of	perfect	health:	though	Jesus’	body	was	still	a
physical	body,	it	was	raised	as	a	transformed	body,	never	able	again	to	suffer,
be	weak	or	ill,	or	die;	it	had	“put	on	immortality”	(1	Cor.	15:53).	Paul	says	the
resurrection	body	is	raised	“imperishable	.	.	.	in	glory	.	.	.	in	power	.	.	.	a
spiritual	body”	(1	Cor.	15:42–44).
3
The	fact	that	Jesus	had	a	physical	body	that	could	be	touched	and	handled
after	the	resurrection	is	seen	in	that	the	disciples	“took	hold	of	his	feet”	(Matt.
28:9),	that	he	appeared	to	the	disciples	on	the	road	to	Emmaus	to	be	just
another	traveler	on	the	road	(Luke	24:15–18,	28–29),	that	he	took	bread	and
broke	it	(Luke	24:30),	that	he	ate	a	piece	of	broiled	fish	to	demonstrate	clearly
that	he	had	a	physical	body	and	was	not	just	a	spirit,	that	Mary	thought	him	to
be	a	gardener	(John	20:15),	that	“he	showed	them	his	hands	and	his	side”
(John	20:20),	that	he	invited	Thomas	to	touch	his	hands	and	his	side	(John
20:27),	that	he	prepared	breakfast	for	his	disciples	(John	21:12–13),	and	that
he	explicitly	told	them,	“See	my	hands	and	my	feet,	that	it	is	I	myself;	handle
me,	and	see;	for	
a	spirit	has	not	flesh	and	bones	as	you	see	that	I	have”	
(Luke
24:39).	Peter	said	that	the	disciples	“ate	and	drank	with	him	after	he	rose	from
the	dead”	(Acts	10:41).
It	is	true	that	Jesus	apparently	was	able	to	appear	and	disappear	out	of	sight
quite	suddenly	(Luke	24:31,	36;	John	20:19,	26).	Yet	we	should	be	careful	not
to	draw	too	many	conclusions	from	this	fact,	for	not	all	the	passages	affirm
that	Jesus	could	suddenly	appear	or	disappear;	some	just	say	that	Jesus	came
and	stood	among	the	disciples.	When	Jesus	suddenly	vanished	from	the	sight
of	the	disciples	in	Emmaus,	this	may	have	been	a	special	miraculous
occurrence,	such	as	happened	when	“the	Spirit	of	the	Lord	caught	up	Philip;
and	the	eunuch	saw	him	no	more”	(Acts	8:39).	Nor	should	we	make	too	much
of	the	fact	that	Jesus	came	and	stood	among	the	disciples	on	two	occasions
when	the	doors	were	“shut”
4
	(John	20:19,	26),	for	no	text	says	that	Jesus
“passed	through	walls”	or	anything	like	that.	Indeed,	on	another	occasion	in
the	New	Testament	where	someone	needed	to	pass	through	a	locked	door,	the
door	miraculously	opened	(see	Acts	12:10).
5
Murray	Harris	has	recently	proposed	an	alternative	interpretation	to	the	verses
quoted	above,	especially	the	verses	showing	Jesus	appearing	and	disappearing
at	different	times:	he	says	that	these	verses	show	that	while	Jesus	could
sometimes	materialize	into	a	physical	body,	his	customary	existence	was	in	a
nonphysical	or	nonfleshly	form	of	his	“spiritual	body.”	Moreover,	when	he
ascended	into	heaven	after	forty	days,	Jesus	permanently	gave	up	any	more
materializing	into	a	physical	body.	Professor	Harris	says:
The	resurrection	of	Jesus	was	not	his	transformation	into	an
immaterial	body	but	his	acquisition	of	a	“spiritual	body”	which	could
materialize	or	dematerialize	at	will.	When,	on	occasion,	Jesus	chose
to	appear	to	various	persons	in	material	form,	this	was	just	as	really
the	“spiritual	body”	of	Jesus	as	when	he	was	not	visible	or
tangible.	.	.	.	After	the	forty	days,	when	his	appearances	on	earth	were
ended,	Jesus	assumed	the	sole	mode	of	being	visible	to	the	inhabitants
of	heaven	but	having	a	nonfleshly	body.	.	.	.	In	his	risen	state	he
transcended	the	normal	laws	of	physical	existence.	He	was	no	longer
bound	by	material	or	spatial	limitations.
6
It	is	important	to	realize	that	Harris	definitely	affirms	the	physical,	bodily
resurrection	of	Jesus	from	the	dead.
7
	He	says	that	the	same	body	that	died	was
also	raised,	but	then	it	was	transformed	into	a	“spiritual	body”	with	new
properties.
8
In	response,	while	I	do	not	consider	this	a	doctrinal	question	of	major
significance	(since	it	is	simply	a	question	about	the	nature	of	the	resurrection
body,	about	which	we	now	know	very	little),
9
	I	nevertheless	think	the	New
Testament	provides	some	persuasive	evidence	that	would	lead	us	to	differ
with	Harris’s	view.	Harris	agrees	that	at	several	times	Jesus	had	a	physical
body	that	could	eat	food	and	be	touched	and	that	had	flesh	and	bones.	He
even	agrees	that	at	Jesus’	ascension	into	heaven,	“It	was	a	real	Jesus	of	‘flesh
and	bones’	(Luke	24:39)	who	was	taken	up	before	the	eyes	of	his	disciples.”
10
The	only	question	is	whether	this	body	of	Jesus	at	other	times	existed	in
nonphysical,	nonfleshly	form,	as	Harris	claims.	To	answer	that,	we	have	to
ask	whether	the	New	Testament	texts	about	Jesus	appearing	and	disappearing
require	this	conclusion.	It	does	not	seem	that	they	do.
Luke	24:31,	which	says	that	after	Jesus	broke	bread	and	gave	it	to	the	two
disciples,	“he	
disappeared	
from	their	sight”	(NIV),	does	not	require	this.	The
Greek	expression	used	here	for	“disappeared”	(
aphantos	egeneto
)	does	not
occur	elsewhere	in	the	New	Testament,	but	when	found	in	Diodorus	Siculus
(a	historian	who	wrote	from	60–30	B.C.),	it	is	used	once	of	a	man	named
Amphiaraus	who,	with	his	chariot,	fell	into	a	chasm	and	“disappeared	from
sight,”	and	the	same	expression	is	used	in	another	place	to	talk	about	Atlas
who	was	blown	off	a	mountaintop	by	high	winds	and	“disappeared.”
11
	In
neither	case	does	the	expression	mean	that	the	person	became	immaterial	or
even	invisible,	but	only	that	he	was	moved	to	a	place	hidden	from	people’s
sight.
12
	So	in	Luke	24:31,	all	we	can	conclude	is	that	the	disciples	no	longer
saw	Jesus—perhaps	the	Spirit	of	the	Lord	took	him	away	(as	with	Philip	in
Acts	8:39),	or	perhaps	he	was	just	hidden	again	from	their	sight	(as	with
Moses	and	Elijah	on	the	Mount	of	Transfiguration,	Matt.	17:8,	or	as	with	the
heavenly	army	around	Elisha,	2	Kings	6:17,	or	[apparently]	as	with	the
disciples	walking	past	the	prison	guards	in	Acts	5:19–23;	12:6,	10).	In	neither
case	do	we	need	to	conclude	that	Jesus’	physical	body	became	nonphysical,
any	more	than	we	need	to	conclude	that	the	disciples’	bodies	became
nonphysical	when	they	walked	past	the	guards	(Acts	5:23;	12:10)	and	escaped
from	prison.	So	Luke	24:31	does	not	say	that	any	transformation	happened	to
Jesus’	body;	it	merely	says	that	the	disciples	could	no	longer	see	him.
13
As	for	the	claim	that	Jesus	passed	through	material	substances,	this	is	not
substantiated	in	the	New	Testament.	As	explained	above,	the	fact	that	Jesus
appeared	in	a	room	when	the	doors	had	been	shut	or	locked	(John	20:19,	26)
may	or	may	not	mean	that	he	passed	through	a	door	or	wall.	Especially
relevant	here	is	the	first	deliverance	of	the	apostles	from	prison:	they	did	not
walk	through	the	doors,	but	“an	angel	of	the	Lord	opened	the	prison	doors	and
brought	them	out”	(Acts	5:19);	yet	the	next	morning	the	prison	officers
reported,	“We	found	the	prison	securely	locked	and	the	sentries	standing	at
the	doors,	but	when	we	opened	it	we	found	no	one	inside”	(Acts	5:23).	The
angel	had	opened	the	doors,	the	apostles	had	passed	through,	and	the	angel
had	closed	and	locked	the	doors	again.	Similarly,	when	Peter	was	rescued
from	prison,	he	did	not	dematerialize	in	order	to	pass	through	the	locked
chains	around	him,	but	“the	chains	fell	off	his	hands”	(Acts	12:7).
14
	In	the
same	way,	it	is	certainly	possible	that	the	door	miraculously	opened	for	Jesus
or	even	that	he	had	entered	the	room	with	the	disciples	but	was	temporarily
hidden	from	their	eyes.
With	regard	to	the	nature	of	Jesus’	resurrection	body,	much	more	decisive
than	the	texts	about	Jesus’	appearing	and	disappearing	are	the	texts	that	show
that	Jesus	clearly	had	a	physical	body	with	“flesh	and	bones”	(Luke	24:39),
which	could	eat	and	drink,	break	bread,	prepare	breakfast,	and	be	touched.
Unlike	the	texts	on	Jesus’	appearing	and	disappearing,	these	texts	are	not
capable	of	an	alternative	explanation	that	denies	Jesus’	physical	body—Harris
himself	agrees	that	in	these	texts	Jesus	had	a	body	of	flesh	and	bones.	But
what	were	these	physical	appearances	intended	to	teach	the	disciples	if	not
that	Jesus’	resurrection	body	was	definitely	a	physical	body?	If	Jesus	rose
from	the	dead	in	the	same	physical	body	that	had	died,	and	if	he	repeatedly
appeared	to	the	disciples	in	that	physical	body,	eating	and	drinking	with	them
(Acts	10:41)	over	forty	days,	and	if	he	ascended	into	heaven	in	that	same
physical	body	(Acts	1:9),	and	if	the	angel	immediately	told	the	disciples	that
“this	Jesus,	who	was	taken	up	from	you	into	heaven,	will	come	in	the	same
way	as	you	saw	him	go	into	heaven”	(Acts	1:11),	then	Jesus	was	clearly
teaching	them	that	his	resurrection	body	was	
a	physical	body.	
If	the
“customary	form”	of	his	resurrection	body	was	nonphysical,	then	in	these
repeated	physical	appearances	Jesus	would	be	guilty	of	misleading	the
disciples	(and	all	subsequent	readers	of	the	New	Testament)	into	thinking	that
his	resurrection	body	remained	physical	when	it	did	not.	If	he	was
customarily	nonphysical	and	was	going	to	become	nonphysical	forever	at	the
ascension,	then	it	would	be	very	misleading	for	Jesus	to	say,	“See	my	hands
and	my	feet,	that	it	is	I	myself;	handle	me,	and	see;	for	a	spirit	has	not	flesh
and	bones	as	you	see	that	I	have”	(Luke	24:39).	He	did	not	say,	“.	.	.	flesh	and
bones,	as	you	see	that	I	temporarily	have”!	It	would	have	been	wrong	to	teach
the	disciples	that	he	had	a	physical	body	when	in	his	customary	mode	of
existence	he	really	did	not.
If	Jesus	had	wanted	to	teach	them	that	he	could	materialize	and	dematerialize
at	will	(as	Harris	argues),	then	he	could	easily	have	dematerialized	before
their	eyes,	so	that	they	could	clearly	record	this	event.	Or	he	could	easily	have
passed	through	a	wall	while	they	watched,	rather	than	just	suddenly	standing
among	them.	In	short,	if	Jesus	and	the	New	Testament	authors	had	wanted	to
teach	us	that	the	resurrection	body	was	customarily	and	essentially
nonmaterial,	they	could	have	done	so,	but	instead	they	gave	many	clear
indications	that	it	was	customarily	physical	and	material,	even	though	it	was	a
body	that	was	perfected,	made	forever	free	from	weakness,	sickness,	and
death.
Finally,	there	is	a	larger	doctrinal	consideration.	The	physical	resurrection	of
Jesus,	and	his	eternal	possession	of	a	physical	resurrection	body,	give	clear
affirmation	of	the	goodness	of	the	material	creation	that	God	originally	made:
“And	God	saw	everything	that	he	had	made,	and	behold,	
it	was	very	good”
(Gen.	1:31).	We	as	resurrected	men	and	women	will	live	forever	in	“new
heavens	and	a	new	earth	in	which	righteousness	dwells”	(2	Peter	3:13).	We
will	live	in	a	renewed	earth	that	“will	be	set	free	from	its	bondage	to	decay”
(Rom.	8:21)	and	become	like	a	new	Garden	of	Eden.	There	will	be	a	new
Jerusalem,	and	people	“shall	bring	into	it	the	glory	and	the	honor	of	the
nations”	(Rev.	21:26),	and	there	will	be	“the	river	of	the	water	of	life,	bright
as	crystal,	flowing	from	the	throne	of	God	and	of	the	Lamb	through	the
middle	of	the	street	of	the	city;	also,	on	either	side	of	the	river,	the	tree	of	life
with	its	twelve	kinds	of	fruit,	yielding	its	fruit	each	month”	(Rev.	22:1–2).	In
this	very	material,	physical,	renewed	universe,	it	seems	that	we	will	need	to
live	as	human	beings	with	physical	bodies,	suitable	for	life	in	God’s	renewed
physical	creation.	Specifically,	Jesus’	physical	resurrection	body	affirms	the
goodness	of	God’s	original	creation	of	man	not	as	a	mere	spirit	like	the
angels,	but	as	a	creature	with	a	physical	body	that	was	“very	good.”	We	must
not	fall	into	the	error	of	thinking	that	nonmaterial	existence	is	somehow	a
better	form	of	existence	for	creatures:
15
	when	God	made	us	as	the	pinnacle	of
his	creation,	he	gave	us	physical	bodies.	In	a	perfected	physical	body	Jesus
rose	from	the	dead,	now	reigns	in	heaven,	and	will	return	to	take	us	to	be	with
himself	forever.
3.	Both	the	Father	and	the	Son	Participated	in	the	Resurrection.
	Some
texts	affirm	that	God	the	Father	specifically	raised	Christ	from	the	dead	(Acts
2:24;	Rom.	6:4;	1	Cor.	6:14;	Gal.	1:1;	Eph.	1:20),	but	other	texts	speak	of
Jesus	as	participating	in	his	own	resurrection.	Jesus	says:	“The	reason	my
Father	loves	me	is	that	I	lay	down	my	life—only	to	take	it	up	again.	No	one
takes	it	from	me,	but	I	lay	it	down	of	my	own	accord.	I	have	authority	to	lay	it
down	and	authority	to	take	it	up	again.	This	command	I	received	from	my
Father”	(John	10:17–18	NIV;	cf.	2:19–21).	It	is	best	to	conclude	that	both	the
Father	and	the	Son	were	involved	in	the	resurrection.
16
	Indeed,	Jesus	says,	“I
am	the	resurrection	and	the	life”	(John	11:25;	cf.	Heb.	7:16).
17
4.	Doctrinal	Significance	of	the	Resurrection.
a.	Christ’s	Resurrection	Insures	Our	Regeneration:
	Peter	says	that	“we
have	been	born	anew	to	a	living	hope	through	the	resurrection	of	Jesus	Christ
from	the	dead”	(1	Peter	1:3).	Here	he	explicitly	connects	Jesus’	resurrection
with	our	regeneration	or	new	birth.	When	Jesus	rose	from	the	dead	he	had	a
new	quality	of	life,	a	“resurrection	life”	in	a	human	body	and	human	spirit
that	were	perfectly	suited	for	fellowship	and	obedience	to	God	forever.	In	his
resurrection,	Jesus	earned	for	us	a	new	life	just	like	his.	We	do	not	receive	all
of	that	new	“resurrection	life”	when	we	become	Christians,	for	our	bodies
remain	as	they	were,	still	subject	to	weakness,	aging,	and	death.	But	in	our
spirits	we	are	made	alive	with	new	resurrection	power.
18
	Thus	it	is	through	his
resurrection	that	Christ	earned	for	us	the	new	kind	of	life	we	receive	when	we
are	“born	again.”	This	is	why	Paul	can	say	that	God	“made	us	alive	together
with	Christ	(by	grace	you	have	been	saved),	and	
raised	us	up	with	him”	
(Eph.
2:5–6;	cf.	Col.	3:1).	When	God	raised	Christ	from	the	dead	he	thought	of	us
as	somehow	being	raised	“with	Christ”	and	therefore	deserving	of	the	merits
of	Christ’s	resurrection.	Paul	says	his	goal	in	life	is	“that	I	may	know	him	and
the	power	of	his	resurrection	.	.	.”	(Phil.	3:10).	Paul	knew	that	even	in	this	life
the	resurrection	of	Christ	gave	new	power	for	Christian	ministry	and
obedience	to	God.
Paul	connects	the	resurrection	of	Christ	with	the	spiritual	power	at	work
within	us	when	he	tells	the	Ephesians	that	he	is	praying	that	they	would	know
“what	is	the	immeasurable	greatness	of	his	power	in	us	who	believe,
according	to	the	working	of	his	great	might	which	he	accomplished	in	Christ
when	he	raised	him	from	the	dead	and	made	him	sit	at	his	right	hand	in	the
heavenly	places”	(Eph.	1:19–20).	Here	Paul	says	that	the	power	by	which
God	raised	Christ	from	the	dead	is	the	same	power	at	work	within	us.	Paul
further	sees	us	as	raised	in	Christ	when	he	says,	“We	were	buried	therefore
with	him	by	baptism	into	death,	so	that	as	Christ	was	raised	from	the	dead	by
the	glory	of	the	Father,	we	too	might	walk	in	newness	of	life.	.	.	.	So	you	also
must	consider	yourselves	dead	to	sin	and	alive	to	God	in	Christ	Jesus”	(Rom.
6:4,	11).	This	new	resurrection	power	in	us	includes	
power	to	gain	more	and
more	victory	over	remaining	sin	
in	our	lives—“sin	will	have	no	dominion
over	you”	(Rom.	6:14;	cf.	1	Cor.	15:17)—even	though	we	will	never	be
perfect	in	this	life.	This	resurrection	power	also	includes	
power	for	ministry	in
the	work	of	the	kingdom.	
It	was	after	Jesus’	resurrection	that	he	promised	his
disciples,	“You	shall	receive	power	when	the	Holy	Spirit	has	come	upon	you;
and	you	shall	be	my	witnesses	in	Jerusalem	and	in	all	Judea	and	Samaria	and
to	the	end	of	the	earth”	(Acts	1:8).	This	new,	intensified	power	for
proclaiming	the	gospel	and	working	miracles	and	triumphing	over	the
opposition	of	the	enemy	was	given	to	the	disciples	after	Christ’s	resurrection
from	the	dead	and	was	part	of	the	new	resurrection	power	that	characterized
their	Christian	lives.
b.	Christ’s	Resurrection	Insures	Our	Justification:
	In	only	one	passage
does	Paul	explicitly	connect	Christ’s	resurrection	with	our	justification	(or	our
receiving	a	declaration	that	we	are	not	guilty	but	righteous	before	God).
19
Paul	says	that	Jesus	“was	put	to	death	for	our	trespasses	and	
raised	for	our
justification”	
(Rom.	4:25).	When	Christ	was	raised	from	the	dead,	it	was
God’s	declaration	of	approval	of	Christ’s	work	of	redemption.	Because	Christ
“humbled	himself	and	became	obedient	unto	death,	even	death	on	a	cross”
(Phil.	2:8),	“God	has	highly	exalted	him	.	.	.”	(Phil.	2:9).	By	raising	Christ
from	the	dead,	God	the	Father	was	in	effect	saying	that	he	approved	of
Christ’s	work	of	suffering	and	dying	for	our	sins,	that	his	work	was
completed,	and	that	Christ	no	longer	had	any	need	to	remain	dead.	There	was
no	penalty	left	to	pay	for	sin,	no	more	wrath	of	God	to	bear,	no	more	guilt	or
liability	to	punishment—all	had	been	completely	paid	for,	and	no	guilt
remained.	In	the	resurrection,	God	was	saying	to	Christ,	“I	approve	of	what
you	have	done,	and	you	find	favor	in	my	sight.”
This	explains	how	Paul	can	say	that	Christ	was	“raised	for	our	justification”
(Rom.	4:25).	If	God	“raised	us	up	with	him”	(Eph.	2:6),	then,	by	virtue	of	our
union	with	Christ,	God’s	declaration	of	approval	of	Christ	is	also	his
declaration	of	approval	of	us.	When	the	Father	in	essence	said	to	Christ,	“All
the	penalty	for	sins	has	been	paid	and	I	find	you	not	guilty	but	righteous	in
my	sight,”	he	was	thereby	making	the	declaration	that	would	also	apply	to	us
once	we	trusted	in	Christ	for	salvation.	In	this	way	Christ’s	resurrection	also
gave	final	proof	that	he	had	earned	our	justification.
c.	Christ’s	Resurrection	Insures	That	We	Will	Receive	Perfect
Resurrection	Bodies	As	Well:
	The	New	Testament	several	times	connects
Jesus’	resurrection	with	our	final	bodily	resurrection.	“And	God	raised	the
Lord	and	will	also	raise	us	up	by	his	power”	(1	Cor.	6:14).	Similarly,	“he	who
raised	the	Lord	Jesus	will	raise	us	also	with	Jesus	and	bring	us	with	you	into
his	presence”	(2	Cor.	4:14).	But	the	most	extensive	discussion	of	the
connection	between	Christ’s	resurrection	and	our	own	is	found	in	1
Corinthians	15:12–58.	There	Paul	says	that	Christ	is	the	“first	fruits	of	those
who	have	fallen	asleep”	(1	Cor.	15:20).	In	calling	Christ	the	“first	fruits”	(Gk.
aparchē
),	Paul	uses	a	metaphor	from	agriculture	to	indicate	that	we	will	be
like	Christ.	Just	as	the	“first	fruits”	or	the	first	taste	of	the	ripening	crop	show
what	the	rest	of	the	harvest	will	be	like	for	that	crop,	so	Christ	as	the	“first
fruits”	shows	what	our	resurrection	bodies	will	be	like	when,	in	God’s	final
“harvest,”	he	raises	us	from	the	dead	and	brings	us	into	his	presence.
20
After	Jesus’	resurrection,	he	still	had	the	nail	prints	in	his	hands	and	feet	and
the	mark	from	the	spear	in	his	side	(John	20:27).	People	sometimes	wonder	if
that	indicates	that	the	scars	of	serious	injuries	that	we	have	received	in	this
life	will	also	remain	on	our	resurrection	bodies.	The	answer	is	that	we
probably	will	not	have	any	scars	from	injuries	or	wounds	received	in	this	life,
but	our	bodies	will	be	made	perfect,	“incorruptible”	and	raised	“in	glory.”	The
scars	from	Jesus’	crucifixion	are	unique	because	they	are	an	eternal	reminder
of	his	sufferings	and	death	for	us.
21
	The	fact	that	he	retains	those	scars	does
not	necessarily	mean	that	we	shall	retain	ours.	Rather,	all	will	be	healed,	and
all	will	be	made	perfect	and	whole.
5.	Ethical	Significance	of	the	Resurrection.
	Paul	also	sees	that	the
resurrection	has	application	to	our	obedience	to	God	in	this	life.	After	a	long
discussion	of	the	resurrection,	Paul	concludes	by	encouraging	his	readers,
“
Therefore,	
my	beloved	brethren,	be	steadfast,	immovable,	always	abounding
in	the	work	of	the	Lord,	knowing	that	in	the	Lord	your	labor	is	not	in	vain”	(1
Cor.	15:58).	It	is	because	Christ	was	raised	from	the	dead,	and	we	too	shall	be
raised	from	the	dead,	that	we	should	continue	steadfastly	in	the	Lord’s	work.
This	is	because	everything	that	we	do	to	bring	people	into	the	kingdom	and
build	them	up	will	indeed	have	eternal	significance,	because	we	shall	all	be
raised	on	the	day	when	Christ	returns,	and	we	shall	live	with	him	forever.
Second,	Paul	encourages	us,	when	we	think	about	the	resurrection,	to	focus
on	our	future	heavenly	reward	as	our	goal.	He	sees	the	resurrection	as	a	time
when	all	the	struggles	of	this	life	will	be	repaid.	But	if	Christ	has	not	been
raised	and	if	there	is	no	resurrection,	then	“your	faith	is	futile	and	you	are	still
in	your	sins.	Then	those	also	who	have	fallen	asleep	in	Christ	have	perished.
If	for	this	life	only	we	have	hoped	in	Christ,	we	are	of	all	men	most	to	be
pitied”	(1	Cor.	15:17–19;	cf.	v.	
32).	But	because	Christ	has	been	raised,	and
because	we	have	been	raised	with	him,	we	are	to	seek	for	a	heavenly	reward
and	set	our	mind	on	things	of	heaven:
If	then	you	have	been	raised	with	Christ,	
seek	the	things	that	are
above,	
where	Christ	is,	seated	at	the	right	hand	of	God.	Set	your
minds	on	things	that	are	above,	not	on	things	that	are	on	earth.	For
you	have	died,	and	your	life	is	hid	with	Christ	in	God.	When	Christ
who	is	our	life	appears,	then	you	also	will	appear	with	him	in	glory.
(Col.	3:1–4)
A	third	ethical	application	of	the	resurrection	is	the	obligation	to	stop	yielding
to	sin	in	our	lives.	When	Paul	says	we	are	to	consider	ourselves	“dead	to	sin
and	alive	to	God	in	Christ	Jesus”	by	virtue	of	the	resurrection	of	Christ	and
his	resurrection	power	within	us	(Rom.	6:11),	he	then	goes	on	immediately	to
say,
“Let	not	sin	therefore	reign	
in	your	mortal	bodies.	.	.	.	Do	not	yield	your
members	to	sin”	(Rom.	6:12–13).	The	fact	that	we	have	this	new	resurrection
power	over	the	domination	of	sin	in	our	lives	is	used	by	Paul	as	a	reason	to
exhort	us	not	to	sin	any	more.
B.	Ascension	Into	Heaven
1.
	Christ	Ascended	to	a	Place.
	After	Jesus’	resurrection,	he	was	on	earth	for
forty	days	(Acts	1:3),	then	he	led	them	out	to	Bethany,	just	outside	Jerusalem,
and	“lifting	up	his	hands,	he	blessed	them.	While	he	blessed	them,	he	parted
from	them,	and	was	carried	up	into	heaven”	(Luke	24:50–51).
A	similar	account	is	given	by	Luke	in	the	opening	section	of	Acts:
And	when	he	had	said	this,	as	they	were	looking	on,	he	was	lifted	up,
and	a	cloud	took	him	out	of	their	sight.	And	while	they	were	gazing
into	heaven	as	he	went,	behold,	two	men	stood	by	them	in	white
robes,	and	said,	“Men	of	Galilee,	why	do	you	stand	looking	into
heaven?	This	Jesus,	who	was	taken	up	from	you	into	heaven,	will
come	in	the	same	way	as	you	saw	him	go	into	heaven.”	(Acts	1:9–11)
These	narratives	describe	an	event	that	is	clearly	designed	to	show	the
disciples	that	Jesus	went	to	a	place.	He	did	not	suddenly	disappear	from	them,
never	to	be	seen	by	them	again,	but	gradually	ascended	as	they	were
watching,	and	then	a	cloud	(apparently	the	cloud	of	God’s	glory)	took	him
from	their	sight.	But	the	angels	immediately	said	that	he	would	come	back	
in
the	same	way	
in	which	he	had	gone	into	heaven.	The	fact	that	Jesus	had	a
resurrection	body	that	was	subject	to	spatial	limitations	(it	could	be	at	only
one	place	at	one	time)	means	that	Jesus	went	
somewhere	
when	he	ascended
into	heaven.
It	is	surprising	that	even	some	evangelical	theologians	hesitate	to	affirm	that
heaven	is	a	place	or	that	Jesus	ascended	to	a	definite	location	somewhere	in
the	space-time	universe.	Admittedly	we	cannot	now	see	where	Jesus	is,	but
that	is	not	because	he	passed	into	some	ethereal	“state	of	being”	that	has	no
location	at	all	in	the	space-time	universe,	but	rather	because	our	eyes	are
unable	to	see	the	unseen	spiritual	world	that	exists	all	around	us.	There	are
angels	around	us,	but	we	simply	cannot	see	them	because	our	eyes	do	not
have	that	capacity:	Elisha	was	surrounded	by	an	army	of	angels	and	chariots
of	fire	protecting	him	from	the	Syrians	at	Dothan,	but	Elisha’s	servant	was	not
able	to	see	those	angels	until	God	opened	his	eyes	so	that	he	could	see	things
that	existed	in	that	spiritual	dimension	(2	Kings	6:17).	Similarly,	when
Stephen	was	dying,	God	gave	him	a	special	ability	to	see	the	world	that	is
now	hidden	from	our	eyes,	for	he	“gazed	into	heaven	and	saw	the	glory	of
God,	and	Jesus	standing	at	the	right	hand	of	God;	and	he	said,	‘Behold,	I	see
the	heavens	opened,	and	the	Son	of	man	standing	at	the	right	hand	of	God’	”
(Acts	7:55–56).	And	Jesus	himself	said,	“In	my	Father’s	house	are	many
rooms;	if	it	were	not	so,	would	I	have	told	you	that	I	go	to	prepare	
a	place	
for
you?	And	when	I	go	and	prepare	a	place	for	you,	I	will	come	again	and	will
take	you	to	myself,	that	where	I	am	you	may	be	also”	(John	14:2–3).
Of	course	we	cannot	now	say	exactly	where	heaven	is.	Scripture	often
pictures	people	as	ascending	up	into	heaven	(as	Jesus	did,	and	Elijah)	or
coming	down	from	heaven	(as	the	angels	in	Jacob’s	dream,	Gen.	28:12),	so
we	are	justified	in	thinking	of	heaven	as	somewhere	“above”	the	earth.
Admittedly	the	earth	is	round	and	it	rotates,	so	where	heaven	is	we	are	simply
unable	to	say	more	precisely—Scripture	does	not	tell	us.	But	the	repeated
emphasis	on	the	fact	that	Jesus	went	somewhere	(as	did	Elijah,	2	Kings	2:11),
and	the	fact	that	the	New	Jerusalem	will	come	down	out	of	heaven	from	God
(Rev.	21:2),	all	indicate	that	there	is	clearly	a	localization	of	heaven	in	the
space-time	universe.	Those	who	do	not	believe	in	Scripture	may	scoff	at	such
an	idea	and	wonder	how	it	can	be	so,	just	as	the	first	Russian	cosmonaut	who
came	back	from	space	and	declared	that	he	did	not	see	God	or	heaven
anywhere,	but	that	simply	points	to	the	blindness	of	their	eyes	toward	the
unseen	spiritual	world;	it	does	not	indicate	that	heaven	does	not	exist	in	a
certain	place.	In	fact,	the	ascension	of	Jesus	into	heaven	is	designed	to	teach
us	that	heaven	does	exist	as	a	place	in	the	space-time	universe.	(See	
chapter
57
	for	a	further	discussion	of	the	nature	of	heaven.)
2.	Christ	Received	Glory	and	Honor	That	Had	Not	Been	His	Before	As
the	God-Man.
	When	Jesus	ascended	into	heaven	he	received	glory,	honor,
and	authority	that	had	never	been	his	before	as	one	who	was	both	God	and
man.	Before	Jesus	died,	he	prayed,	“Father,	glorify	me	in	your	own	presence
with	the	glory	which	I	had	with	you	before	the	world	was	made”	(John
17:5).
22
	In	his	sermon	at	Pentecost	Peter	said	that	Jesus	was	“exalted	at	the
right	hand	of	God”	(Acts	2:33),	and	Paul	declared	that	“God	has	highly
exalted	him”	(Phil.	2:9),	and	that	he	was	“taken	up	in	glory”	(1	Tim.	3:16;	cf.
Heb.	1:4).	Christ	is	now	in	heaven	with	the	angelic	choirs	singing	praise	to
him	with	the	words,	“Worthy	is	the	Lamb	who	was	slain,	to	receive	power
and	wealth	and	wisdom	and	might	and	honor	and	glory	and	blessing!”	(Rev.
5:12).
23
3.	Christ	Was	Seated	at	God’s	Right	Hand	(Christ’s	Session).
	One	specific
aspect	of	Christ’s	ascension	into	heaven	and	receiving	of	honor	was	the	fact
that	he	
sat	down	
at	the	right	hand	of	God.	This	is	sometimes	called	his	
session
at	God’s	right	hand.
24
The	Old	Testament	predicted	that	the	Messiah	would	sit	at	the	right	hand	of
God:	“The	L
ORD
	says	to	my	lord:	‘Sit	at	my	right	hand,	till	I	make	your
enemies	your	footstool’	”	(Ps.	110:1).	When	Christ	ascended	back	into	heaven
he	received	the	fulfillment	of	that	promise:	“When	he	had	made	purification
for	sins,	he	
sat	down	
at	the	right	hand	of	the	Majesty	on	high”	(Heb.	1:3).
This	welcoming	into	the	presence	of	God	and	sitting	at	God’s	right	hand	is	a
dramatic	indication	of	the	completion	of	Christ’s	work	of	redemption.	Just	as
a	human	being	will	sit	down	at	the	completion	of	a	large	task	to	enjoy	the
satisfaction	of	having	accomplished	it,	so	Jesus	sat	at	the	right	hand	of	God,
visibly	demonstrating	that	his	work	of	redemption	was	completed.
In	addition	to	showing	the	completion	of	Christ’s	work	of	redemption,	the	act
of	sitting	at	God’s	right	hand	is	an	indication	that	he	received	authority	over
the	universe.	Paul	says	that	God	“raised	him	from	the	dead	and	made	him	sit
at	his	right	hand	in	the	heavenly	places,	far	above	all	rule	and	authority	and
power	and	dominion,	and	above	every	name	that	is	named”	(Eph.	1:20–21).
Similarly,	Peter	says	that	Jesus	“has	gone	into	heaven	and	is	at	the	right	hand
of	God,	with	angels,	authorities,	and	powers	subject	to	him”	(1	Peter	3:22).
Paul	also	alludes	to	Psalm	110:1	when	he	says	that	Christ	“must	reign	until	he
has	put	all	his	enemies	under	his	feet”	(1	Cor.	15:25).
One	additional	aspect	of	the	authority	that	Christ	received	from	the	Father
when	he	sat	at	his	right	hand	was	the	authority	to	pour	out	the	Holy	Spirit	on
the	church.	Peter	says	on	the	Day	of	Pentecost,	“Being	therefore	exalted	at	the
right	hand	of	God,	and	having	
received	from	the	Father	the	promise	of	the
Holy	Spirit,	
he	has	poured	out	this	which	you	see	and	hear”	(Acts	2:33).
The	fact	that	Jesus	now	sits	at	the	right	hand	of	God	in	heaven	does	not	mean
that	he	is	perpetually	“fixed”	there	or	that	he	is	inactive.	He	is	also	seen	as
standing	at	God’s	right	hand	(Acts	7:56)	and	as	walking	among	the	seven
golden	lampstands	in	heaven	(Rev.	2:1).	Just	as	a	human	king	sits	on	his	royal
throne	at	his	accession	to	the	kingship,	but	then	engages	in	many	other
activities	throughout	each	day,	so	Christ	sat	at	the	right	hand	of	God	as	a
dramatic	evidence	of	the	completion	of	his	redemptive	work	and	his	reception
of	authority	over	the	universe,	but	he	is	certainly	engaged	in	other	activities	in
heaven	as	well.
4.	Christ’s	Ascension	Has	Doctrinal	Significance	for	Our	Lives.
	Just	as	the
resurrection	has	profound	implications	for	our	lives,	so	Christ’s	ascension	has
significant	implications	for	us.	First,	since	we	are	united	with	Christ	in	every
aspect	of	his	work	of	redemption,
25
	Christ’s	going	up	into	heaven
foreshadows	our	future	ascension	into	heaven	with	him.	“We	who	are	alive,
who	are	left,	shall	be	caught	up	together	with	them	in	the	clouds	to	meet	the
Lord	in	the	air;	and	so	we	shall	always	be	with	the	Lord”	(1	Thess.	4:17).	The
author	of	Hebrews	wants	us	to	run	the	race	of	life	with	the	knowledge	that	we
are	following	in	Jesus’	steps	and	will	eventually	arrive	at	the	blessings	of	life
in	heaven	that	he	is	now	enjoying:	“Let	us	run	with	perseverance	the	race	that
is	set	before	us,	looking	to	Jesus	the	pioneer	and	perfecter	of	our	faith,	who
for	the	joy	that	was	set	before	him	endured	the	cross,	despising	the	shame,
and	is	seated	at	the	right	hand	of	the	throne	of	God”	(Heb.	12:1–2).	And	Jesus
himself	says	that	he	will	one	day	take	us	to	be	with	himself	(John	14:3).
Second,	Jesus’	ascension	gives	us	assurance	that	our	final	home	will	be	in
heaven	with	him.	“In	my	Father’s	house	are	many	rooms;	if	it	were	not	so,
would	I	have	told	you	that	I	go	to	prepare	a	place	for	you?	And	when	I	go	and
prepare	a	place	for	you,	I	will	come	again	and	will	take	you	to	myself,	that
where	I	am	you	may	be	also”	(John	14:2–3).	Jesus	was	a	man	like	us	in	every
way	yet	without	sin,	and	he	has	gone	before	us	so	that	eventually	we	might
follow	him	there	and	live	with	him	forever.	The	fact	that	Jesus	has	already
ascended	into	heaven	and	achieved	the	goal	set	before	him	gives	great
assurance	to	us	that	we	will	eventually	go	there	also.
Third,	because	of	our	union	with	Christ	in	his	ascension,	we	are	able	to	share
now	(in	part)	in	Christ’s	authority	over	the	universe,	and	we	will	later	share	in
it	more	fully.	This	is	what	Paul	points	to	when	he	says	that	God	“raised	us	up
with	him,	and	made	us	
sit	with	him	in	the	heavenly	places	
in	Christ	Jesus”
(Eph.	2:6).	We	are	not	physically	present	in	heaven,	of	course,	for	we	remain
here	on	earth	at	the	present	time.	But	if	Christ’s	session	at	God’s	right	hand
refers	to	his	reception	of	authority,	then	the	fact	that	God	has	made	us	sit	with
Christ	means	that	we	share	in	some	measure	in	the	authority	that	Christ	has,
authority	to	contend	against	“the	spiritual	hosts	of	wickedness	in	the	heavenly
places”	(Eph.	6:12;	cf.	vv.	10–18)	and	to	do	battle	with	weapons	that	“have
divine	power	to	destroy	strongholds”	(2	Cor.	10:4).	This	sharing	in	Christ’s
authority	over	the	universe	will	be	made	more	fully	our	possession	in	the	age
to	come:	“Do	you	not	know	that	we	are	to	judge	angels?”	(1	Cor.	6:3).
Moreover,	we	will	share	with	Christ	in	his	authority	over	the	creation	that
God	has	made	(Heb.	2:5–8).
26
	Jesus	promises,	“He	who	conquers	and	who
keeps	my	works	until	the	end,	I	will	give	him	power	over	the	nations,	and	he
shall	rule	them	with	a	rod	of	iron,	as	when	earthen	pots	are	broken	in	pieces,
even	as	I	myself	have	received	power	from	my	Father”	(Rev.	2:26–27).	He
also	promises,	“He	who	conquers,	I	will	grant	him	to	sit	with	me	on	my
throne,	as	I	myself	conquered	and	sat	down	with	my	Father	on	his	throne”
(Rev.	3:21).	These	are	amazing	promises	of	our	future	sharing	in	Christ’s
sitting	at	the	right	hand	of	God,	promises	that	we	will	not	fully	understand
until	the	age	to	come.
C.	States	of	Jesus	Christ
In	talking	about	the	life,	death,	and	resurrection	of	Christ,	theologians	have
sometimes	talked	about	the	“states	of	Jesus	Christ.”	By	this	they	mean	the
different	relationships	Jesus	had	to	God’s	law	for	mankind,	to	the	possession
of	authority,	and	to	receiving	honor	for	himself.	Generally	two	states
(humiliation	and	exaltation)	are	distinguished.	Thus,	the	doctrine	of	“the
twofold	state	of	Christ”	is	the	teaching	that	Christ	experienced	first	the	state
of	humiliation,	then	the	state	of	exaltation.
Within	the	humiliation	of	Christ	are	included	his	incarnation,	suffering,	death,
and	burial.	Sometimes	a	fifth	aspect	(descent	into	hell)	is	included,	but	as
explained	above,	the	position	taken	in	this	book	is	that	that	concept	is	not
supported	in	Scripture.
In	the	exaltation	of	Christ,	there	are	also	four	aspects:	his	resurrection,
ascension	into	heaven,	session	at	the	right	hand	of	God,	and	return	in	glory
and	power.	Many	systematic	theologies	use	the	state	of	humiliation	and	the
state	of	exaltation	as	broad	categories	to	organize	their	discussion	of	Jesus’
work.
27
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
As	you	read	this	chapter,	what	aspects	of	the	Bible’s	teaching	about	a
resurrection	body	were	new	to	your	understanding?	Can	you	think	of
some	characteristics	of	the	resurrection	body	that	you	especially	look
forward	to?	How	does	the	thought	of	having	such	a	body	make	you	feel?
2
.	
What	things	would	you	like	to	do	now	but	find	yourself	unable	to	do
because	of	the	weakness	or	limitations	of	your	own	physical	body?	Do
you	think	these	activities	would	be	appropriate	to	your	life	in	heaven?
Will	you	be	able	to	do	them	then?
3
.	
When	you	were	born	again,	you	received	new	spiritual	life	within.	If	you
think	of	this	new	spiritual	life	as	part	of	the	resurrection	power	of	Christ
working	within	you,	how	does	that	give	you	encouragement	in	living	the
Christian	life	and	in	ministering	to	people’s	needs?
4
.	
The	Bible	says	that	you	are	now	seated	with	Christ	in	the	heavenly
places	(Eph.	2:6).	As	you	meditate	on	this	fact,	how	will	it	affect	your
prayer	life	and	your	engaging	in	spiritual	warfare	against	demonic
forces?
5
.	
When	you	think	of	Christ	now	in	heaven,	does	it	cause	you	to	focus
more	attention	on	things	that	will	have	eternal	significance?	Does	it
increase	your	assurance	that	you	will	someday	be	with	him	in	heaven?
How	do	you	feel	about	the	prospect	of	reigning	with	Christ	over	the
nations	and	over	angels	as	well?
SPECIAL	TERMS
ascension
	
	
	
raised	in	power
exaltation	of	Christ
	
	
	
resurrection
humiliation	of	Christ
	
	
	
session
incorruptible
	
	
	
spiritual	body
raised	in	glory
	
	
	
states	of	Jesus	Christ
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the	
bibliography	to
chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be	found	in	
Appendix	4
.)
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92			Litton,	195–96
1930			Thomas,	73–87
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1875–76			Pope,	3:401–6
1987–90			Oden,	451–526
3.			Baptist
1767			Gill,	1:583–602
1907			Strong,	706–10,	1015–23
1917			Mullins,	44–46,	158–64,	472–78
1983–85			Erickson,	769–79
1987–94			Lewis/Demarest,	2:437–96
4.			Dispensational
1947			Chafer,	5:231–79
1949			Thiessen,	243–50
1986			Ryrie,	267–74
5.			Lutheran
1917–24			Pieper,	2:324–30
1934			Mueller,	295–300
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1861			Heppe,	488–509
1871–73			Hodge,	2:626–38
1887–1921			Warfield,	
SSW,	
1:178–202;	
PWC,	
535–48
1937–66			Murray,	
CW,	
1:40–43;	
CW,	
4:82–91
1938			Berkhof,	344–55
1962			Buswell,	2:32–40
7.			Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988–92			Williams,	1:381–413
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955			Ott,	192–96
2.Roman	Catholic:	Post-Vatican	II
1980			McBrien,	1:405–17
Other	Works
Bray,	G.	L.	“Ascension	and	Heavenly	Session	of	Christ.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.
46–47.
Craig,	William	Lane.	
The	Son	Rises:	The	Historical	Evidence	for	the
Resurrection	of	Jesus.	
Chicago:	Moody,	1981.
Fuller,	Daniel	P.	
Easter	Faith	and	History.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,
1965.
Gaffin,	Richard	B.,	Jr.	
Resurrection	and	Redemption:	A	Study	in	Paul’s
Soteriology.	
Formerly,	
The	Centrality	of	the	Resurrection:	A	Study	in
Paul’s	Soteriology.	
Phillipsburg,	N.J.:	Presbyterian	and	Reformed,	1978.
Habermas,	G.	R.	“Resurrection	of	Christ.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	938–41.
_____,	and	Anthony	Flew.	
Did	Jesus	Rise	From	the	Dead?	The
Resurrection	Debate.	
Edited	by	Terry	L.	Miethe.	New	York:	Harper	and
Row,	1987.
Harris,	Murray	J.	
From	Grave	to	Glory:	Resurrection	in	the	New
Testament,	Including	a	Response	to	Norman	L.	Geisler.	
Grand	Rapids:
Zondervan,	1990.
_____.	“Resurrection,	General.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	581–82.
Ladd,	George	E.	
I	Believe	in	the	Resurrection	of	Jesus.	
Grand	Rapids:
Eerdmans,	1975.
Macleod,	D.	“Resurrection	of	Christ.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	582–85.
Morison,	Frank.	
Who	Moved	the	Stone?	
London:	Faber	and	Faber,	1930;
reprint,	Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1958.
O’Donovan,	Oliver.	
Resurrection	and	Moral	Order.	
Leicester:	Inter-
Varsity	Press,	1986.
Ross,	A.	“Ascension	of	Christ.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	86–87.
Swete,	Henry	Barclay.	
The	Ascended	Christ:	A	Study	in	the	Earliest
Christian	Teaching.	
London:	Macmillan,	1910.
Tenney,	Merrill	C.	
The	Reality	of	the	Resurrection.	
New	York:	Harper
and	Row,	1963.
Toon,	Peter.	
The	Ascension	of	Our	Lord.	
Nashville:	Thomas	Nelson,
1984.
Wenham,	John.	
The	Easter	Enigma.	
London:	Paternoster,	1984.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
1
	Corinthians	15:20–23:	
But	in	fact	Christ	has	been	raised	from	the	dead,
the	first	fruits	of	those	who	have	fallen	asleep.	For	as	by	a	man	came	death,
by	a	man	has	come	also	the	resurrection	of	the	dead.	For	as	in	Adam	all	die,
so	also	in	Christ	shall	all	be	made	alive.	But	each	in	his	own	order:	Christ	the
first	fruits,	then	at	his	coming	those	who	belong	to	Christ.
HYMN
“Christ	the	Lord	Is	Risen	Today”
“Christ	the	Lord	is	risen	today,”	al-le-lu-ia!
Sons	of	men	and	angels	say;	al-le-lu-ia!
Raise	your	joys	and	triumphs	high;	al-le-lu-ia!
Sing,	ye	heav’ns,	and	earth	reply;	al-le-lu-ia!
Vain	the	stone,	the	watch,	the	seal;	al-le-lu-ia!
Christ	has	burst	the	gates	of	hell:	al-le-lu-ia!
Death	in	vain	forbids	him	rise;	al-le-lu-ia!
Christ	hath	opened	paradise.	Al-le-lu-ia!
Lives	again	our	glorious	King;	al-le-lu-ia!
Where,	O	death,	is	now	thy	sting?	Al-le-lu-ia!
Once	he	died,	our	souls	to	save;	al-le-lu-ia!
Where	thy	victory,	O	grave?	Al-le-lu-ia!
Soar	we	now	where	Christ	has	led,	al-le-lu-ia!
Following	our	exalted	Head;	al-le-lu-ia!
Made	like	him,	like	him	we	rise;	al-le-lu-ia!
Ours	the	cross,	the	grave,	the	skies.	Al-le-lu-ia!
Hail,	the	Lord	of	earth	and	heav’n!	Al-le-lu-ia!
Praise	to	thee	by	both	be	giv’n;	al-le-lu-ia!
Thee	we	greet	triumphant	now;	al-le-lu-ia!
Hail,	the	resurrection	thou!	Al-le-lu-ia!
AUTHOR:	CHARLES	WESLEY,	1739
NOTES
1
The	historical	arguments	for	the	resurrection	of	Christ	are	substantial	and	have	persuaded	many	skeptics	who	started	to	examine
the	evidence	for	the	purpose	of	disproving	the	resurrection.	The	best-known	account	of	such	a	change	from	skepticism	to	belief	is
Frank	Morison,	
Who	Moved	the	Stone?	
(London:	Faber	and	Faber,	1930;	reprint,	Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1958).	A	widely	used
booklet	summarizing	the	arguments	is	J.	N.	D.	Anderson,	
The	Evidence	for	the	Resurrection	
(London	and	Downers	Grove,	Ill.:
InterVarsity	Press,	1966).	(Both	Morison	and	Anderson	were	trained	as	lawyers.)	More	recent	and	detailed	presentations	are	found
in	William	Lane	Craig,	
The	Son	Rises:	The	Historical	Evidence	for	the	Resurrection	of	Jesus	
(Chicago:	Moody,	1981);	Gary
Habermas	and	Anthony	Flew,	
Did	Jesus	Rise	From	the	Dead?	The	Resurrection	Debate,	
ed.	Terry	L.	Miethe	(New	York:	Harper
and	Row,	1987);	Gary	Habermas,	“Resurrection	of	Christ,”	in	
EDT,	
pp.	938–41.	An	extensive	compilation	of	arguments	and
quotations	from	recognized	scholars	affirming	the	overwhelming	reliability	of	the	evidence	for	Christ’s	resurrection	is	found	in
Josh	McDowell,	
Evidence	that	Demands	a	Verdict,	
rev.	ed.,	vol.	
1	(San	Bernardino,	Calif.:	Here’s	Life	Publishers,	1979),	pp.	179–
263.
2
See	discussion	of	the	term	“first	fruits”	in	
chapter	28
.
3
By	“spiritual	body”	Paul	does	not	mean	“immaterial,”	but	rather	“suited	to	and	responsive	to	the	guidance	of	the	Spirit.”	In	the
Pauline	epistles,	the	word	“spiritual”	(Gk.	
pneumatikos
)	never	means	“nonphysical”	but	rather	“consistent	with	the	character	and
activity	of	the	Holy	Spirit”	(see,	e.g.,	Rom.	1:11;	7:14;	1	Cor.	2:13,	15;	3:1;	14:37;	Gal.	6:1	[”you	who	are	spiritual”];	Eph.	5:19).
The	RSV	translation,	“It	is	sown	a	
physical	
body,	it	is	raised	a	
spiritual	
body,”	is	very	misleading,	because	Paul	does	not	use	the
word	that	was	available	to	him	if	he	had	meant	to	speak	of	a	physical	body	(Gk.	
sōmatikos
),	but	rather	uses	the	word	
psychikos,
which	means,	in	this	context,	“natural”	(so	NIV,	NASB),	that	is,	a	body	that	is	living	in	its	own	life	and	strength	and	in	the
characteristics	of	this	present	age	but	is	not	fully	subject	to	and	conforming	to	the	character	and	will	of	the	Holy	Spirit.	Therefore,
a	clearer	paraphrase	would	be,	“It	is	sown	a	
natural	
body	subject	to	the	characteristics	and	desires	of	this	age,	and	governed	by	its
own	sinful	will,	but	it	is	raised	a	
spiritual	
body,	completely	subject	to	the	will	of	the	Holy	Spirit	and	responsive	to	the	Holy
Spirit’s	guidance.”	Such	a	body	is	not	at	all	“nonphysical,”	but	it	is	a	physical	body	raised	to	the	degree	of	perfection	for	which
God	originally	intended	it.
4
The	Greek	perfect	participle	
kekleismenon	
may	mean	either	that	the	doors	were	“shut”	or	that	they	were	“locked.”
5
I	do	not	wish	to	argue	that	it	is	impossible	that	Jesus’	resurrection	body	somehow	passed	through	the	door	or	the	wall	to	enter	the
room,	only	that	no	verse	in	the	Bible	says	that.	It	is	possible,	but	the	possibility	does	not	deserve	the	status	of	an	assured
conclusion	that	it	has	reached	in	much	popular	preaching	and	much	evangelical	scholarship—it	is	just	one	possible	inference	from
these	verses,	among	several.	Leon	Morris	says,	“Some	suggest	that	Jesus	came	right	through	the	closed	door,	or	that	the	door
opened	of	its	own	accord	or	the	like.	But	Scripture	says	nothing	of	the	mode	of	Jesus’	entry	into	the	room	and	we	do	well	not	to
attempt	too	exact	a	definition”	(
The	Gospel	According	to	John,	
p.	844).	The	problem	with	an	affirmation	that	Jesus	passed	through
walls	is	that	it	may	cause	people	to	think	of	Jesus’	resurrection	body	as	somehow	nonmaterial,	and	this	is	contrary	to	the	explicit
affirmations	of	material	characteristics	that	we	have	in	several	New	Testament	texts.
6
Murray	Harris,	
From	Grave	to	Glory:	Resurrection	in	the	New	Testament	
(Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1990),	pp.	142–43.
7
See	Harris,	ibid.,	pp.	351	and	353	(where	he	“unequivocally”	affirms	“the	literal,	physical	resurrection	of	Jesus	from	the	dead”)
and	p.	
365	(“I	am	happy	to	affirm	that	our	Lord	rose	from	the	dead	in	the	actual	physical	body	he	possessed	before	his	death”).
8
He	understands	“spiritual”	not	to	mean	“nonphysical”	but	rather	“animated	and	guided	by	the	spirit”	(or	possibly	“Spirit”)
chapter	11
.
9
See	the	lengthy	report	about	Harris’s	view	and	those	who	have	criticized	it	(and	sometimes	misrepresented	it)	in	
CT,	
April	5,
1993,	pp.	62–66.	Norman	Geisler	and	some	others	have	accused	Harris	of	teaching	serious	heresy,	but	in	this	article,	J.	I.	Packer
says	that	“both	Harris	and	Geisler	appear	to	be	orthodox,	and	both	of	them	equally	so”	(pp.	64–65).	A	report	from	three	other
evangelical	theologians,	Millard	Erickson,	Bruce	Demarest,	and	Roger	Nicole,	says	that	Harris’s	views	are	“somewhat	novel”	but
“are	compatible	with	the	doctrinal	position	[of	Trinity	Evangelical	Divinity	School,	where	Harris	teaches,	and]	.	.	.	of	the	wider
evangelical	movement”	(p.	
63).
10
Harris,	
From	Grave	to	Glory,	
p.	422.
11
Diod.	Sic.	4.65.9	(of	Amphiaraus)	and	3.60.3	(of	Atlas).
12
Another	occurrence	of	the	word	
aphantos	
has	a	similar	sense:	Plutarch	(ca.	A.D.	50–ca.	120)	reports	someone	who	said	that	if
there	is	a	“mid-center”	of	the	earth	or	ocean,	“it	is	known	to	the	gods,	but	is	hidden	(
aphantos
)	from	mortals”	(
Moralia	
409F).	The
sense	is	not	“immaterial”	but	“hidden	from	sight,	not	visible.”
13
Compare	Luke	24:16,	where	it	says	that	Jesus	drew	near	to	the	disciples	on	the	Emmaus	Road,	but	“their	eyes	were	kept	from
recognizing	him.”	If	God	could	cause	the	disciples’	eyes	to	be	partially	blinded	so	that	they	could	see	Jesus	but	not	recognize	him,
then	certainly	a	few	minutes	later	he	could	cause	their	eyes	to	be	more	fully	blinded	so	they	could	not	see	him	at	all.	The
possibilities	are	too	complex	and	our	knowledge	is	too	limited	for	us	to	insist	that	these	texts	require	that	Jesus	became
nonphysical.
14
Harris	says	that	Jesus	passed	through	a	sealed	tomb,	according	to	Matt.	28:2,	6,	but	the	verses	can	just	as	easily	mean	that	the
stone	was	first	rolled	away,	and	then	Jesus	came	out	(cf.	Luke	24:2).	Similarly,	John	20:4–7	only	says	that	the	grave	cloths	were
lying	where	Jesus’	body	had	been	but	does	not	require	that	Jesus’	body	passed	through	the	linen	cloths:	it	could	as	readily	mean
that	Jesus	(or	an	angel)	removed	the	cloths	and	placed	them	neatly	in	the	tomb.	Acts	10:40	says	that	Jesus	was	made	“manifest”	or
visible	to	chosen	witnesses	(that	is,	they	saw	him),	but	again	it	says	nothing	about	him	materializing	or	being	immaterial.	In	all	of
these	verses,	Harris	seems	to	me	to	be	concluding	too	much	from	too	little	data.
Finally,	even	if	Jesus	did	pass	through	the	door	or	the	wall	(as	many	Christians	have	concluded),	this	does	not	require	us	to	say
that	his	body	was	customarily	nonmaterial,	but	could	well	be	explained	as	a	special	miracle	or	as	a	property	of	resurrection	bodies
that	we	do	not	now	understand,	but	that	does	not	require	that	they	be	nonphysical	or	nonmaterial.
15
Professor	Harris	also	wants	to	avoid	this	error,	for	he	says,	“There	can	be	no	dualism	between	spirit	and	matter.	No	New
Testament	writer	envisages	the	salvation	of	the	soul	or	spirit	with	the	visible	material	world	abandoned	to	oblivion”	(p.	
251).	Yet	I
am	concerned	that	his	position	may	lead	others	to	a	depreciation	of	the	value	of	the	material	creation	and	of	the	goodness	of	our
physical	bodies	as	created	by	God.
16
See	the	discussion	of	the	participation	of	the	Father	and	the	Son	in	the	resurrection	in	
chapter	26
17
Because	the	works	of	God	are	usually	works	of	the	entire	Trinity,	it	is	probably	true	to	say	that	the	Holy	Spirit	also	was
involved	in	raising	Jesus	from	the	dead,	but	no	text	of	Scripture	affirms	that	explicitly	(but	see	Rom.	8:11).
18
See	
chapter	34
,	for	a	discussion	of	regeneration.
19
See	
chapter	36
,	on	justification.
20
See	
chapter	42
,	for	a	more	detailed	discussion	of	the	nature	of	our	resurrection	bodies.
21
In	fact,	the	evidences	of	the	severe	beating	and	disfigurement	that	Jesus	suffered	before	his	crucifixion	were	probably	all
healed,	and	only	the	scars	in	his	hands,	feet,	and	side	remained	as	testimony	to	his	death	for	us:	Jesus	was	raised	“in	glory”	(cf.	1
Cor.	15:43),	not	in	horrible	disfigurement	just	barely	brought	back	to	life.
22
This	verse	shows	that	the	glory	Jesus	received	had	been	his	before	as	eternal	Son	of	God,	but	it	had	not	been	his	before	in	his
incarnate	form	as	God-man.
23
Some	Lutheran	theologians	have	also	said	that	when	Jesus	ascended	into	heaven	his	human	nature	became	ubiquitous
(everywhere	present):	see	the	discussion	in	
chapter	26,	n.	38
.
24
The	word	
session	
formerly	meant	“the	act	of	sitting	down,”	but	it	no	longer	has	that	meaning	in	ordinary	English	usage	today.
25
See	the	discussion	of	union	with	Christ	in	
chapter	43
.
26
See	discussion	of	Heb.	2:5–8	in	
chapter	26
;	see	also	
Chapter	15
.
27
Although	this	is	a	useful	method	of	organization,	I	have	not	used	it	in	this	book.	However,	all	of	the	topics	included	in
discussions	of	these	two	states	have	been	covered	in	this	and	other	chapters	of	this	book.	For	more	detailed	discussion,	see	W.
Grudem,	“States	of	Jesus	Christ,”	
EDT,	
pp.	1052–54.
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	29
The	Offices	of	Christ
How	is	Christ	prophet,	priest,	and	king?
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
There	were	three	major	offices	among	the	people	of	Israel	in	the	Old
Testament:	the	
prophet	
(such	as	Nathan,	2	Sam.	7:2),	the	
priest	
(such	as
Abiathar,	1	Sam.	30:7),	and	the	
king	
(such	as	King	David,	2	Sam.	5:3).	These
three	offices	were	distinct.	The	prophet	spoke	God’s	words	to	the	people;	the
priest	offered	sacrifices,	prayers,	and	praises	to	God	on	behalf	of	the	people;
and	the	king	ruled	over	the	people	as	God’s	representative.	These	three	offices
foreshadowed	Christ’s	own	work	in	different	ways.	Therefore	we	can	look
again	at	Christ’s	work,	now	thinking	about	the	perspective	of	these	three
offices	or	categories.
	
1
	
Christ	fulfills	these	three	offices	in	the	following	ways:
as	
prophet	
he	reveals	God	to	us	and	speaks	God’s	words	to	us;	as	
priest	
he
both	offers	a	sacrifice	to	God	on	our	behalf	and	is	himself	the	sacrifice	that	is
offered;	and	as	
king	
he	rules	over	the	church	and	over	the	universe	as	well.
We	now	turn	to	discuss	each	of	these	offices	in	more	detail.
A.	Christ	as	Prophet
The	Old	Testament	prophets	spoke	God’s	words	to	the	people.	Moses	was	the
first	major	prophet,	and	he	wrote	the	first	five	books	of	the	Bible,	the
Pentateuch.	After	Moses	there	was	a	succession	of	other	prophets	who	spoke
and	wrote	God’s	words.
	
2
	
But	Moses	predicted	that	sometime	another	prophet
like	himself	would	come.
The	L
ORD
	your	God	will	raise	up	for	you	a	
prophet	like	me	
from
among	you,	from	your	brethren—him	you	shall	heed—just	as	you
desired	of	the	L
ORD
	your	God.	.	.	.	And	the	L
ORD
	said	to	me	.	.	.	“I
will	raise	up	for	them	a	prophet	like	you	from	among	their	brethren;
and	I	will	put	my	words	in	his	mouth,	and	he	shall	speak	to	them	all
that	I	command	him.”	(Deut.	18:15–18)
However,	when	we	look	at	the	gospels	we	see	that	Jesus	is	not
primarily	
viewed	as	a	prophet	or	as	
the	
prophet	like	Moses,	though
there	are	occasional	references	to	this	effect.	Often	those	who	call
Jesus	a	“prophet”	know	very	little	about	him.	For	instance,	various
opinions	of	Jesus	were	circulating:	“Some	say	John	the	Baptist,
others	say	Elijah,	and	others	Jeremiah	
or	one	of	the	prophets”
(Matt.	16:14;	cf.	Luke	9:8).	When	Jesus	raised	the	son	of	the	widow
of	Nain	from	the	dead,	the	people	were	afraid	and	said,	“A	great
prophet	
has	arisen	among	us!”	(Luke	7:16).	When	Jesus	told	the
Samaritan	woman	at	the	well	something	of	her	past	life,	she
immediately	responded,	“Sir,	I	perceive	that	you	are	
a	prophet”
(John	4:19).	But	she	did	not	then	know	very	much	at	all	about	him.
The	reaction	of	the	man	born	blind	who	was	healed	in	the	temple
was	similar:	“He	is	a	prophet”	(John	9:17;	note	that	his	belief	in
Jesus’	messiahship	and	deity	did	not	come	until	v.	
37,	after	a
subsequent	conversation	with	Jesus).
	
3
	
Therefore,	“prophet”	is	not	a
primary	designation	of	Jesus	or	one	used	frequently	by	him	or
about	him.
Nevertheless,	there	was	still	an	expectation	that	
the	
prophet	like
Moses	would	come	(Deut.	18:15,	18).	For	instance,	after	Jesus	had
multiplied	the	loaves	and	fish,	some	people	exclaimed,	“This	is
indeed	
the	prophet	
who	is	to	come	into	the	world!”	(John	6:14;	cf.
7:40).	Peter	also	identified	Christ	as	the	prophet	predicted	by	Moses
(see	Acts	3:22–24,	quoting	Deut.	18:15).	So	Jesus	is	indeed	the
prophet	predicted	by	Moses.
Nevertheless,	it	is	significant	that	in	the	Epistles	Jesus	is	never
called	a	prophet	or	
the	
prophet.	This	is	especially	significant	in	the
opening	chapters	of	Hebrews,	because	there	was	a	clear	opportunity
to	identify	Jesus	as	a	prophet	if	the	author	had	wished	to	do	so.	He
begins	by	saying,	“In	many	and	various	ways	God	spoke	of	old	to
our	fathers	
by	the	prophets;	
but	in	these	last	days	he	has	spoken	to
us	
by	a	Son”	
(Heb.	1:1–2).	Then	after	discussing	the	greatness	of
the	Son,	in	chapters	1–2,	the	author	concludes	this	section	not	by
saying,	“Therefore,	consider	Jesus,	the	greatest	prophet	of	all,”	or
something	like	that,	but	rather	by	saying,	“Therefore,	holy	brethren,
who	share	in	a	heavenly	call,	consider	Jesus,	
the	apostle	
and	high
priest	of	our	confession”	(Heb.	3:1).
Why	did	the	New	Testament	epistles	avoid	calling	Jesus	a	prophet?
Apparently	because,	although	Jesus	is	the	prophet	whom	Moses
predicted,	yet	he	is	also	far	greater	than	any	of	the	Old	Testament
prophets,	in	two	ways:
1.	He	is	the	one	
about	whom	
the	prophecies	in	the	Old	Testament
were	made.	When	Jesus	spoke	with	the	two	disciples	on	the	road	to
Emmaus,	he	took	them	through	the	entire	Old	Testament,	showing
how	the	prophecies	pointed	to	him:	“And	beginning	with	Moses
and	all	the	prophets,	
he	interpreted	to	them	in	all	the	scriptures	the
things	concerning	himself”	(Luke	24:27).	He	told	these	disciples
that	they	were	“slow	of	heart	to	believe	
all	that	the	prophets	had
spoken,”	
showing	that	it	was	“necessary	that	the	Christ	should
suffer	these	things	and	enter	into	his	glory”	(Luke	24:25–26;	cf.	1
Peter	1:11,	which	says	that	the	Old	Testament	prophets	were
“predicting	the	sufferings	of	Christ	and	the	subsequent	glory”).
Thus,	the	Old	Testament	prophets	looked	
forward	
to	Christ	in	what
they	wrote,	and	the	New	Testament	apostles	looked	
back	
to	Christ
and	interpreted	his	life	for	the	benefit	of	the	church.
2.	Jesus	was	not	merely	a	messenger	of	revelation	from	God	(like
all	the	other	prophets),	but	was	himself	the	
source	
of	revelation
from	God.	Rather	than	saying,	as	all	the	Old	Testament	prophets
did,	“Thus	says	the	L
ORD
,”	Jesus	could	begin	divinely	authoritative
teaching	with	the	amazing	statement,	“But	I	
say	
unto	you”	(Matt.
5:22;	et	al.).	The	word	of	the	Lord	
came	to	
the	Old	Testament
prophets,	but	Jesus	spoke	on	his	own	authority	as	the	eternal	Word
of	God	(John	1:1)	who	perfectly	revealed	the	Father	to	us	(John
14:9;	Heb.	1:1–2).
In	the	broader	sense	of	
prophet,	
simply	meaning	one	who	reveals
God	to	us	and	speaks	to	us	the	words	of	God,	Christ	is	of	course
truly	and	fully	a	prophet.	In	fact,	he	is	the	one	whom	all	the	Old
Testament	prophets	prefigured	in	their	speech	and	in	their	actions.
B.	Christ	as	Priest
In	the	Old	Testament,	the	priests	were	appointed	by	God	to	offer
sacrifices.	They	also	offered	prayers	and	praise	to	God	on	behalf	of
the	people.	In	so	doing	they	“sanctified”	the	people	or	made	them
acceptable	to	come	into	God’s	presence,	albeit	in	a	limited	way
during	the	Old	Testament	period.	In	the	New	Testament	Jesus
becomes	our	great	high	priest.	This	theme	is	developed	extensively
in	the	letter	to	the	Hebrews,	where	we	find	that	Jesus	functions	as
priest	in	two	ways.
1.
	Jesus	Offered	a	Perfect	Sacrifice	for	Sin.
	The	sacrifice	which	Jesus
offered	for	sins	was	not	the	blood	of	animals	such	as	bulls	or	goats:	“For	it	is
impossible	that	the	blood	of	bulls	and	goats	should	take	away	sins”	(Heb.
10:4).	Instead,	Jesus	offered	himself	as	a	perfect	sacrifice:	“But	as	it	is,	he	has
appeared	once	for	all	at	the	end	of	the	age	to	put	away	sin	
by	the	sacrifice	of
himself”	
(Heb.	9:26).	This	was	a	completed	and	final	sacrifice,	never	to	be
repeated,	a	theme	frequently	emphasized	in	the	book	of	Hebrews	(see	7:27;
9:12,	24–28;	10:1–2,	10,	12,	14;	13:12).	Therefore	Jesus	fulfilled	all	the
expectations	that	were	prefigured,	not	only	in	the	Old	Testament	sacrifices,
but	also	in	the	lives	and	actions	of	the	priests	who	offered	them:	he	was	both
the	sacrifice	and	the	priest	who	offered	the	sacrifice.	Jesus	is	now	the	“great
high	priest	who	has	passed	through	the	heavens”	(Heb.	4:14)	and	who	has
appeared	“in	the	presence	of	God	on	our	behalf”	(Heb.	9:24),	since	he	has
offered	a	sacrifice	that	ended	for	all	time	the	need	for	any	further	sacrifices.
2.	Jesus	Continually	Brings	Us	Near	to	God.
	The	Old	Testament	priests	not
only	offered	sacrifices,	but	also	in	a	representative	way	they	came	into	the
presence	of	God	from	time	to	time	on	behalf	of	the	people.	But	Jesus	does
much	more	than	that.	As	our	perfect	high	priest,	he	continually	
leads	us	
into
God’s	presence	so	that	we	no	longer	have	need	of	a	Jerusalem	temple,	or	of	a
special	priesthood	to	stand	between	us	and	God.	And	Jesus	does	not	come
into	the	inner	part	(the	holy	of	holies)	of	the	earthly	temple	in	Jerusalem,	but
he	has	gone	into	the	heavenly	equivalent	to	the	holy	of	holies,	the	very
presence	of	God	himself	in	heaven	(Heb.	9:24).	Therefore	we	have	a	hope
that	follows	him	there:	“We	have	this	as	a	sure	and	steadfast	anchor	of	the
soul,	a	hope	that	
enters	into	the	inner	shrine	behind	the	curtain,	
where	Jesus
has	gone	as	a	forerunner	on	our	behalf,	having	become	a	high	priest	for	ever”
(Heb.	6:19–20).	This	means	that	we	have	a	far	greater	privilege	than	those
people	who	lived	at	the	time	of	the	Old	Testament	temple.	They	could	not
even	enter	into	the	first	room	of	the	temple,	the	holy	place,	for	only	the	priests
could	go	there.	Then	into	the	inner	room	of	the	temple,	the	holy	of	holies,
only	the	high	priest	could	go,	and	he	could	only	enter	there	once	a	year	(Heb
9:1–7).	But	when	Jesus	offered	a	perfect	sacrifice	for	sins,	the	curtain	or	veil
of	the	temple	that	closed	off	the	holy	of	holies	was	torn	in	two	from	top	to
bottom	(Luke	23:45),	thus	indicating	in	a	symbolic	way	on	earth	that	the	way
of	access	to	God	in	heaven	was	opened	by	Jesus’	death.	Therefore	the	author
of	Hebrews	can	make	this	amazing	exhortation	to	all	believers:
Therefore,	brethren,	since	we	have	confidence	to	
enter	the	sanctuary
[lit.	‘the	holy	places,’	meaning	both	the	‘holy	place’	and	the	‘holy	of
holies’	itself]	by	the	blood	of	Jesus	.	.	.	and	since	we	have	a	great
priest	over	the	house	of	God,	
let	us	draw	near	with	a	true	heart	in	full
assurance	of	faith.	
(Heb.	10:19–22)
Jesus	has	opened	for	us	the	way	of	access	to	God	so	that	we	can	continually
“draw	near”	into	God’s	very	presence	without	fear	but	with	“confidence”	and
in	“full	assurance	of	faith.”
3.	Jesus	as	Priest	Continually	Prays	for	Us.
	One	other	priestly	function	in
the	Old	Testament	was	to	pray	on	behalf	of	the	people.	The	author	of
Hebrews	tells	us	that	Jesus	also	fulfills	this	function:	“He	is	able	for	all	time
to	save	those	who	draw	near	to	God	through	him,	since	he	always	lives	
to
make	intercession	for	them”	
(Heb.	7:25).	Paul	affirms	the	same	point	when	he
says	Christ	Jesus	is	the	one	“who	indeed	
intercedes	for	us”	
(Rom.	8:34).
Some	have	argued	that	this	work	of	high	priestly	intercession	is
only	the	act	of	remaining	in	the	Father’s	presence	as	a	continual
reminder	that	he	himself	has	paid	the	penalty	for	all	our	sins.
According	to	this	view,	Jesus	does	not	actually	make	specific
prayers	to	God	the	Father	about	individual	needs	in	our	lives,	but
“intercedes”	only	in	the	sense	of	remaining	in	God’s	presence	as
our	high	priestly	representative.
However,	this	view	does	not	seem	to	fit	the	actual	language	used	in
Romans	8:34	and	Hebrews	7:25.	In	both	cases,	the	word	
intercede
translates	the	Greek	term	
entygchanō.	
This	word	does	not	mean
merely	“to	stand	as	someone’s	representative	before	another
person,”	but	clearly	has	the	sense	of	making	specific	requests	or
petitions	before	someone.	For	example,	Festus	uses	this	word	to	say
to	King	Agrippa,	“You	see	this	man	about	whom	the	whole	Jewish
people	
petitioned	
me”	(Acts	25:24).	Paul	also	uses	it	of	Elijah	when
he	“
pleads	
with	God	against	Israel”	(Rom.	11:2).	In	both	cases	the
requests	are	very	specific,	not	just	general	representations.
	
4
We	may	conclude,	then,	that	both	Paul	and	the	author	of	Hebrews
are	saying	that	Jesus	continually	lives	in	the	presence	of	God	to
make	specific	requests	and	to	bring	specific	petitions	before	God	on
our	behalf.	This	is	a	role	that	Jesus,	as	God-man,	is	uniquely
qualified	to	fulfill.	Although	God	could	care	for	all	our	needs	in
response	to	direct	observation	(Matt.	6:8),	yet	it	has	pleased	God,	in
his	relationship	to	the	human	race,	to	decide	to	act	instead	in
response	to	prayer,	apparently	so	that	the	faith	shown	through
prayer	might	glorify	him.	It	is	especially	the	prayers	of	men	and
women	created	in	his	image	that	are	pleasing	in	God’s	sight.	In
Christ,	we	have	a	true	man,	a	perfect	man,	praying	and	thereby
continually	glorifying	God	through	prayer.	Thus,	human	manhood
is	raised	to	a	highly	exalted	position:	“There	is	one	God,	and	there
is	one	mediator	between	God	and	men,	
the	man	
Christ	Jesus”	(1
Tim.	2:5).
Yet	in	his	human	nature	alone	Jesus	could	not	of	course	be	such	a
great	high	priest	for	all	his	people	all	over	the	world.	He	could	not
hear	the	prayers	of	persons	far	away,	nor	could	he	hear	prayers	that
were	only	spoken	in	a	person’s	mind.	He	could	not	hear	all	requests
simultaneously	(for	in	the	world	at	any	one	moment	there	are
millions	of	people	praying	to	him).	Therefore,	in	order	to	be	the
perfect	high	priest	who	intercedes	for	us,	he	must	be	God	as	well	as
man.	He	must	be	one	who	in	his	divine	nature	can	both	know	all
things	and	bring	them	into	the	presence	of	the	Father.	Yet	because
he	became	and	continues	to	be	man	he	has	the	right	to	represent	us
before	God	and	he	can	express	his	petitions	from	the	viewpoint	of	a
sympathetic	high	priest,	one	who	understands	by	experience	what
we	go	through.
Therefore,	Jesus	is	the	only	person	in	the	whole	universe	for	all
eternity	who	can	be	such	a	heavenly	high	priest,	one	who	is	truly
God	and	truly	man,	exalted	forever	above	the	heavens.
The	thought	that	Jesus	is	continually	praying	for	us	should	give	us
great	encouragement.	He	always	prays	for	us	according	to	the
Father’s	will,	so	we	can	know	that	his	requests	will	be	granted.
Berkhof	says:
It	is	a	consoling	thought	that	Christ	is	praying	for	us,	even	when	we	are
negligent	in	our	prayer	life;	that	He	is	presenting	to	the	Father	those
spiritual	needs	which	were	not	present	to	our	minds	and	which	we	often
neglect	to	include	in	our	prayers;	and	that	He	prays	for	our	protection
against	the	dangers	of	which	we	are	not	even	conscious,	and	against	the
enemies	which	threaten	us,	though	we	do	not	notice	it.	He	is	praying
that	our	faith	may	not	cease,	and	that	we	may	come	out	victoriously	in
the	end.
	
5
C.	Christ	as	King
In	the	Old	Testament	the	king	has	authority	to	rule	over	the	nation
of	Israel.	In	the	New	Testament,	Jesus	was	born	to	be	King	of	the
Jews	(Matt.	2:2),	but	he	refused	any	attempt	by	people	to	try	to
make	him	an	earthly	king	with	earthly	military	and	political	power
(John	6:15).	He	told	Pilate,	“My	kingship	is	not	of	this	world;	if	my
kingship	were	of	this	world,	my	servants	would	fight,	that	I	might
not	be	handed	over	to	the	Jews;	but	my	kingship	is	not	from	the
world”	(John	18:36).	Nonetheless,	Jesus	did	have	a	kingdom	whose
arrival	he	announced	in	his	preaching	(Matt.	4:17,	23;	12:28,	et	al.).
He	is	in	fact	the	true	king	of	the	new	people	of	God.	Thus,	Jesus
refused	to	rebuke	his	disciples	who	cried	out	at	his	triumphal	entry
into	Jerusalem,	“Blessed	is	
the	King	
who	comes	in	the	name	of	the
Lord!”	(Luke	19:38;	cf.	vv.	39–40;	also	Matt.	21:5;	John	1:49;	Acts
17:7).
After	his	resurrection,	Jesus	was	given	by	God	the	Father	far
greater	authority	over	the	church	and	over	the	universe.	God	raised
him	up	and	“made	him	sit	at	his	right	hand	in	the	heavenly	places,
far	above	all	rule	and	authority	and	power	and	dominion,	
and
above	every	name	that	is	named,	not	only	in	this	age	but	also	in	that
which	is	to	come;	and	he	has	put	all	things	under	his	feet	and	has
made	him	the	head	over	all	things	for	the	church”	(Eph.	1:20–22;
Matt.	28:18;	1	Cor.	15:25).	That	authority	over	the	church	and	over
the	universe	will	be	more	fully	recognized	by	people	when	Jesus
returns	to	earth	in	power	and	great	glory	to	reign	(Matt.	26:64;	2
Thes.	1:7–10;	Rev.	19:11–16).	On	that	day	he	will	be	acknowledged
as	“
King	of	kings	
and	Lord	of	lords”	(Rev.	19:16)	and	every	knee
shall	bow	to	him	(Phil.	2:10).
D.	Our	Roles	as	Prophets,	Priests,	and	Kings
If	we	look	back	at	the	situation	of	Adam	before	the	fall	and	forward
to	our	future	status	with	Christ	in	heaven	for	eternity,	we	can	see
that	these	roles	of	prophet,	priest,	and	king	had	parallels	in	the
experience	that	God	originally	intended	for	man,	and	will	be
fulfilled	in	our	lives	in	heaven.
In	the	Garden	of	Eden,	Adam	was	a	“prophet”	in	that	he	had	true
knowledge	of	God	and	always	spoke	truthfully	about	God	and
about	his	creation.	He	was	a	“priest”	in	that	he	was	able	freely	and
openly	to	offer	prayer	and	praise	to	God.	There	was	no	need	of	a
sacrifice	to	pay	for	sins,	but	in	another	sense	of	sacrifice	Adam	and
Eve’s	work	would	have	been	offered	to	God	in	gratitude	and
thanksgiving,	and	so	would	have	been	a	“sacrifice”	of	another	sort
(cf.	Heb.	13:15).	Adam	and	Eve	were	also	“kings”	(or	king	and
queen)	in	the	sense	of	having	been	given	dominion	and	rule	over
the	creation	(Gen.	1:26–28).
After	sin	entered	into	the	world,	fallen	human	beings	no	longer
functioned	as	prophets,	for	they	believed	false	information	about
God	and	spoke	falsely	about	him	to	others.	They	no	longer	had
priestly	access	to	God	because	sin	cut	them	off	from	his	presence.
Instead	of	ruling	over	the	creation	as	kings,	they	were	subject	to	the
harshness	of	the	creation	and	tyrannized	by	flood,	drought,	and
unproductive	land,	as	well	as	by	tyrannical	human	rulers.	The
nobility	of	man	as	God	had	created	him—to	be	a	true	prophet,
priest,	and	king—was	lost	through	sin.
There	was	a	partial	recovery	of	the	purity	of	these	three	roles	in	the
establishment	of	the	three	offices	of	prophet,	priest,	and	king	in	the
kingdom	of	Israel.	From	time	to	time	godly	men	occupied	these
offices.	But	there	were	also	false	prophets,	dishonest	priests,	and
ungodly	kings,	and	the	original	purity	and	holiness	with	which	God
intended	man	to	fulfill	these	offices	were	never	fully	realized.
When	Christ	came,	we	saw	for	the	first	time	the	fulfillment	of	these
three	roles,	since	he	was	the	perfect	prophet,	who	most	fully
declared	God’s	words	to	us,	the	perfect	high	priest,	who	offered	the
supreme	sacrifice	for	sins	and	who	brought	his	people	near	to	God,
and	the	true	and	rightful	king	of	the	universe,	who	will	reign
forever	with	a	scepter	of	righteousness	over	the	new	heavens	and
new	earth.
But	amazingly	we	as	Christians	even	now	begin	to	imitate	Christ	in
each	of	these	roles,	though	in	a	subordinate	way.	We	have	a
“prophetic”	role	as	we	proclaim	the	gospel	to	the	world	and	thereby
bring	God’s	saving	Word	to	people.	In	fact,	whenever	we	speak
truthfully	about	God	to	believers	or	to	unbelievers	we	are	fulfilling
a	“prophetic”	function	(using	the	word	
prophetic	
in	a	very	broad
sense).
We	are	also	priests,	because	Peter	calls	us	“a	royal	priesthood”	(1
Peter	2:9).	He	invites	us	to	be	built	into	a	spiritual	temple	and	“to
be	a	holy	priesthood”	as	well	as	“to	offer	spiritual	sacrifices
acceptable	to	God	through	Jesus	Christ”	(1	Peter	2:5).	The	author	of
Hebrews	also	views	us	as	priests	who	are	able	to	enter	into	the	holy
of	holies	(Heb.	10:19,	22)	and	able	to	“continually	offer	up	a
sacrifice	of	praise	to	God,	that	is,	the	fruit	of	lips	that	acknowledge
his	name”	(Heb.	13:15).	He	also	tells	us	that	our	good	works	are
sacrifices	pleasing	to	God:	“Do	not	neglect	to	do	good	and	to	share
what	you	have,	for	such	
sacrifices	
are	pleasing	to	God”	(Heb.
13:16).	Paul	also	has	a	priestly	role	in	mind	for	us	when	he	writes,
“I	appeal	to	you	therefore,	brethren,	by	the	mercies	of	God,	to
present	your	bodies	
as	a	living	sacrifice,	
holy	and	acceptable	to
God,	which	is	your	spiritual	worship”	(Rom.	12:1).
We	also	share	in	part	now	in	the	kingly	reign	of	Christ,	since	we
have	been	raised	to	sit	with	him	in	the	heavenly	places	(Eph.	2:6),
thus	sharing	to	some	degree	in	his	authority	over	evil	spiritual
forces	that	may	be	arrayed	against	us	(Eph.	6:10–18;	James	4:7;	1
Peter	5:9;	1	John	4:4).	God	has	even	now	committed	to	us	authority
over	various	areas	in	this	world	or	in	the	church,	giving	to	some
authority	over	much	and	to	some	authority	over	little.	But	when	the
Lord	returns	those	who	have	been	faithful	over	little	will	be	given
authority	over	much	(Matt.	25:14–30).
When	Christ	returns	and	rules	over	the	new	heavens	and	new	earth,
we	will	once	again	be	true	“prophets”	because	our	knowledge	will
then	be	perfect	and	we	shall	know	as	we	are	known	(1	Cor.	13:12).
Then	we	will	speak	only	truth	about	God	and	about	his	world,	and
in	us	the	original	prophetic	purpose	which	God	had	for	Adam	will
be	fulfilled.	We	will	be	priests	forever,	for	we	will	eternally
worship	and	offer	prayer	to	God	as	we	behold	his	face	and	dwell	in
his	presence	(Rev.	22:3–4).	We	will	continually	offer	ourselves	and
all	that	we	do	or	have	as	sacrifices	to	our	most	worthy	king.
Yet	we	shall	also,	in	subjection	to	God,	share	in	ruling	over	the
universe,	for	with	him	we	shall	“reign	forever	and	ever”	(Rev.
22:5).	Jesus	says,	“He	who	conquers,	I	will	grant	him	
to	sit	with	me
on	my	throne,	
as	I	myself	conquered	and	sat	down	with	my	Father
on	his	throne”	(Rev.	3:21).	In	fact,	Paul	tells	the	Corinthians,	“Do
you	not	know	that	
the	saints	will	judge	the	world?	
.	.	.	Do	you	not
know	that	
we	are	to	judge	angels?”	
(1	Cor.	6:2–3).	Therefore	for
all	eternity,	we	shall	forever	function	as	subordinate	prophets,
priests,	and	kings,	yet	always	subject	to	the	Lord	Jesus,	the	supreme
prophet,	priest,	and	king.
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
Can	you	see	some	ways	in	which	an	understanding	of	Christ’s	role	as
prophet,	priest,	and	king	will	help	you	understand	more	fully	the
functions	of	prophets,	priests,	and	kings	in	the	Old	Testament?	Read	the
description	of	Solomon’s	kingdom	in	1	Kings	4:20–34	and	1	Kings
10:14–29.	Do	you	see	in	Solomon’s	kingdom	any	foreshadowing	of	the
three	offices	of	Christ?	Any	foreshadowing	of	Christ’s	eternal	kingdom?
Do	you	think	that	you	have	greater	or	lesser	privileges	living	now	as	a
member	of	the	church	in	the	new	covenant	age?
2
.	
Can	you	see	any	fulfillment	of	the	role	of	prophet	in	your	life	now?	Of
the	role	of	priest?	Of	the	role	of	king?	How	could	each	of	these	functions
be	developed	in	your	life?
SPECIAL	TERMS
intercession
	
priest
king
	
prophet
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the
bibliography	to	chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be
found	in	
Appendix	4
.)
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92			Litton,	219–38
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1875–76			Pope,	2:197–262
1940			Wiley,	2:187–216
1983			Carter,	1:363–64
3.			Baptist
1767			Gill,	1:602–44
1887			Boyce,	291–95
1907			Strong,	710–76
1917			Mullins,	303–4
1983–85			Erickson,	762–63
4.			Dispensational
1947			Chafer,	3:17–30
1986			Ryrie,	254–59
5.			Lutheran
1917–24			Pieper,	2:330–96
1934			Mueller,	301–18
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1559			Calvin,	1:494–503	(2.15)
1871–73			Hodge,	2:455–90,	592–609
1878			Dabney,	475–77,	483–87
1937–66			Murray,	
CW,	
1:44–58
1938			Berkhof,	356–66,	406–12
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955			Ott,	179–91
2.			Roman	Catholic:	Post–Vatican	II
1980			McBrien	(no	explicit	treatment)
Other	Works
Baker,	J.	P.	“Offices	of	Christ.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	476–77.
Letham,	Robert.	
The	Work	of	Christ.	
Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity
Press,	1993.
Reymond,	R.	L.	“Offices	of	Christ.”	In	
EDT,	
p.	793.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
1
	Peter	2:9–10:	
But	you	are	a	chosen	race,	a	royal	priesthood,	a	holy	nation,
God’s	own	people,	that	you	may	declare	the	wonderful	deeds	of	him	who
called	you	out	of	darkness	into	his	marvelous	light.	Once	you	were	no	people
but	now	you	are	God’s	people;	once	you	had	not	received	mercy	but	now	you
have	received	mercy.
HYMN
“Rejoice	the	Lord	Is	King”
This	powerful	hymn	encourages	us	to	rejoice	at	Christ’s	present	and
future	kingship.	(An	excellent	hymn	about	Christ’s	role	as	priest	is
“Arise,	My	Soul,	Arise,”	also	by	Charles	Wesley,	and	this	may	be
used	as	an	alternative	hymn.	Another	alternative	is	“How	Sweet	the
Name	of	Jesus	Sounds,”	by	John	Newton,	esp.	v.	
4.)
Rejoice,	the	Lord	is	King:	your	Lord	and	King	adore;
Rejoice,	give	thanks	and	sing,	and	triumph	evermore:
Lift	up	your	heart,	lift	up	your	voice;
Rejoice,	again	I	say,	rejoice.
Jesus,	the	Savior,	reigns,	the	God	of	truth	and	love;
When	he	had	purged	our	stains,	he	took	his	seat	above:
Lift	up	your	heart,	lift	up	your	voice;
Rejoice,	again	I	say,	rejoice.
His	kingdom	cannot	fail,	he	rules	o’er	earth	and	heav’n;
The	keys	of	death	and	hell	are	to	our	Jesus	giv’n:
Lift	up	your	heart,	lift	up	your	voice;
Rejoice,	again	I	say,	rejoice.
He	sits	at	God’s	right	hand	till	all	his	foes	submit,
And	bow	to	his	command,	and	fall	beneath	his	feet:
Lift	up	your	heart,	lift	up	your	voice;
Rejoice,	again	I	say,	rejoice.
AUTHOR:	CHARLES	WESLEY,	1746
NOTES
1
John	Calvin	(1509–64)	was	the	first	major	theologian	to	apply	these	three	categories	to	the	work	of	Christ	(see	his	
Institutes	of
the	Christian	Religion,	
Book	2,	Chapter	15).	The	categories	have	been	adapted	by	many	subsequent	theologians	as	a	helpful	way
of	understanding	various	aspects	of	Christ’s	work.
2
See	the	discussion	of	the	writing	of	the	books	in	the	Old	Testament	canon	in	
chapter	3
.
3
In	Luke	24:19	the	two	travelers	on	the	road	to	Emmaus	also	refer	to	Jesus	as	a	“prophet,”	thus	putting	him	in	a	general	category
of	religious	leaders	sent	from	God,	perhaps	for	the	benefit	of	the	stranger	whom	they	presumed	to	have	little	knowledge	of	the
events	surrounding	Jesus’	life.
4
Literature	outside	the	New	Testament	provides	further	examples	of	
entygchanō	
used	to	mean	“to	bring	requests	or	petitions.”
See,	e.g.,	Wisd.	8:20	(“I	
asked	
the	Lord,	and	made	petition	to	him”);	1	Macc.	8:32;	3	Macc.	6:37	(“They	
requested	
the	King,	that
he	send	them	back	to	their	home”);	1	Clem.	56:1;	Epistle	of	Polycarp	to	the	Philippians	4:3;	Josephus,	
Antiquities	
12:18;	16:170
(the	Jews	in	Cyrene	
petition	
Marcus	Agrippa	concerning	people	in	their	land	who	are	falsely	collecting	taxes).	More	examples
could	be	found	as	well	(cf.	also	Rom.	8:27,	and,	using	a	cognate	word,	v.	
26).
5
Berkhof,	
Systematic	Theology,	
p.	403.
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	30
The	Work	of	the	Holy	Spirit
What	are	the	distinctive	activities	of	the	Holy	Spirit	throughout	the
history	of	the	Bible?
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
In	the	previous	chapters	we	have	discussed	at	some	length	the
person	and	work	of	God	the	Father,	and,	more	recently,	the	person
and	work	of	God	the	Son,	Jesus	Christ.	We	have	also	examined	the
biblical	evidence	for	the	deity	and	distinct	personality	of	the	Holy
Spirit	(in	connection	with	the	doctrine	of	the	Trinity).	It	is
appropriate	now	in	this	chapter	that	we	focus	on	the	distinctive
work	of	the	Holy	Spirit.	Among	the	different	activities	of	the
members	of	the	Trinity,	what	activities	are	said	to	be	especially	the
work	of	God	the	Holy	Spirit?
We	should	realize	at	the	outset	that	other	chapters	in	this	book	deal
more	or	less	directly	with	certain	aspects	of	the	Holy	Spirit’s	work.
The	chapters	on	baptism	in	and	filling	with	the	Holy	Spirit	(39)	and
the	gifts	of	the	Holy	Spirit	(52–53)	deal	almost	entirely	with
specific	works	of	the	Holy	Spirit.	Moreover,	the	chapters	on	the
authority	of	Scripture	(4),	prayer	(18),	the	gospel	call	(33),
regeneration	(34),	sanctification	(38),	perseverance	(40),
glorification	(42),	church	discipline	(46),	the	means	of	grace	within
the	church	(48),	and	worship	(51)	all	treat	various	aspects	of	the
Holy	Spirit’s	work	in	the	world,	and	especially	in	the	lives	of
believers.	Nonetheless,	in	this	chapter	we	shall	attempt	to	gain	an
overview	of	the	teaching	of	all	of	Scripture	on	the	work	of	the	Holy
Spirit	in	order	to	understand	more	fully	what	kinds	of	activities
have	been	especially	delegated	to	the	Holy	Spirit	by	God	the	Father
and	God	the	Son.
We	may	define	the	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	as	follows:	
The	work	of
the	Holy	Spirit	is	to	manifest	the	active	presence	of	God	in	the
world,	and	especially	in	the	church.	
This	definition	indicates	that
the	Holy	Spirit	is	the	member	of	the	Trinity	whom	the	Scripture
most	often	represents	as	being	
present	
to	do	God’s	work	in	the
world.	Although	this	is	true	to	some	extent	throughout	the	Bible,	it
is	particularly	true	in	the	new	covenant	age.	In	the	Old	Testament,
the	presence	of	God	was	many	times	manifested	in	the	glory	of	God
and	in	theophanies,	and	in	the	gospels	Jesus	himself	manifested	the
presence	of	God	among	men.	But	after	Jesus	ascended	into	heaven,
and	continuing	through	the	entire	church	age,	the	Holy	Spirit	is	now
the	
primary	
manifestation	of	the	presence	of	the	Trinity	among	us.
He	is	the	one	who	is	most	prominently	
present	
with	us	now.
	
1
From	the	very	beginning	of	creation	we	have	an	indication	that	the
Holy	Spirit’s	work	is	to	complete	and	sustain	what	God	the	Father
has	planned	and	what	God	the	Son	has	begun,	for	in	Genesis	1:2,
“the	
Spirit	of	God	
was	moving	over	the	face	of	the	waters.”	And	at
Pentecost,	with	the	beginning	of	the	new	creation	in	Christ,	it	is	the
Holy	Spirit	who	comes	to	grant	power	to	the	church	(Acts	1:8;	2:4,
17–18).	Because	the	Holy	Spirit	is	the	person	of	the	Trinity	through
whom	God	particularly	manifests	his	presence	in	the	new	covenant
age,	it	is	appropriate	that	Paul	should	call	the	Holy	Spirit	the	“first
fruits”	(Rom.	8:23)	and	the	“guarantee”	(or	“down	payment,”	2
Cor.	1:22;	5:5)	of	the	full	manifestation	of	God’s	presence	that	we
will	know	in	the	new	heavens	and	new	earth	(cf.	Rev.	21:3–4).
Even	in	the	Old	Testament,	it	was	predicted	that	the	presence	of	the
Holy	Spirit	would	bring	abundant	blessings	from	God:	Isaiah
predicted	a	time	when	the	Spirit	would	bring	great	renewal.
For	the	palace	will	be	forsaken,	the	populous	city	deserted	.	.	.	
until
the	Spirit	is	poured	upon	us	from	on	high,	
and	the	wilderness	becomes
a	fruitful	field,	and	the	fruitful	field	is	deemed	a	forest.	Then	justice
will	dwell	in	the	wilderness,	and	righteousness	abide	in	the	fruitful
field.	And	the	effect	of	righteousness	will	be	peace,	and	the	result	of
righteousness,	quietness	and	trust	for	ever.	My	people	will	abide	in	a
peaceful	habitation,	in	secure	dwellings,	and	in	quiet	resting	places.
(Isa.	32:14–18)
Similarly,	God	prophesied	through	Isaiah	to	Jacob,	“For	I	will	pour	water	on
the	thirsty	land,	and	streams	on	the	dry	ground;	
I	will	pour	my	Spirit	upon
your	descendants,	
and	my	blessing	on	your	offspring”	(Isa.	44:3).
By	contrast,	the	departure	of	the	Holy	Spirit	removed	the	blessing
of	God	from	a	people:	“But	they	rebelled	and	
grieved	his	holy
Spirit;	
therefore	he	turned	to	be	their	enemy,	and	himself	fought
against	them”	(Isa.	63:10).	Nonetheless,	several	prophecies	in	the
Old	Testament	predicted	a	time	when	the	Holy	Spirit	would	come
in	greater	fullness,	a	time	when	God	would	make	a	new	covenant
with	his	people	(Ezek.	36:26–27;	37:14;	39:29;	Joel	2:28–29).
In	what	specific	ways	does	the	Holy	Spirit	bring	God’s	blessing?
We	may	distinguish	four	aspects	of	the	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	to
bring	evidence	of	God’s	presence	and	to	bless:	(1)	the	Holy	Spirit
empowers;	
(2)	the	Holy	Spirit	
purifies;	
(3)	the	Holy	Spirit	
reveals;
(4)	the	Holy	Spirit	
unifies.	
We	will	examine	each	of	these	four
activities	below.	Finally,	we	must	recognize	that	these	activities	of
the	Holy	Spirit	are	not	to	be	taken	for	granted,	and	they	do	not	just
happen	automatically	among	God’s	people.	Rather,	the	Holy	Spirit
reflects	the	pleasure	or	displeasure	of	God	with	the	faith	and
obedience—or	unbelief	and	disobedience—of	God’s	people.
Because	of	this,	we	need	to	look	at	a	fifth	aspect	of	the	Holy
Spirit’s	activity:	(5)	the	Holy	Spirit	
gives	stronger	or	weaker
evidence	
of	the	presence	and	blessing	of	God,	according	to	our
response	to	him.
A.	The	Holy	Spirit	Empowers
1.
	He	Gives	Life.
	In	the	realm	of	nature	it	is	the	role	of	the	Holy	Spirit	to	give
life	to	all	animate	creatures,	whether	on	the	ground	or	in	the	sky	and	sea,	for
“When	you	send	forth	your	Spirit,	they	are	created”	(Ps.	104:30).	Conversely,
if	God	“should	take	back	his	spirit	to	himself,	and	gather	to	himself	his
breath,	all	flesh	would	perish	together,	and	man	would	return	to	dust”	(Job
34:14–15).	Here	we	see	the	role	of	the	Spirit	in	the	giving	and	sustaining	of
human	and	animal	life.
Parallel	with	this	is	the	role	of	the	Holy	Spirit	to	give	us	new	life	in
regeneration.
	
2
	
Jesus	told	Nicodemus,	“That	which	is	born	of	the
flesh	is	flesh,	and	that	which	is	
born	of	the	Spirit	
is	spirit.	Do	not
marvel	that	I	said	to	you,	‘You	must	be	born	anew’	”	(John	3:6–7;
cf.	vv.	5,	8;	6:63;	2	Cor.	3:6).	He	also	said,	“It	is	
the	Spirit	who
gives	life;	
the	flesh	profits	nothing”	(John	6:63	NASB;	cf.	2	Cor.
3:6;	Acts	10:44–47;	Titus	3:5).
	
3
	
Consistent	with	this	life-giving
function	of	the	Holy	Spirit	is	the	fact	that	it	was	the	Holy	Spirit	who
conceived	Jesus	in	the	womb	of	Mary	his	mother	(Matt.	1:18,	20;
Luke	1:35).	And	on	the	day	when	Christ	returns,	it	is	the	same	Holy
Spirit	who	will	complete	this	life-giving	work	by	giving	new
resurrection	life	to	our	mortal	bodies:	“If	the	Spirit	of	him	who
raised	Jesus	from	the	dead	dwells	in	you,	he	who	raised	Christ
Jesus	from	the	dead	will	give	life	to	your	mortal	bodies	also
through	his	Spirit	
which	dwells	in	you”	(Rom.	8:11).
2.	He	Gives	Power	for	Service.
a.	Old	Testament:
	In	the	Old	Testament,	the	Holy	Spirit	frequently
empowered	people	for	special	service.	He	empowered	Joshua	with	leadership
skills	and	wisdom	(Num.	27:18;	Deut.	34:9),	and	empowered	the	judges	to
deliver	Israel	from	their	oppressors	(note	how	“the	Spirit	of	the	L
ORD
	came
upon”	Othniel	in	Judg.	3:10,	Gideon	in	6:34,	Jephthah	in	11:29,	and	Samson
in	13:25;	14:6,	19;	15:14).	The	Holy	Spirit	came	mightily	upon	Saul	to	arouse
him	to	battle	against	the	enemies	of	Israel	(1	Sam.	11:6),	and	when	David	was
anointed	as	king,	“the	Spirit	of	the	L
ORD
	came	mightily	upon	David	from	that
day	forward”	(1	Sam.	16:13),	equipping	David	to	fulfill	the	task	of	kingship
to	which	God	had	called	him.
	
4
	
In	a	slightly	different	kind	of	empowering,	the
Holy	Spirit	endowed	Bezalel	with	artistic	skills	for	the	construction	of	the
tabernacle	and	its	equipment	(Ex.	31:3;	35:31),	and	with	the	ability	to	teach
these	skills	to	others	(Ex.	35:34).
	
5
The	Holy	Spirit	also	protected	God’s	people	and	enabled	them	to
overcome	their	enemies.	For	example,	God	put	his	Spirit	in	the
midst	of	them	at	the	time	of	the	exodus	(Isa.	63:11–12)	and	later,
after	their	return	from	exile,	put	his	Spirit	in	the	midst	of	them	to
protect	them	and	keep	them	from	fear	(Hag.	2:5).	When	Saul	was
attempting	to	capture	David	by	force,	the	Holy	Spirit	came	upon
Saul’s	messengers	(1	Sam.	19:20)	and	eventually	upon	Saul	himself
(v.	
23),	causing	them	involuntarily	to	fall	to	the	ground	and	to
prophesy	for	hours,	thus	defeating	Saul’s	purpose	and	humiliating
him	in	response	to	his	malicious	show	of	force	against	David	and
Samuel.	In	a	similar	way,	while	Ezekiel	was	prophesying	judgment
by	the	power	of	the	Holy	Spirit	against	some	of	the	leaders	of	Israel
(Ezek.	11:5),	one	of	the	leaders	named	Pelatiah	actually	died	(Ezek.
11:13).	In	this	way	the	Holy	Spirit	brought	immediate	judgment	on
him.
Finally,	the	Old	Testament	predicted	a	time	when	the	Holy	Spirit
would	anoint	a	Servant-Messiah	in	great	fullness	and	power:
And	the	
Spirit	of	the	L
ORD
	shall	rest	upon	him,	
the	spirit	of	wisdom
and	understanding,	the	spirit	of	counsel	and	might,	the	spirit	of
knowledge	and	the	fear	of	the	L
ORD
.	And	his	delight	shall	be	in	the
fear	of	the	L
ORD
.	(Isa.	11:2–3)
Isaiah	prophesied	that	God	would	say	of	this	coming	Servant,	“I	have	put	my
Spirit	upon	him”	(Isa.	42:1),	and	he	himself	would	say,	“The	Spirit	of	the
Lord	GOD	is	upon	me,	because	the	L
ORD
	has	anointed	me”	(Isa.	61:1;	cf.
Luke	4:18).
Before	leaving	this	discussion	of	the	empowering	of	the	Holy	Spirit
in	the	Old	Testament,	we	should	note	that	it	sometimes	is	said	that
there	was	no	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	
within	
people	in	the	Old
Testament.	This	idea	has	mainly	been	inferred	from	Jesus’	words	to
the	disciples	in	John	14:17,	“He	dwells	with	you,	and	will	be	
in
you.”	But	we	should	not	conclude	from	this	verse	that	there	was	no
work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	within	people	before	Pentecost.	Although
the	Old	Testament	does	not	frequently	speak	of	people	who	had	the
Holy	Spirit	in	them	or	who	were	filled	with	the	Holy	Spirit,	there
are	a	few	examples:	Joshua	is	said	to	have	the	Holy	Spirit	within
him	(Num.	27:18;	Deut.	34:9),	as	are	Ezekiel	(Ezek.	2:2;	3:24),
Daniel	(Dan.	4:8–9,	18;	5:11),	and	Micah	(Mic.	3:8).
	
6
	
This	means
that	when	Jesus	says	to	his	disciples	that	the	Holy	Spirit	“dwells
with	you	and	will	be	in	you”	(John	14:17),	he	cannot	mean	that
there	was	an	absolute	“within/without”	difference	between	the	old
and	new	covenant	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit.	Nor	can	John	7:39	(“as
yet	the	Spirit	had	not	been	given,	because	Jesus	was	not	yet
glorified”)	mean	that	there	was	
no	
activity	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in
people’s	lives	before	Pentecost.	Both	of	these	passages	must	be
different	ways	of	saying	that	the	more	powerful,	fuller	work	of	the
Holy	Spirit	that	is	characteristic	of	life	after	Pentecost	had	not	yet
begun	in	the	lives	of	the	disciples.	The	Holy	Spirit	had	not	come
within	them	in	the	way	in	which	God	had	promised	to	put	the	Holy
Spirit	within	his	people	when	the	new	covenant	would	come	(see
Ezek.	36:26,	27;	37:14),	nor	had	the	Holy	Spirit	been	poured	out	in
the	great	abundance	and	fullness	that	would	characterize	the	new
covenant	age	(Joel	2:28–29).	In	this	powerful	new	covenant	sense,
the	Holy	Spirit	was	not	yet	at	work	within	the	disciples.
	
7
b.	New	Testament:
	The	empowering	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in	the	New
Testament	is	seen	first	and	most	fully	in	his	anointing	and	empowering	of
Jesus	as	the	Messiah.	The	Holy	Spirit	descended	upon	Jesus	at	his	baptism
(Matt.	3:16;	Mark	1:11;	Luke	3:22).	John	the	Baptist	said,	“I	saw	the	Spirit
descend	as	a	dove	from	heaven,	and	it	remained	on	him”	(John	1:32).
Therefore	Jesus	entered	into	the	temptation	in	the	wilderness	“full	of	the	Holy
Spirit”	(Luke	4:1),	and	after	his	temptation,	at	the	beginning	of	his	ministry,
“Jesus	returned	
in	the	power	of	the	Spirit	
into	Galilee”	(Luke	4:14).	When
Jesus	came	to	preach	in	the	synagogue	at	Nazareth,	he	declared	that	Isaiah’s
prophecy	was	fulfilled	in	himself:	“The	Spirit	of	the	Lord	is	upon	me,	because
he	has	anointed	me	to	preach	good	news	to	the	poor.	He	has	sent	me	to
proclaim	release	to	the	captives	and	recovering	of	sight	to	the	blind,	to	set	at
liberty	those	who	are	oppressed,	to	proclaim	the	acceptable	year	of	the	Lord”
(Luke	4:18–19).	The	power	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in	Jesus’	life	was	then	seen	in
his	subsequent	miracles,	as	he	cast	out	demons	with	a	word	and	healed	all
who	came	to	him	(Luke	4:36,	40–41).	The	Holy	Spirit	was	pleased	to	dwell	in
Jesus	and	empower	him,	for	he	fully	delighted	in	the	absolute	moral	purity	of
Jesus’	life.	In	the	context	of	talking	about	his	own	ministry,	and	the	Father’s
blessing	on	that	ministry,	Jesus	says,	“It	is	not	by	measure	that	he	gives	the
Spirit;	the	Father	loves	the	Son,	and	has	given	all	things	into	his	hand”	(John
3:34–35).	Jesus	had	an	anointing	of	the	Holy	Spirit	without	measure,	and	this
anointing	“remained	on	him”	(John	1:32;	cf.	Acts	10:38).
The	Holy	Spirit	also	empowered	Jesus’	disciples	for	various	kinds
of	ministry.	Jesus	had	promised	them,	“You	shall	
receive	power
when	the	Holy	Spirit	has	come	upon	you;	
and	you	shall	be	my
witnesses	in	Jerusalem	and	in	all	Judea	and	Samaria	and	to	the	end
of	the	earth”	(Acts	1:8).
	
8
	
There	are	several	specific	examples	of	the
Holy	Spirit’s	empowering	the	early	Christians	to	work	miracles	as
they	proclaimed	the	gospel	(note	Stephen	in	Acts	6:5,	8;	and	Paul	in
Rom.	15:19;	1	Cor.	2:4).	But	the	Holy	Spirit	also	gave	great	power
to	the	preaching	of	the	early	church	so	that	when	the	disciples	were
filled	with	the	Holy	Spirit	they	proclaimed	the	Word	boldly	and
with	great	power	(Acts	4:8,	31;	6:10;	1	Thess.	1:5;	1	Peter	1:12).	In
general,	we	can	say	that	the	Holy	Spirit	speaks	through	the	gospel
message	as	it	is	effectively	proclaimed	to	people’s	hearts.	The	New
Testament	ends	with	an	invitation	from	both	the	Holy	Spirit	and	the
church,	who	together	call	people	to	salvation:	“The	Spirit	and	the
Bride	say,	‘Come.’	And	let	him	who	hears	say,	‘Come’	”	(Rev.
22:17).	In	fact,	not	only	in	the	preaching	of	the	gospel	message,	but
also	in	the	reading	and	teaching	of	Scripture,	the	Holy	Spirit
continues	to	speak	to	people’s	hearts	each	day	(see	Heb.	3:7	and
10:15,	where	the	author	quotes	an	Old	Testament	passage	and	says
that	the	Holy	Spirit	is	now	speaking	that	passage	to	his	readers).
Another	aspect	of	empowering	Christians	for	service	is	the	Holy
Spirit’s	activity	of	giving	spiritual	gifts	to	equip	Christians	for
ministry.	After	listing	a	variety	of	spiritual	gifts,	Paul	says,	“But
one	and	the	same	Spirit	works	all	these	things,	
distributing	to	each
one	individually	just	as	He	wills”	(1	Cor.	12:11	NASB).	Since	the
Holy	Spirit	is	the	one	who	shows	or	manifests	God’s	presence	in
the	world,	it	is	not	surprising	that	Paul	can	call	spiritual	gifts
“manifestations”	of	the	Holy	Spirit	(1	Cor.	12:7).
	
9
	
When	spiritual
gifts	are	active,	it	is	another	indication	of	the	presence	of	God	the
Holy	Spirit	in	the	church.
	
10
In	the	prayer	lives	of	individual	believers,	we	find	that	the	Holy
Spirit	empowers	prayer	and	makes	it	effective.	“We	do	not	know
how	to	pray	as	we	ought,	but	the	Spirit	himself	intercedes	for	us
with	sighs	too	deep	for	words”	(Rom.	8:26).
	
11
	
And	Paul	says	that
we	“have	access	in	one	Spirit	to	the	Father”	(Eph.	2:18).	One
specific	kind	of	prayer	that	the	New	Testament	says	is	empowered
by	the	Holy	Spirit	is	the	gift	of	prayer	in	tongues	(1	Cor.	12:10–11;
14:2,	14–17).
	
12
Yet	another	aspect	of	the	Holy	Spirit’s	work	in	empowering
Christians	for	service	is	empowering	people	to	overcome	spiritual
opposition	to	the	preaching	of	the	gospel	and	to	God’s	work	in
people’s	lives.	This	power	in	spiritual	warfare	was	first	seen	in	the
life	of	Jesus,	who	said,	“If	it	is	
by	the	Spirit	of	God	
that	I	cast	out
demons,	then	the	kingdom	of	God	has	come	upon	you”	(Matt.
12:28).	When	Paul	came	to	Cyprus	he	encountered	opposition	from
Elymas	the	magician,	but	he,	“
filled	with	the	Holy	Spirit,	
looked
intently	at	him	and	said,	‘You	son	of	the	devil,	you	enemy	of	all
righteousness,	full	of	all	deceit	and	villainy,	will	you	not	stop
making	crooked	the	straight	paths	of	the	Lord?	And	now,	behold,
the	hand	of	the	Lord	is	upon	you,	and	you	shall	be	blind	and	unable
to	see	the	sun	for	a	time.’	Immediately	mist	and	darkness	fell	upon
him	and	he	went	about	seeking	people	to	lead	him	by	the	hand”
(Acts	13:9–11).	The	gift	of	“distinguishing	between	spirits”	(1	Cor.
12:10),	given	by	the	Holy	Spirit,	is	also	to	be	a	tool	in	this	warfare
against	the	forces	of	darkness,	as	is	the	Word	of	God,	which
functions	as	the	“sword	of	the	Spirit”	(Eph.	6:17)	in	spiritual
conflict.
B.	The	Holy	Spirit	Purifies
Since	this	member	of	the	Trinity	is	called	the	
Holy	
Spirit,	it	is	not
surprising	to	find	that	one	of	his	primary	activities	is	to	cleanse	us
from	sin	and	to	“sanctify	us”	or	make	us	more	holy	in	actual
conduct	of	life.	Even	in	the	lives	of	unbelievers	there	is	some
restraining	influence	of	the	Holy	Spirit	as	he	convicts	the	world	of
sin	(John	16:8–11;	Acts	7:51).	But	when	people	become	Christians
the	Holy	Spirit	does	an	initial	cleansing	work	in	them,	making	a
decisive	break	with	the	patterns	of	sin	that	were	in	their	lives
before.
	
13
	
Paul	says	of	the	Corinthians,	“You	were	washed,	
you
were	sanctified,	
you	were	justified	in	the	name	of	the	Lord	Jesus
Christ	and	
in	the	Spirit	of	our	God”	
(1	Cor.	6:11;	see	also	Titus
3:5).	This	cleansing	and	purifying	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	is
apparently	what	is	symbolized	by	the	metaphor	of	fire	when	John
the	Baptist	says	that	Jesus	will	baptize	people	“with	the	Holy	Spirit
and	with	fire”	(Matt.	3:11;	Luke	3:16).
After	the	initial	break	with	sin	that	the	Holy	Spirit	brings	about	in
our	lives	at	conversion,	he	also	produces	in	us	growth	in	holiness	of
life.	He	brings	forth	the	
“fruit	of	the	Spirit”	
within	us	(“love,	joy,
peace,	patience,	kindness,	goodness,	faithfulness,	gentleness,	self-
control,”	Gal.	5:22–23),	those	qualities	that	reflect	the	character	of
God.	As	we	continually	“are	being	changed	into	his	likeness	from
one	degree	of	glory	to	another,”	we	should	be	reminded	that	“this
comes	from	the	Lord	who	is	the	Spirit”	(2	Cor.	3:18).	Sanctification
comes	by	the	power	of	the	Holy	Spirit	(2	Thess.	2:13;	1	Peter	1:2;
cf.	Rom.	8:4,	15–16),	so	that	it	is	
“by	the	Spirit”	
that	we	are	able	to
“put	to	death	the	deeds	of	the	body”	and	grow	in	personal	holiness
(Rom.	8:13;	see	7:6;	Phil.	1:19).
	
14
Some	people	today	say	a	purifying	(or	healing)	work	of	the	Holy
Spirit	occurs	when	they	are	“slain	in	the	spirit,”	an	experience	in
which	they	suddenly	fall	to	the	ground	in	a	semi-conscious	state
and	remain	there	for	minutes	or	hours.	Although	the	phrase
“slaying	in	the	Spirit”	is	nowhere	in	Scripture,	there	are	instances
when	people	fell	to	the	ground,	or	fell	into	a	trance,	in	the	presence
of	God.
	
15
	
Contemporary	experiences	should	be	evaluated
according	to	what	lasting	results	(“fruit”)	they	bear	in	people’s	lives
(see	Matt.	7:15–20;	1	Cor.	14:12,	26c).
C.	The	Holy	Spirit	Reveals
1.
	Revelation	to	Prophets	and	Apostles.
	In	chapter	4	we	discussed	in	great
detail	the	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in	revealing	God’s	words	to	the	Old
Testament	prophets	and	New	Testament	apostles,	in	many	cases	so	that	these
words	could	be	put	into	Scripture	(see,	for	example,	Num.	24:2;	Ezek.	11:5;
Zech.	7:12;	et	al.).	The	whole	of	the	Old	Testament	Scriptures	came	about
because	“men	spoke	from	God	as	they	were	carried	along	by	the	Holy	Spirit”
(2	Peter	1:21	NIV).	Several	other	passages	mention	this	work	of	the	Holy
Spirit	in	Old	Testament	prophets	(see	Matt.	22:43;	Acts	1:16;	4:25;	28:25;	1
Peter	1:21).	The	New	Testament	apostles	and	others	who	wrote	words	of	New
Testament	Scripture	were	also	guided	“into	all	the	truth”	by	the	Holy	Spirit
(John	16:13),	who	also	spoke	to	the	apostles	what	he	heard	from	the	Father
and	the	Son,	and	declared	to	them	“the	things	that	are	to	come”	(John	16:3;	cf.
Eph.	3:5).	Others	who	were	filled	with	the	Holy	Spirit	also	spoke	or	sang
words	that	became	part	of	Scripture,	such	as	Elizabeth	(Luke	1:41),	Zechariah
(Luke	1:67),	and	Simeon	(Luke	2:25).
2.	He	Gives	Evidence	of	God’s	Presence.
	Sometimes	it	has	been	said	that
the	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	is	not	to	call	attention	to	himself	but	rather	to	give
glory	to	Jesus	and	to	God	the	Father.	But	this	seems	to	be	a	false	dichotomy,
not	supported	by	Scripture.	Of	course	the	Holy	Spirit	does	glorify	Jesus	(John
16:14)	and	bear	witness	to	him	(John	15:26;	Acts	5:32;	1	John	2:3;	1	John
4:2).	But	this	does	not	mean	that	he	does	not	make	his	own	actions	and	words
known!	The	Bible	has	hundreds	of	verses	
talking	about	the	work	of	the	Holy
Spirit,	
making	his	work	known,	and	the	Bible	is	itself	spoken	or	inspired	by
the	Holy	Spirit!
Moreover,	
the	Holy	Spirit	frequently	made	himself	known	by
phenomena	that	indicated	his	activity,	
both	in	the	Old	Testament
and	in	the	New	Testament	periods.	This	was	true	when	the	Holy
Spirit	came	upon	the	seventy	elders	with	Moses	and	they
prophesied	(Num.	11:25–26),	and	when	the	Holy	Spirit	came	upon
the	judges	to	enable	them	to	do	great	works	of	power	(Judg.	14:6,
19;	15:14,	et	al.).	In	these	instances	people	could	see	the	effect	of
the	Holy	Spirit	coming	on	the	Lord’s	servants.	This	was	also	true
when	the	Holy	Spirit	came	mightily	upon	Saul	and	he	prophesied
with	a	band	of	prophets	(1	Sam.	10:6,	10),	and	it	was	frequently
true	when	he	empowered	the	Old	Testament	prophets	to	give	public
prophecies.
The	Holy	Spirit	also	made	his	presence	evident	in	a	visible	way
when	he	descended	as	a	dove	on	Jesus	(John	1:32),	or	came	as	a
sound	of	a	rushing	wind	and	with	visible	tongues	of	fire	on	the
disciples	at	Pentecost	(Acts	2:2–3).	In	addition,	when	people	had
the	Holy	Spirit	poured	out	on	them	and	began	to	speak	in	tongues
or	praise	God	in	a	remarkable	and	spontaneous	way	(see	Acts	2:4;
10:44–46;	19:6),	the	Holy	Spirit	certainly	made	his	presence	known
as	well.	And	Jesus	promised	that	the	Holy	Spirit	within	us	would	be
so	powerful	he	would	be	like	a	river	of	living	water	flowing	out
from	our	inmost	beings	(see	John	7:39)—a	simile	that	suggests	that
people	would	be	aware	of	a	presence	that	would	somehow	be
perceptible.
In	the	lives	of	individual	believers,	the	Holy	Spirit	does	not	entirely
conceal	his	work,	but	makes	himself	known	in	various	ways.	He
bears	witness	with	our	spirit	that	we	are	children	of	God	(Rom.
8:16),	and	cries,	“Abba!	Father!”	(Gal.	4:6).	He	provides	a
guarantee	or	a	down	payment	of	our	future	fellowship	with	him	in
heaven	(2	Cor.	1:22;	5:5),	and	reveals	his	desires	to	us	so	that	we
can	be	led	by	those	desires	and	follow	them	(Rom.	8:4–16;	Gal.
5:16–25).	He	gives	gifts	that	manifest	his	presence	(1	Cor.	12:7–
11).	And	from	time	to	time	he	works	miraculous	signs	and	wonders
that	strongly	attest	to	the	presence	of	God	in	the	preaching	of	the
gospel	(Heb.	2:4;	cf.	1	Cor.	2:4;	Rom.	15:19).
It	seems	more	accurate,	therefore,	to	say	that	although	the	Holy
Spirit	does	glorify	Jesus,	he	also	frequently	calls	attention	to	his
work	and	
gives	recognizable	evidences	that	make	his	presence
known.	
Indeed,	it	seems	that	one	of	his	primary	purposes	in	the	new
covenant	age	is	
to	manifest	the	presence	of	God,	
to	give	indications
that	make	the	presence	of	God	known.	And	when	the	Holy	Spirit
works	in	various	ways	that	can	be	perceived	by	believers	and
unbelievers,	this	encourages	people’s	faith	that	God	is	near	and	that
he	is	working	to	fulfill	his	purposes	in	the	church	and	to	bring
blessing	to	his	people.
3.	He	Guides	and	Directs	God’s	People.
	Scripture	gives	many	examples	of
direct	guidance	from	the	Holy	Spirit	to	various	people.	In	fact,	in	the	Old
Testament,	God	said	that	it	was	sin	for	the	people	to	enter	into	agreements
with	others	when	those	agreements	were	“not	of	my	Spirit”	(Isa.	30:1).
Apparently	the	people	had	been	deciding	on	the	basis	of	their	own	wisdom
and	common	sense	rather	than	seeking	the	guidance	of	God’s	Holy	Spirit
before	they	entered	into	such	agreements.	In	the	New	Testament,	the	Holy
Spirit	led	Jesus	into	the	wilderness	for	his	period	of	temptation	(Matt.	4:1;
Luke	4:1);	in	fact,	so	strong	was	this	leading	of	the	Holy	Spirit	that	Mark	can
say	that	“The	Spirit	immediately	drove	him	out	into	the	wilderness”	(Mark
1:12).
	
16
In	other	contexts	the	Holy	Spirit	gave	direct	words	of	guidance	to
people,	saying	to	Philip,	for	example,	“Go	up	and	join	this	chariot”
(Acts	8:29),	or	telling	Peter	to	go	with	three	men	who	came	to	him
from	Cornelius’	household	(Acts	10:19–20;	11:12),	or	directing	the
Christians	at	Antioch,	“Set	apart	for	me	Barnabas	and	Saul	for	the
work	to	which	I	have	called	them”	(Acts	13:2).
Also	in	the	category	of	“giving	guidance,”	but	of	a	much	more
direct	and	compelling	kind,	are	several	examples	where	the	Holy
Spirit	actually	transported	a	person	from	one	place	to	another.	This
was	so	when	“the	Spirit	of	the	Lord	caught	up	Philip;	and	the
eunuch	saw	him	no	more.	.	.	.	But	Philip	was	found	at	Azotus”
(Acts	8:39–40)—the	guidance	in	this	case	could	hardly	have	been
more	clear!	But	similar	things	happened	to	some	Old	Testament
prophets,	for	those	who	knew	Elijah	seemed	to	expect	that	the
Spirit	of	God	would	snatch	him	up	and	transport	him	somewhere	(1
Kings	18:12;	2	Kings	2:16:	“It	may	be	that	the	Spirit	of	the	L
ORD
has	caught	him	up	and	cast	him	upon	some	mountain	or	into	some
valley”).	The	Spirit	of	the	Lord	several	times,	Ezekiel	says,	“lifted
me	up”	and	brought	him	to	one	place	or	another	(Ezek.	11:1;	37:1;
43:5),	an	experience	that	was	also	part	of	John’s	later	visions	in
Revelation	(Rev.	17:3;	21:10).
	
17
But	in	the	vast	majority	of	cases	the	leading	and	guiding	by	the
Holy	Spirit	is	not	nearly	as	dramatic	as	this.	Scripture	talks	rather
about	a	day-to-day	guidance	by	the	Holy	Spirit—being	“led”	by	the
Holy	Spirit	(Rom.	8:14;	Gal.	5:18),	and	walking	according	to	the
Spirit	(Rom.	8:4;	Gal.	5:16).	Now	it	is	possible	to	understand	Paul
here	to	be	referring	only	to	obedience	to	the	moral	commands	of
Scripture,	but	this	interpretation	seems	quite	unlikely,	especially
since	the	entire	context	is	dealing	with	emotions	and	desires	which
we	perceive	in	a	more	subjective	way,	and	because	Paul	here
contrasts	being	led	by	the	Spirit	with	following	the	desires	of	the
flesh	or	the	sinful	nature:
But	I	say,	
walk	by	the	Spirit,	
and	do	not	gratify	the	desires	of	the	flesh.
For	the	desires	of	the	flesh	are	against	the	Spirit,	and	the	
desires	of	the
Spirit	
are	against	the	flesh.	.	.	.	Now	the	works	of	the	flesh	are	plain:
fornication,	impurity,	licentiousness,	idolatry,	sorcery,	enmity,	strife,
jealousy,	anger.	.	.	.	But	the	fruit	of	the	Spirit	is	love,	joy,	peace,
patience,	kindness,	goodness,	faithfulness,	gentleness,	self-
control.	.	.	.	If	we	live	by	the	Spirit,	let	us	also	walk	by	the	Spirit.	Let
us	have	no	self-conceit,	no	provoking	of	one	another,	no	envy	of	one
another.	(Gal.	5:16–26)
The	contrast	between	“desires	of	the	flesh”	and	“desires	of	the	Spirit”	implies
that	our	lives	should	be	responding	moment	by	moment	to	the	desires	of	the
Holy	Spirit,	not	to	the	desires	of	the	flesh.	Now	it	may	be	that	a	large	part	of
responding	to	those	desires	is	the	intellectual	process	of	understanding	what
love,	joy,	peace	(and	so	forth)	are,	and	then	acting	in	a	loving	or	a	joyful	or
peaceful	way.	But	this	can	hardly	constitute	the	whole	of	such	guidance	by
the	Spirit	because	these	emotions	are	not	simply	things	we	think	about;	they
are	things	we	also	feel	and	sense	at	a	deeper	level.	In	fact,	the	word	translated
“desires”	(Gk.	
epithymia
)	is	a	word	that	refers	to	strong	human	desires,	not
simply	to	intellectual	decisions.	Paul	implies	that	we	are	to	follow	these
desires	as	they	are	produced	by	the	Holy	Spirit	in	us.	Moreover,	the	idea	of
being	“led”	by	the	Holy	Spirit	(Gal.	5:18)	implies	an	active	
personal
participation	by	the	Holy	Spirit	in	guiding	us.	This	is	something	more	than
our	reflecting	on	biblical	moral	standards,	and	includes	an	involvement	by	the
Holy	Spirit	in	relating	to	us	as	persons	and	leading	and	directing	us.
There	are	specific	examples	of	the	Holy	Spirit	guiding	people
directly	in	the	book	of	Acts.	After	the	decision	of	the	Jerusalem
council,	the	leaders	wrote	in	their	letter	to	the	churches,	“It	has
seemed	good	to	the	Holy	Spirit	
and	to	us	to	lay	upon	you	no	greater
burden	than	these	necessary	things”	(Acts	15:28).	This	verse
suggests	that	the	council	must	have	had	a	sense	of	the	good
pleasure	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in	these	areas:	they	knew	what	“seemed
good	to	the	Holy	Spirit.”	On	Paul’s	second	missionary	journey,
Luke	writes	that	they	were	“forbidden	by	the	Holy	Spirit	to	speak
the	word	in	Asia”	and	then	that	“they	attempted	to	go	into	Bithynia,
but	the	Spirit	of	Jesus	did	not	allow	them”	(Acts	16:6–7).	Of
course,	no	written	principle	from	the	Old	Testament	Scriptures
would	have	led	them	to	conclude	that	they	could	not	preach	in	Asia
or	Bithynia.	The	Holy	Spirit	must	rather	have	communicated	his
direct	guidance	to	them	in	some	specific	way,	whether	through
words	heard	audibly	or	in	the	mind,	or	through	strong	subjective
impressions	of	a	lack	of	the	Holy	Spirit’s	presence	and	blessing	as
they	attempted	to	travel	to	these	different	areas.	Later,	when	Paul	is
on	his	way	to	Jerusalem,	he	says,	“I	am	going	to	Jerusalem,	
bound
in	the	Spirit,	
not	knowing	what	shall	befall	me	there;	except	that	the
Holy	Spirit	testifies	to	me	in	every	city	that	imprisonment	and
afflictions	await	me”	(Acts	20:22–23).	Paul	did	not	think	he	had
another	choice—so	clearly	did	the	Holy	Spirit	manifest	his
presence	and	desires	to	him,	that	Paul	could	speak	of	having	been
“bound”	in	the	Spirit.
	
18
In	other	cases	the	Holy	Spirit	gave	guidance	to	establish	people	in
various	ministries	or	church	offices.	So	the	Holy	Spirit	said	to	some
in	the	church	at	Antioch,	“Set	apart	for	me	Barnabas	and	Saul	for
the	work	to	which	I	have	called	them”	(Acts	13:2).	And	Paul	could
say	that	the	Holy	Spirit	had	established	the	elders	of	the	Ephesian
church	in	their	office	because	he	said,	“Take	heed	to	yourselves	and
to	all	the	flock,	in	which	the	Holy	Spirit	has	made	you	overseers”
(Acts	20:28).	Finally,	the	Holy	Spirit	did	provide	some	guidance
through	the	means	of	spiritual	gifts	such	as	prophecy	(1	Cor.	14:29–
33).
	
19
4.	He	Provides	a	Godlike	Atmosphere	When	He	Manifests	His	Presence.
Because	the	Holy	Spirit	is	fully	God,	and	shares	all	the	attributes	of	God,	his
influence	will	be	to	bring	a	Godlike	character	or	atmosphere	to	the	situations
in	which	he	is	active.	Because	he	is	the	
Holy	
Spirit	he	will	at	times	bring
about	a	conviction	of	sin,	righteousness,	and	judgment	(John	16:8–11).
Because	God	is	love,	the	Holy	Spirit	pours	God’s	love	into	our	hearts	(Rom.
5:5;	15:30;	Col.	1:8)	and	often	the	strongly	manifested	presence	of	the	Holy
Spirit	will	create	an	atmosphere	of	love.	Because	God	is	“not	a	God	of
confusion	but	of	peace”	(1	Cor.	14:33),	the	Holy	Spirit	brings	an	atmosphere
of	peace	into	situations:	“The	kingdom	of	God	is	not	food	and	drink,	but
righteousness	and	peace	and	joy	in	the	Holy	Spirit”	(Rom.	14:17;	cf.	Gal.
5:22).	This	last	verse	also	teaches	that	the	Holy	Spirit	imparts	an	atmosphere
of	joy	(see	also	Acts	13:52;	1	Thess.	1:6).	Although	the	list	is	not	exhaustive,
Paul	summarized	many	of	these	Godlike	qualities	that	the	Holy	Spirit
produces	when	he	listed	the	various	elements	of	the	fruit	of	the	Spirit	in
Galatians	5:22–23.
Other	elements	of	the	atmosphere	that	the	Holy	Spirit	can	impart
are	truth	(John	14:17;	15:26;	16:13;	1	John	5:7),	wisdom	(Deut.
34:9;	Isa.	11:2),	comfort	(Acts	9:31),	freedom	(2	Cor.	3:17),
righteousness	(Rom.	14:17),	hope	(Rom.	15:13;	cf.	Gal.	5:5),	an
awareness	of	sonship	or	adoption	(Rom.	8:15–16;	Gal.	4:5–6),	and
even	glory	(2	Cor.	3:8).	The	Holy	Spirit	also	brings	unity	(Eph.
4:3),	and	power	(Acts	1:18;	1	Cor.	2:4;	2	Tim.	1:7;	cf.	Acts	1:8).	All
of	these	elements	of	the	Holy	Spirit’s	activity	indicate	the	various
aspects	of	an	atmosphere	in	which	he	makes	his	own	presence—
and	thereby	his	own	character—known	to	the	people.
5.	He	Gives	Us	Assurance.
	The	Holy	Spirit	bears	witness	“with	our	spirits
that	we	are	children	of	God”	(Rom.	8:16),	and	gives	evidence	of	the	work	of
God	within	us:	“And	by	this	we	know	that	he	abides	in	us,	by	the	Spirit	which
he	has	given	us”	(1	John	3:24).	“By	this	we	know	that	we	abide	in	him	and	he
in	us,	
because	he	has	given	us	of	his	own	Spirit”	
(1	John	4:13).	The	Holy
Spirit	not	only	witnesses	to	us	that	we	are	God’s	children,	but	also	witnesses
that	God	abides	in	us	and	that	we	are	abiding	in	him.	Once	again	more	than
our	intellect	is	involved:	the	Spirit	works	to	give	us	assurance	at	the
subjective	level	of	spiritual	and	emotional	perception	as	well.
6.	He	Teaches	and	Illumines.
	Another	aspect	of	the	Holy	Spirit’s	revealing
work	is	teaching	certain	things	to	God’s	people	and	illumining	them	so	that
they	can	understand	things.	Jesus	promised	this	teaching	function	especially
to	his	disciples	when	he	said	that	the	Holy	Spirit	“will	
teach	
you	all	things,
and	bring	to	your	remembrance	all	that	I	have	said	to	you”	(John	14:26),	and
said,	“he	will	guide	you	into	all	the	truth”	(John	16:13).	Moreover,	he
promised	that	when	his	disciples	were	put	on	trial	because	of	persecution,	the
Holy	Spirit	would	teach	them	at	that	time	what	to	say	(Luke	12:12;	cf.	Matt.
10:20;	Mark	13:11).	At	other	times	the	Holy	Spirit	revealed	specific
information	to	people—showing	Simeon	that	he	would	not	die	until	he	saw
the	Messiah,	for	example	(Luke	2:26),	or	revealing	to	Agabus	that	a	famine
would	occur	(Acts	11:28)	or	that	Paul	would	be	taken	captive	in	Jerusalem
(Acts	21:11).	In	other	cases	the	Holy	Spirit	revealed	to	Paul	that	he	would
suffer	in	Jerusalem	(Acts	20:23;	21:4)	and	expressly	said	to	Paul	things	that
would	happen	in	the	latter	days	(1	Tim.	4:1),	and	revealed	to	him	what	God
has	prepared	for	those	who	love	him	(1	Cor.	2:10).
The	illuminating	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	is	seen	in	the	fact	that	he
enables	us	to	understand:	“We	have	received	not	the	spirit	of	the
world,	but	the	Spirit	which	is	from	God,	
that	we	might	understand
the	gifts	bestowed	on	us	by	God”	(1	Cor.	2:12).	Therefore,	“The
unspiritual	man	does	not	receive	the	gifts	(literally,	things)	of	the
Spirit	of	God”	but	“The	spiritual	man	judges	all	things”	(1	Cor.
2:14–15).	We	should	pray	that	the	Holy	Spirit	would	give	us	his
illumination	and	thereby	help	us	to	understand	rightly	when	we
study	Scripture	or	when	we	ponder	situations	in	our	lives.	Although
he	did	not	mention	the	Holy	Spirit	specifically,	the	psalmist	prayed
for	such	illumination	when	he	asked	God,	“Open	my	eyes,	that	I
may	behold	wondrous	things	out	of	your	law”	(Ps.	119:18).
Similarly,	Paul	prayed	for	the	Christians	in	and	around	Ephesus,
.	.	.	that	the	God	of	our	Lord	Jesus	Christ,	the	Father	of	glory,	may	give
you	a	spirit	[or:	“the	Spirit,”	NIV]	of	wisdom	and	of	revelation	in	the
knowledge	of	him,	having	the	eyes	of	your	hearts	enlightened,	that	you
may	know	what	is	the	hope	to	which	he	has	called	you,	what	are	the
riches	of	his	glorious	inheritance	in	the	saints,	and	what	is	the
immeasurable	greatness	of	his	power	in	us	who	believe,	according	to
the	working	of	his	great	might.	(Eph.	1:17–19)
D.	The	Holy	Spirit	Unifies
When	the	Holy	Spirit	was	poured	out	on	the	church	at	Pentecost,
Peter	proclaimed	that	the	prophecy	of	Joel	2:28–32	was	fulfilled:
But	this	is	what	was	spoken	by	the	prophet	Joel:
“And	in	the	last	days	it	shall	be,	God	declares,
that	I	will	pour	out	my	Spirit	upon	all	flesh,
and	your	sons	and	your	daughters	shall	prophesy,
and	your	young	men	shall	see	visions,
and	your	old	men	shall	dream	dreams;
yes,	and	on	my	menservants	and	my	maidservants	in	those	days
I	will	pour	out	my	Spirit;	and	they	shall	prophesy.”	(Acts	2:16–18)
There	is	an	emphasis	on	the	Holy	Spirit	coming	on	a	community	of	believers
—not	just	a	leader	like	Moses	or	Joshua,	but	sons	and	daughters,	old	men	and
young	men,	menservants	and	maidservants—all	will	receive	the	outpouring	of
the	Holy	Spirit	in	this	time.
	
20
In	the	event	of	Pentecost,	the	Holy	Spirit	created	a	new	community
which	was	the	church.	The	community	was	marked	by
unprecedented	unity,	as	Luke	reminds	us:
And	all	who	believed	were	together	and	had	all	things	in	common;
and	they	sold	their	possessions	and	goods	and	distributed	them	to	all,
as	any	had	need.	And	day	by	day,	attending	the	temple	together	and
breaking	bread	in	their	homes,	they	partook	of	food	with	glad	and
generous	hearts,	praising	God	and	having	favor	with	all	the	people.
(Acts	2:44–47)
Paul	blesses	the	Corinthian	church	with	a	blessing	that	seeks	the
unifying	fellowship	of	the	Holy	Spirit	for	all	of	them	when	he	says,
“The	grace	of	the	Lord	Jesus	Christ	and	the	love	of	God	and	the
fellowship	of	the	Holy	Spirit
	
21
	
be	with	you	all”	(2	Cor.	13:14).	It	is
significant	that	in	this	trinitarian	verse	he	especially	attributes	the
deepening	of	fellowship	among	believers	not	to	the	Father	or	the
Son	but	to	the	Holy	Spirit,	a	statement	consistent	with	the	overall
unifying	work	of	the	Spirit	in	the	church.
This	unifying	function	of	the	Holy	Spirit	is	also	evident	when	Paul
tells	the	Philippians,	“If	therefore	there	is	any	encouragement	in
Christ,	if	there	is	any	consolation	of	love,	if	there	is	any	
fellowship
of	the	Spirit	.	.	.	
make	my	joy	complete	by	being	of	the	same	mind,
maintaining	the	same	love,	united	in	spirit,	intent	on	one	purpose”
(Phil.	2:1–2	NASB).
	
22
	
In	a	similar	way,	when	he	emphasizes	the
new	unity	between	Jews	and	Gentiles	in	the	church,	he	says	that
“through	him	we	both	have	access	in	one	Spirit	to	the	Father”	(Eph.
2:18),	and	says	that	in	the	Lord	they	are	built	into	the	one	new
house	of	God	“in	the	Spirit”	(Eph.	2:22).	When	he	wants	to	remind
them	of	the	unity	they	should	have	as	Christians	he	exhorts	them	to
be	“eager	to	maintain	
the	unity	of	the	Spirit	
in	the	bond	of	peace”
(Eph.	4:3).
Paul’s	discussion	of	spiritual	gifts	also	repeats	this	theme	of	the
unifying	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit.	Whereas	we	might	think	that
people	who	have	differing	gifts	would	not	readily	get	along	well
with	each	other,	Paul’s	conclusion	is	just	the	opposite:	differing
gifts	draw	us	together,	because	we	are	forced	to	depend	on	each
other.	“The	eye	cannot	say	to	the	hand,	‘I	have	no	need	of	you,’	nor
again	the	head	to	the	feet,	‘I	have	no	need	of	you’	”	(1	Cor.	12:21).
These	differing	gifts,	Paul	tells	us,	are	empowered	by	“one	and	the
same	Spirit,	who	apportions	to	each	one	individually	as	he	wills”	(1
Cor.	12:11),	so	that	in	the	church,	“To	each	is	given	the
manifestation	of	the	Spirit	
for	the	common	good”	(1	Cor.	12:7).	In
fact,	“in	one	Spirit	we	were	all	baptized	into	one	body—Jews	or
Greeks,	slaves	or	free—and	all	were	made	to	drink	of	one	Spirit”	(1
Cor.	12:13,	author’s	translation).
	
23
The	idea	that	the	Holy	Spirit	unifies	the	church	is	also	evident	in
the	fact	that	“strife	.	.	.	disputes,	dissensions,	factions”	(Gal.	5:20
NASB)	are	desires	of	the	flesh	that	are	opposed	to	being	“led	by	the
Spirit”	(Gal.	5:18;	cf.	v.	
25).	The	Holy	Spirit	is	the	one	who
produces	love	in	our	hearts	(Rom.	5:5;	Gal.	5:22;	Col.	1:8),	and	this
love	“binds	everything	together	in	perfect	harmony”	(Col.	3:14).
Therefore	when	the	Holy	Spirit	is	working	strongly	in	a	church	to
manifest	God’s	presence,	one	evidence	will	be	a	beautiful	harmony
in	the	church	community	and	overflowing	love	for	one	another.
E.	The	Holy	Spirit	Gives	Stronger	or	Weaker	Evidence	of	the	Presence
and	Blessing	of	God	According	to	Our	Response	to	Him
Many	examples	in	both	the	Old	and	New	Testament	indicate	that
the	Holy	Spirit	will	bestow	or	withdraw	blessing	according	to
whether	or	not	he	is	pleased	by	the	situation	he	sees.	It	is
noteworthy	that	Jesus	was	completely	without	sin	and	the	Holy
Spirit	“remained	on	him”	(John	1:32)	and	was	given	to	him	without
measure	(John	3:34).	In	the	Old	Testament	the	Holy	Spirit	came
mightily	upon	Samson	several	times	(Judg.	13:25;	14:6,	19;	15:14),
but	ultimately	left	him	when	he	persisted	in	sin	(Judg.	16:20).
Similarly,	when	Saul	persisted	in	disobedience	the	Holy	Spirit
departed	from	him	(1	Sam.	16:14).	And	when	the	people	of	Israel
rebelled	and	grieved	the	Holy	Spirit	he	turned	against	them	(Isa.
63:10).
Also	in	the	New	Testament	the	Holy	Spirit	can	be	grieved	and	cease
to	bring	blessing	in	a	situation.	Stephen	rebuked	the	Jewish	leaders,
saying,	“You	always	
resist	the	Holy	Spirit”	
(Acts	7:51).	Paul	warns
the	Ephesian	Christians,	“Do	not	
grieve	the	Holy	Spirit	of	God,	
in
whom	you	were	sealed	for	the	day	of	redemption”	(Eph.	4:30),	and
exhorts	the	Thessalonian	church,	“Do	not	
quench	the	Spirit”	
(1
Thess.	5:19;	cf.	the	metaphor	of	delaying	to	open	the	door	and
thereby	disappointing	one’s	lover	in	Song	of	Sol.	5:3,	6).	In	a
similar	vein,	Paul	gives	a	serious	warning	to	Christians	not	to	defile
their	bodies	by	joining	them	to	a	prostitute	because	the	Holy	Spirit
lives	within	their	bodies:	“Do	you	not	know	that	your	body	is	a
temple	of	the	Holy	Spirit	within	you,	which	you	have	from	God?
You	are	not	your	own;	you	were	bought	with	a	price.	So	glorify
God	in	your	body”	(1	Cor.	6:19–20).
Even	more	serious	than	grieving	or	quenching	the	Holy	Spirit	is	a
deeper,	more	hardened	disobedience	to	him	that	brings	strong
judgment.	When	Peter	rebuked	Ananias,	“Why	has	Satan	filled
your	heart	to	lie	to	the	Holy	Spirit	and	to	keep	back	part	of	the
proceeds	of	the	land?”	(Acts	5:3),	he	fell	down	dead.	Similarly,
when	Peter	said	to	Ananias’s	wife	Sapphira,	“How	is	it	that	you
have	agreed	together	to	tempt	the	Spirit	of	the	Lord?”	(Acts	5:9),
she	immediately	fell	down	dead	as	well.	The	book	of	Hebrews
warns	those	who	are	in	danger	of	falling	away	that	severe
punishment	is	deserved	by	the	man	“who	has	spurned	the	Son	of
God,	and	profaned	the	blood	of	the	covenant	by	which	he	was
sanctified,	and	
outraged	the	Spirit	of	grace”	
(Heb.	10:29).	For	such
a	person	there	only	remains	“a	fearful	prospect	of	judgment”	(Heb.
10:27).
	
24
Finally,	there	remains	one	more	level	of	offense	against	the	Holy
Spirit.	This	kind	of	offense	is	even	more	serious	than	grieving	him
or	acting	with	the	hardened	disobedience	to	him	that	brings
discipline	or	judgment.	It	is	possible	so	to	offend	the	Holy	Spirit
that	his	convicting	work	will	not	be	brought	to	bear	again	in	a
person’s	life.
Every	sin	and	blasphemy	will	be	forgiven	men,	but	the	
blasphemy
against	the	Spirit	
will	not	be	forgiven.	And	whoever	says	a	word
against	the	Son	of	man	will	be	forgiven;	but	whoever	speaks	against
the	Holy	Spirit	will	not	be	forgiven,	either	in	this	age	or	in	the	age	to
come.	(Matt.	12:31–32;	cf.	Mark	3:29;	Luke	12:10)
These	statements	are	made	in	a	context	in	which	the	Pharisees	willfully	and
maliciously	attribute	to	Satan	the	powerful	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	that	was
evident	in	the	ministry	of	Jesus.	Since	the	Holy	Spirit	so	clearly	manifested
the	presence	of	God,	those	who	willfully	and	maliciously	spoke	against	him
and	attributed	his	activity	instead	to	the	power	of	Satan	were	guilty,	Jesus
said,	“of	an	eternal	sin”	(Mark	3:29).
	
25
All	of	these	passages	indicate	that	we	must	be	very	careful	not	to
grieve	or	offend	the	Holy	Spirit.	He	will	not	force	himself	on	us
against	our	wills	(see	1	Cor.	14:32),	but	if	we	resist	and	quench	and
oppose	him,	then	his	empowering	will	depart	and	he	will	remove
much	of	the	blessing	of	God	from	our	lives.
On	the	other	hand,	in	the	life	of	Christians	whose	conduct	is
pleasing	to	God,	the	Holy	Spirit	will	be	present	to	bring	great
blessing.	The	Holy	Spirit	was	“poured	out”	in	fullness	at	Pentecost
(see	Acts	2:17–18)	and	he	now	dwells	within	all	true	believers,
making	them	temples	of	the	living	God	(1	Cor.	3:16;	6:19–20).	We
can	know	close	fellowship	and	partnership	with	the	Holy	Spirit	in
our	lives	(2	Cor.	3:14;	Phil.	2:1).	He	entrusts	gifts	(1	Cor.	12:11)
and	truth	(2	Tim.	1:14)	and	ministries	(Acts	20:28)	to	us.	In	fact,	so
full	and	abundant	will	be	his	presence	that	Jesus	could	promise	that
he	will	flow	out	of	our	inmost	being	like	“rivers	of	living	water”
(John	7:38–39).	Peter	promises	that	his	presence	especially	rests	on
those	who	suffer	for	the	sake	of	Christ:	“If	you	are	reproached	for
the	name	of	Christ,	you	are	blessed,	because	the	spirit	of	glory	and
of	God	rests	upon	you”	(1	Peter	4:14).
Therefore	it	is	important	that	all	our	ministry	be	done	
in	the	Holy
Spirit,	
that	is,	that	we	consciously	dwell	in	the	Godlike	atmosphere
created	by	the	Holy	Spirit—the	atmosphere	of	power,	love,	joy,
truth,	holiness,	righteousness,	and	peace.	But	greater	than	these
characteristics	of	the	atmosphere	created	by	the	Holy	Spirit	is	the
sense	of	the	presence	of	the	Holy	Spirit	himself—
to	be	in	the	Holy
Spirit	is	really	to	be	in	an	atmosphere	of	God’s	manifested	presence.
This	is	why	people	in	the	New	Testament	can	walk	in	the	comfort
of	the	Holy	Spirit	(Acts	9:31),	and	why	it	is	possible	just	to	be	“in
the	Spirit”	as	John	was	on	the	Lord’s	day	(Rev.	1:10;	cf.	4:2).
It	is	surprising	how	many	particular	activities	are	said	in	the	New
Testament	to	be	done	“in”	the	Holy	Spirit:	it	is	possible	to	
rejoice	
in
the	Holy	Spirit	(Luke	10:21),	to	
resolve	
or	decide	something	in	the
Holy	Spirit	(Acts	19:21),	to	have	one’s	
conscience	bear	witness	
in
the	Holy	Spirit	(Rom.	9:1),	to	have	
access	to	God	
in	the	Holy	Spirit
(Eph.	2:18),	to	
pray	
in	the	Holy	Spirit	(Eph.	6:18;	Jude	20),	and	to
love	
in	the	Holy	Spirit	(Col.	1:8).	In	the	light	of	these	texts,	we
might	ask	ourselves,	for	how	many	of	these	activities	during	each
day	are	we	consciously	aware	of	the	Holy	Spirit’s	presence	and
blessing?
It	is	also	possible	to	be	filled	with	the	Holy	Spirit	(Eph.	5:18;	cf.
Luke	1:15,	41,	67;	4:1;	Acts	2:4;	4:8;	6:3,	5;	7:55;	9:17;	11:24;
13:9).	To	be	filled	with	the	Holy	Spirit	is	to	be	filled	with	the
immediate	presence	of	God	himself,	and	it	therefore	will	result	in
feeling	what	God	feels,	desiring	what	God	desires,	doing	what	God
wants,	speaking	by	God’s	power,	praying	and	ministering	in	God’s
strength,	and	knowing	with	the	knowledge	which	God	himself
gives.
	
26
	
In	times	when	the	church	experiences	revival	the	Holy
Spirit	produces	these	results	in	people’s	lives	in	especially	powerful
ways.
Therefore	in	our	Christian	lives	it	is	important	that	we	depend	on
the	Holy	Spirit’s	power,	recognizing	that	any	significant	work	is
done	“Not	by	might,	nor	by	power,	
but	by	my	Spirit,	
says	the	L
ORD
of	hosts”	(Zech.	4:6).	Paul	is	emphatic	in	telling	the	Galatians	that
the	Holy	Spirit	was	received	by	faith	in	the	beginning	of	their
Christian	life	(Gal.	3:2)	and	would	continue	to	work	according	to
their	faith	in	their	lives	subsequent	to	conversion:	“Having	begun
with	the	Spirit,	are	you	now	ending	with	the	flesh?	
.	.	.	Does	he	who
supplies	the	Spirit	to	you	and	works	miracles	among	you	do	so	by
works	of	the	law,	or	by	hearing	with	faith?”	(Gal.	3:3,	5).
Therefore	we	are	to	walk	according	to	the	guidance	of	the	Holy
Spirit	(Rom.	8:12–16;	Gal.	5:16–26)	and	set	our	minds	on	the
things	of	the	Spirit	(Rom.	8:4–6).	All	our	ministry,	whatever	form	it
may	take,	is	to	be	done	in	the	power	of	the	Holy	Spirit.
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
In	the	past,	has	it	been	hard	for	you	to	think	of	the	Holy	Spirit	as	a
person	rather	than	simply	as	a	presence	or	force?	What	items	(if	any)	in
this	chapter	have	helped	you	think	more	readily	of	the	Holy	Spirit	as	a
person?	Do	you	think	that	you	have	a	consciousness	of	relating	to	the
Holy	Spirit	as	a	person	who	is	distinct	from	God	the	Father	and	God	the
Son?	What	might	help	you	be	more	aware	of	this	distinction	among	the
members	of	the	Trinity	as	they	relate	to	you?
2
.	
Do	you	perceive	any	difference	in	the	way	the	Father,	Son,	and	Holy
Spirit	relate	to	you	in	your	Christian	life?	If	so,	can	you	explain	what	that
difference	is	or	how	you	are	aware	of	it?
3
.	
Have	you	ever	been	especially	aware	of	the	Holy	Spirit’s	empowering	in
a	specific	situation	of	ministry?	(This	could	have	been	while	doing
evangelism	or	counseling,	Bible	teaching	or	preaching,	prayer	or
worship,	or	in	some	other	ministry	situation.)	How	did	you	perceive	the
presence	of	the	Holy	Spirit	at	that	time,	or	what	made	you	aware	of	his
presence?
4
.	
In	your	own	experience,	in	what	ways	does	the	guidance	of	the	Holy
Spirit	come	to	you?	Is	it	primarily	(or	exclusively)	through	the	words	of
Scripture?	If	so,	are	there	times	when	certain	Scripture	passages	seem	to
come	alive	or	speak	with	great	relevance	and	forcefulness	to	you	at	the
moment?	How	do	you	know	when	this	is	happening?	If	the	Holy	Spirit’s
guidance	has	come	to	you	in	other	ways	in	addition	to	speaking	through
the	words	of	Scripture,	what	have	those	other	ways	been?
5
.	
Do	you	have	a	sense	from	time	to	time	of	the	pleasure	or	displeasure	of
the	Holy	Spirit	at	some	course	of	action	that	you	are	taking?	Is	there
anything	in	your	life	right	now	that	is	grieving	the	Holy	Spirit?	What	do
you	plan	to	do	about	it?
6
.	
Did	the	Holy	Spirit	immediately	leave	Samson	when	he	began	to	sin	(see
Judg.	13:25;	14:6,	19;	15:14)?	Why	or	why	not?	Is	the	presence	of
spiritual	power	in	someone’s	ministry	a	guarantee	that	the	Holy	Spirit	is
pleased	with	all	of	that	person’s	life?
SPECIAL	TERMS
blasphemy	against	the	Holy	Spirit
	
in	the	Holy	Spirit
filled	with	the	Holy	Spirit
	
manifestation	of	God’s	active
Holy	Spirit
	
presence
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the
bibliography	to	chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be
found	in	
Appendix	4
.)
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92			Litton,	242–47
1930			Thomas,	90–99
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1875–76			Pope,	2:321–36
1940			Wiley,	2:303–33
1960			Purkiser,	183–203
1983			Carter,	1:415–72
3.			Baptist
1917			Mullins,	359–65
1976–83			Henry,	4:476–93;	6:370–401
1983–85			Erickson,	845–83
4.			Dispensational
1947			Chafer,	1:397–414;	6:26–298
1949			Thiessen,	251–56
1986			Ryrie,	341–90
5.			Lutheran
1917–24			Pieper	(no	extensive	treatment,	but	see
extensive	index	entries:	4:391–99)
1934			Mueller,	443
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1559			Calvin,	2:537–42	(3.1)
1887–1921			Warfield,	
SSW,	
1:203–22;	
BD,	
101–32
1937–66			Murray,	
CW,	
1:138–42,	186–92;	
CW,	
3:210–14
1938			Berkhof,	423–31
7.			Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988–92			Williams,	2:137–207,	237–70
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955			Ott	(no	explicit	treatment)
2.			Roman	Catholic:	Post-Vatican	II
1980			McBrien	(no	explicit	treatment)
Other	Works
Bruner,	Frederick	Dale.	
A	Theology	of	the	Holy	Spirit.	
Grand	Rapids:
Eerdmans,	1970.
Carson,	D.	A.	
Showing	the	Spirit:	A	Theological	Exposition	of	1
Corinthians	12–14.	
Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1987.
Carter,	Charles.	
The	Person	and	Ministry	of	the	Holy	Spirit.	
Grand
Rapids:	Baker,	1974.
Caulley,	T.	S.	“Holy	Spirit.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	521–27.
Gaffin,	Richard	B.,	Jr.	“The	Holy	Spirit.”	
WTJ	
43:1	(Fall	1980),	pp.	58–
78.
Green,	Michael.	
I	Believe	in	the	Holy	Spirit.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,
1975.
Hawthorne,	Gerald.	
The	Presence	and	the	Power:	The	Significance	of	the
Holy	Spirit	in	the	Life	and	Ministry	of	Jesus.	
Dallas:	Word,	1991.
Hoekema,	Anthony	A.	“The	Role	of	the	Holy	Spirit.”	In	
Saved	By	Grace.
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	and	Exeter:	Paternoster,	1989,	pp.	28–53.
Horton,	S.	M.	
What	the	Bible	Says	About	the	Holy	Spirit.	
Springfield,
Mo.:	Gospel	Publishing	House,	1976.
Ladd,	George	E.	
The	Presence	of	the	Future:	The	Eschatology	of	Biblical
Realism.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1974.
Moule,	C.	F.	D.	
The	Holy	Spirit.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1978.
Pache,	Rene.	
The	Person	and	Work	of	the	Holy	Spirit.	
Chicago:	Moody,
1954.
Packer,	J.	I.	“Holy	Spirit.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	316–19.
_____.	
Keep	in	Step	with	the	Spirit.	
Old	Tappan,	N.J.:	Revell,	1984.
Palmer,	Edwin	H.	
The	Person	and	Ministry	of	the	Holy	Spirit.	
Grand
Rapids:	Baker,	1958.
Ryrie,	C.	C.	
The	Holy	Spirit.	
Chicago:	Moody,	1965.
Smeaton,	G.	
The	Doctrine	of	the	Holy	Spirit.	
2d	ed.	Edinburgh:	T.	and	T.
Clark,	1889.
Sproul,	R.	C.	
The	Mystery	of	the	Holy	Spirit.	
Wheaton,	Ill.:	Tyndale,
1990.
Stott,	John	R.	W.	
Baptism	and	Fullness:	The	Work	of	the	Holy	Spirit
Today.	
Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,	1964.
Swete,	Henry	B.	
The	Holy	Spirit	in	the	New	Testament.	
2d	ed.	London:
Macmillan,	1910.
White,	John.	
When	the	Spirit	Comes	with	Power.	
Downers	Grove,	Ill.:
InterVarsity	Press,	1988.
Wood,	Leon	J.	
The	Holy	Spirit	in	the	Old	Testament.	
Grand	Rapids:
Zondervan,	1976.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
Romans	8:
1
2–
1
4:	
So	then,	brethren,	we	are	debtors,	not	to	the	flesh,	to	live
according	to	the	flesh—for	if	you	live	according	to	the	flesh	you	will	die,	but	if
by	the	Spirit	you	put	to	death	the	deeds	of	the	body	you	will	live.	For	all	who
are	led	by	the	Spirit	of	God	are	sons	of	God.
HYMN
“Come,	O	Creator	Spirit”
This	is	one	of	the	oldest	hymns	in	any	hymnal,	written	by	an
anonymous	author	in	the	tenth	century	or	earlier.	It	directly
addresses	the	Holy	Spirit	and	asks	him	to	come	and	bring	blessing
in	our	hearts,	filling	us	with	joy	and	love	and	praise,	and	giving	us
protection	from	the	enemy	and	peace	in	our	lives.
Come,	O	Creator	Spirit	blest,
And	in	our	hearts	take	up	thy	rest;
Spirit	of	grace,	with	heav’nly	aid
Come	to	the	souls	whom	thou	hast	made.
Thou	art	the	Comforter,	we	cry,
Sent	to	the	earth	from	God	Most	High,
Fountain	of	life	and	fire	of	love,
And	our	anointing	from	above.
Bringing	from	heav’n	our	sev’n-fold	dow’r,
Sign	of	our	God’s	right	hand	of	pow’r,
O	blessed	Spirit,	promised	long,
Thy	coming	wakes	the	heart	to	song.
Make	our	dull	minds	with	rapture	glow,
Let	human	hearts	with	love	o’erflow;
And,	when	our	feeble	flesh	would	fail,
May	thine	immortal	strength	prevail.
Far	from	our	souls	the	foe	repel,
Grant	us	in	peace	henceforth	to	dwell;
Ill	shall	not	come,	nor	harm	betide,
If	only	thou	wilt	be	our	guide.
Show	us	the	Father,	Holy	One,
Help	us	to	know	th’	eternal	Son;
Spirit	divine,	for	evermore
Thee	will	we	trust	and	thee	adore.
ANON.,	TENTH	CENTURY
Alternative	hymn:
“Spirit	of	God,	Descend	Upon	My	Heart”
Spirit	of	God,	descend	upon	my	heart;
Wean	it	from	earth,	through	all	its	pulses	move;
Stoop	to	my	weakness,	mighty	as	thou	art,
And	make	me	love	thee	as	I	ought	to	love.
Hast	thou	not	bid	us	love	thee,	God	and	King?
All,	all	thine	own,	soul,	heart,	and	strength	and	mind.
I	see	thy	cross	-	there	teach	my	heart	to	cling:
O	let	me	seek	thee,	and	O	let	me	find.
Teach	me	to	feel	that	thou	art	always	nigh;
Teach	me	the	struggles	of	the	soul	to	bear,
To	check	the	rising	doubt,	the	rebel	sigh;
Teach	me	the	patience	of	unanswered	prayer.
Teach	me	to	love	thee	as	thine	angels	love,
One	holy	passion	filling	all	my	frame;
The	baptism	of	the	heav’n	descended	Dove,
My	heart	an	altar,	and	thy	love	the	flame.
AUTHOR:	GEORGE	CROLY,	1854
NOTES
1
In	this	discussion,	when	I	use	the	word	“present”	I	mean	“present	to	bless,”	as	discussed	in	the	section	on	God’s	omnipotence	in
chapter	11.	Of	course,	since	he	is	fully	God,	the	
being	
of	the	Holy	Spirit	is	always	present	everywhere	(he	is	omnipresent),	but	he
does	not	always	show	his	presence	in	activities	that	bring	blessing	(see	
chapter	11
).
2
See	the	discussion	of	regeneration	in	
chapter	34
.	Moreover,	as	we	argue	in	chapter	39,	the	phrase	“baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit”	is
used	by	the	New	Testament	(for	example,	in	1	Cor.	12:13)	to	speak	of	the	Holy	Spirit’s	work	at	the	time	we	become	Christians
(though	many	evangelicals	today,	especially	in	charismatic	and	Pentecostal	groups,	would	understand	“baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit”
to	refer	to	something	the	Holy	Spirit	does	after	conversion).
3
Related	to	the	life-giving	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	is	the	fact	that	he	also	seals	his	work	to	us	so	that	he	keeps	true	believers	from
falling	away	from	God	and	losing	their	salvation	(Eph.	1:13).
4
It	is	apparently	in	the	sense	of	equipping	for	kingship	that	David	asks	that	the	Holy	Spirit	not	be	withdrawn	from	him	when	he
prays,	“Cast	me	not	away	from	your	presence,	and	
take	not	your	holy	Spirit	from	me”	
(Ps.	51:11).	Just	as	the	Holy	Spirit	in	his
role	of	anointing	Saul	for	kingship	had	departed	from	Saul	at	the	same	time	as	he	came	upon	David	(cf.	1	Sam.	16:13	with	v.	
14),
so	David,	after	his	sin	with	Bathsheba	(see	Ps.	51,	title),	prayed	that	the	Holy	Spirit	would	not	similarly	be	taken	from	him.
5
The	Holy	Spirit	also	empowered	the	Old	Testament	prophets	by	giving	them	revelations	to	speak,	but	I	have	included	that
function	under	Section	C	below	(“The	Holy	Spirit	Reveals”).
6
Before	Pentecost	in	the	New	Testament	we	also	find	that	John	the	Baptist	(Luke	1:15),	Elizabeth	(Luke	1:41),	and	Zechariah
(Luke	1:67)	were	all	said	to	be	filled	with	the	Holy	Spirit.
7
See	
chapter	39
,	for	a	fuller	discussion	of	the	differences	between	the	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in	the	old	covenant	and	in	the	new
covenant.
8
The	word	here	translated	“power”	(
dynamis
)	occurs	nine	other	times	in	Acts.	In	one	case	(4:33),	it	is	unclear	whether	this
“power”	refers	to	powerful	preaching	that	convicted	the	hearers	or	to	miraculous	signs	that	accompanied	the	preaching.	But	in	the
other	eight	examples	(2:22;	3:12;	4:7;	6:8;	8:10	[in	this	verse	referring	to	pagan	miracle-working	power],	13;	10:38;	19:11)	it
refers	to	
power	to	work	miracles.	
This	meaning	of	the	term	
dynamis	
is	further	confirmed	by	its	frequent	use	in	Luke’s	gospel	to
refer	to	miracle-working	power.	Therefore	when	Jesus	promised	the	disciples	in	Acts	1:8	that	they	would	receive	“power”	when
the	Holy	Spirit	came	upon	them,	it	seems	likely	that	they	would	have	understood	him	to	mean	at	least	the	power	of	the	Holy	Spirit
to	work	miracles	that	would	attest	to	the	truthfulness	of	the	gospel.	Because	the	immediate	context	of	the	sentence	talks	about
being	witnesses	for	Jesus,	they	may	also	have	understood	him	to	mean	that	they	would	receive	the	power	of	the	Holy	Spirit	to
work	through	their	preaching	and	bring	conviction	of	sins	and	awaken	faith	in	people’s	hearts.	This	power	in	their	preaching	was
evident	in	subsequent	events,	as	when	Peter’s	hearers	“were	cut	to	the	heart”	(Acts	2:37),	or	when	“many	of	those	who	heard	the
word	believed;	and	the	number	of	the	men	came	to	about	five	thousand”	(Acts	4:4).
9
The	Greek	word	translated	“manifestation”	is	
phanerōsis,	
which	means	something	that	discloses,	something	that	makes	publicly
evident	or	clear.	The	related	adjective	
phaneros	
means	“visible,	clear,	plainly	to	be	seen,	open,	plain,	evident,	known”	(BAGD,	p.
852).
10
The	Holy	Spirit	also	empowers	obedience	to	God	during	the	Christian	life	(see	discussion	below	on	the	Holy	Spirit’s	work	of
purification).
11
See	discussion	of	Rom.	8:26	in	
chapter	18
,	and	
chapter	53
.
12
See	discussion	of	speaking	in	tongues	in	
chapter	53
.
13
See	discussion	of	this	in	John	Murray,	“Definitive	Sanctification,”	in	
Collected	Writings	of	John	Murray	
(Edinburgh	and
Carlisle,	Pa.:	Banner	of	Truth,	1977),	pp.	277–84.
14
See	
chapter	38
,	for	a	more	extensive	discussion	of	sanctification.
15
See	Gen.	15:12;	Exod.	40:35;	1	Sam.	19:24;	1	Kings	8:11;	Ezek.	1:28;	3:23;	Dan.	8:27;	John	18:6;	Acts	9:4;	10:10;	Rev.	1:17;
4:10	(compare	angelic	encounter	in	Dan.	8:17–18;	10:7–17).
16
The	verb	here	translated	“drove	out”	is	a	strong	term,	
ekballō,	
which	means	“drive	out,	expel,”	and	more	literally	can	mean
“throw	out.”
17
It	is	possible	that	Ezekiel	and	John	are	speaking	of	transportation	in	a	vision	(as	in	Ezek.	8:3	and	11:24)	rather	than	literal
physical	travel.	Paul	allows	for	both	possibilities	in	2	Cor.	12:2–3.
18
The	word	translated	“bound”	is	a	perfect	passive	participle	of	
deō,	
and	signifies	an	earlier	completed	event	(perhaps	a	strong
conviction	from	the	Holy	Spirit	that	settled	Paul’s	mind	on	the	trip	to	Jerusalem	once	for	all),	but	an	event	that	also	has	continuing
results	in	the	present,	so	that	Paul	remained	“bound”	when	he	spoke	(the	event	still	influenced	Paul	so	strongly	that	he	had	no
other	choice	but	to	continue	forward	toward	Jerusalem).
19
However,	it	is	always	dangerous	to	follow	spontaneous	prophecies	alone	for	guidance	in	this	church	age,	since	we	are	never	to
think	of	any	prophecies	as	inerrant	or	100	percent	accurate	today.	Mistakes	can	especially	come	in	the	area	of	personal	guidance.
But	all	that	does	not	allow	us	to	say	that	there	can	be	no	guidance	that	comes	through	prophecy.	See	further	discussion	about
subjective	guidance	in	general	and	the	gift	of	prophecy	in	particular	in	
chapter	8
,	and	
chapter	53
.
20
This	was	also	a	fulfillment	of	Moses’	wish	that	the	Lord	would	put	his	Spirit	on	all	his	people	(Num.	11:29),	and	of	the	vision
of	the	valley	of	dry	bones	revived	by	the	Spirit	in	Ezek.	37.	See	also	Donald	Guthrie,	
New	Testament	Theology,	
pp.	512–13,	540,
562.
21
The	word	
koinōnia,	
“fellowship,”	could	also	mean	“participation	in	the	Holy	Spirit,”	but	it	would	make	little	sense	for	Paul	to
wish	for	them	something	they	already	had	as	believers	(participation	in	the	Holy	Spirit).	It	is	better	to	translate	the	verse,
“fellowship	of	the	Holy	Spirit,”	thus	emphasizing	a	blessing	from	the	Holy	Spirit	that	Paul	hoped	would	increase	in	the	Corinthian
church.
22
The	Greek	word	
koinōnia	
is	also	best	translated	“fellowship”	here	because	Paul’s	purpose	in	Phil.	2:1–11	is	to	encourage	unity
in	the	Philippian	church.	(See	the	preceding	footnote	also.)
23
See	the	extended	discussion	of	this	verse	in	
chapter	39
.
24
This	passage	could	also	be	put	in	the	next	category,	discussed	in	the	following	paragraph.
25
See	
chapter	24
,	for	a	fuller	discussion	of	the	unpardonable	sin.
26
See	
chapter	39
,	for	more	extensive	discussion	of	being	filled	with	the	Holy	Spirit.
OceanofPDF.com
Part	5
The	Doctrine	of	the	Application	of	Redemption
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	31
Common	Grace
What	are	the	undeserved	blessings	that	God	gives	to	all	people,
both	believers	and	unbelievers?
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
A.	Introduction	and	Definition
When	Adam	and	Eve	sinned,	they	became	worthy	of	eternal
punishment	and	separation	from	God	(Gen.	2:17).	In	the	same	way,
when	human	beings	sin	today	they	become	liable	to	the	wrath	of
God	and	to	eternal	punishment:	“The	wages	of	sin	is	death”	(Rom.
6:23).	This	means	that	once	people	sin,	God’s	justice	would	require
only	one	thing—that	they	be	eternally	separated	from	God,	cut	off
from	experiencing	
any	
good	from	him,	and	that	they	live	forever	in
hell,	receiving	only	his	wrath	eternally.	In	fact,	this	was	what
happened	to	angels	who	sinned,	and	it	could	justly	have	happened
to	us	as	well:	“
God	did	not	spare	the	angels	when	they	sinned,	
but
cast	them	into	hell	and	committed	them	to	pits	of	nether	gloom	to
be	kept	until	the	judgment”	(2	Peter	2:4).
But	in	fact	Adam	and	Eve	did	not	die	at	once	(though	the	sentence
of	death	
began	
to	be	worked	out	in	their	lives	on	the	day	they
sinned).	The	full	execution	of	the	sentence	of	death	was	delayed	for
many	years.	Moreover,	millions	of	their	descendants	even	to	this
day	do	not	die	and	go	to	hell	as	soon	as	they	sin,	but	continue	to
live	for	many	years,	enjoying	countless	blessings	in	this	world.
How	can	this	be?	
How	can	God	continue	to	give	blessings	to
sinners	who	deserve	only	death—
not	only	to	those	who	will
ultimately	be	saved,	but	also	to	millions	who	will	never	be	saved,
whose	sins	will	never	be	forgiven?
The	answer	to	these	questions	is	that	God	bestows	
common	grace.
We	may	define	common	grace	as	follows:	
Common	grace	is	the
grace	of	God	by	which	he	gives	people	innumerable	blessings	that
are	not	part	of	salvation.	
The	word	
common	
here	means	something
that	is	common	to	all	people	and	is	not	restricted	to	believers	or	to
the	elect	only.
In	distinction	from	common	grace,	the	grace	of	God	that	brings
people	to	salvation	is	often	called	“saving	grace.”	Of	course,	when
we	talk	about	“common	grace”	and	“saving	grace”	we	are	not
implying	that	there	are	two	different	kinds	of	grace	in	God	himself,
but	only	that	God’s	grace	manifests	itself	in	the	world	in	two
different	ways.	Common	grace	is	different	from	saving	grace	in	its
results	
(it	does	not	bring	about	salvation),	in	its	
recipients	
(it	is
given	to	believers	and	unbelievers	alike),	and	in	its	
source	
(it	does
not	directly	flow	from	Christ’s	atoning	work,	since	Christ’s	death
did	not	earn	any	measure	of	forgiveness	for	unbelievers,	and
therefore	did	not	merit	the	blessings	of	common	grace	for	them
either).	However,	on	this	last	point	it	should	be	said	that	common
grace	does	flow	
indirectly	
from	Christ’s	redemptive	work,	because
the	fact	that	God	did	not	judge	the	world	at	once	when	sin	entered	it
was	primarily	or	perhaps	exclusively	due	to	the	fact	that	he	planned
eventually	to	save	some	sinners	through	the	death	of	his	Son.
	
1
B.	Examples	of	Common	Grace
If	we	look	at	the	world	around	us	and	contrast	it	with	the	fires	of
hell	that	the	world	deserves,	we	can	immediately	see	abundant
evidence	of	God’s	common	grace	in	thousands	of	examples	in
everyday	life.	We	can	distinguish	several	specific	categories	in
which	this	common	grace	is	seen.
1.
	The	Physical	Realm.
	Unbelievers	continue	to	live	in	this	world	solely
because	of	God’s	common	grace—every	breath	that	people	take	is	of	grace,
for	the	wages	of	sin	is	death,	not	life.	Moreover,	the	earth	does	not	produce
only	thorns	and	thistles	(Gen.	3:18),	or	remain	a	parched	desert,	but	by	God’s
common	grace	it	produces	food	and	materials	for	clothing	and	shelter,	often
in	great	abundance	and	diversity.	Jesus	said,	“Love	your	enemies	and	pray	for
those	who	persecute	you,	so	that	you	may	be	sons	of	your	Father	who	is	in
heaven;	for	
he	makes	his	sun	rise	on	the	evil	and	on	the	good,	and	sends	rain
on	the	just	and	on	the	unjust”	
(Matt.	5:44–45).	Here	Jesus	appeals	to	God’s
abundant	common	grace	as	an	encouragement	to	his	disciples	that	they	too
should	bestow	love	and	prayer	for	blessing	on	unbelievers	(cf.	Luke	6:35–36).
Similarly,	Paul	told	the	people	of	Lystra,	“In	past	generations	he	allowed	all
the	nations	to	walk	in	their	own	ways;	yet	he	did	not	leave	himself	without
witness,	for	he	did	good	and	
gave	you	from	heaven	rains	and	fruitful	seasons,
satisfying	your	hearts	with	food	and	gladness”	
(Acts	14:16–17).
The	Old	Testament	also	speaks	of	the	common	grace	of	God	that
comes	to	unbelievers	as	well	as	to	believers.	One	specific	example
is	Potiphar,	the	Egyptian	captain	of	the	guard	who	purchased
Joseph	as	a	slave:	“
The	L
ORD
	blessed	the	Egyptian’s	house	
for
Joseph’s	sake;	the	blessing	of	the	L
ORD
	was	upon	all	that	he	had,	in
house	and	field”	(Gen.	39:5).	David	speaks	in	a	much	more	general
way	about	all	the	creatures	God	has	made:	“The	L
ORD
	is	good	to
all,	and	his	compassion	is	over	all	that	he	has	made.	.	.	.	The	eyes	of
all	look	to	you,	and	you	give	them	their	food	in	due	season.	You
open	your	hand,	you	satisfy	the	desire	of	every	living	thing”	(Ps.
145:9,	15–16).
These	verses	are	another	reminder	that	the	goodness	that	is	found	in
the	whole	creation	is	due	to	God’s	goodness	and	compassion.
We	even	see	evidence	of	God’s	common	grace	in	the	beauty	of	the
natural	world.	Though	nature	itself	is	in	“bondage	to	decay”	and
has	been	“subjected	to	futility”	(Rom.	8:21,	20)	because	of	the
curse	of	the	fall	(Gen.	3:17–19),	much	beauty	still	remains	in	the
natural	world.	The	beauty	of	multicolored	flowers,	of	grass	and
woodlands,	of	rivers	and	lakes	and	mountains	and	ocean	shores,
still	remains	as	a	daily	testimony	to	the	continuing	common	grace
of	God.	Unbelievers	deserve	to	enjoy	none	of	this	beauty,	but	by
God’s	grace	they	can	enjoy	much	of	it	for	their	whole	lives.
2.	The	Intellectual	Realm.
	Satan	is	“a	liar	and	the	father	of	lies”	and	“there	is
no	truth	in	him”	(John	8:44),	because	he	is	fully	given	over	to	evil	and	to	the
irrationality	and	commitment	to	falsehood	that	accompanies	radical	evil.	But
human	beings	in	the	world	today,	even	unbelievers,	are	not	totally	given	over
to	lying,	irrationality,	and	ignorance.	All	people	are	able	to	have	some	grasp
of	truth;	indeed,	some	have	great	intelligence	and	understanding.	This	also
must	be	seen	as	a	result	of	God’s	grace.	John	speaks	of	Jesus	as	“the	true	light
that	
enlightens	every	man”	
(John	1:9),	for	in	his	role	as	creator	and	sustainer
of	the	universe	(not	particularly	in	his	role	as	redeemer)	the	Son	of	God
allows	enlightenment	and	understanding	to	come	to	all	people	in	the	world.
	
2
God’s	common	grace	in	the	intellectual	realm	is	seen	in	the	fact	that
all	people	have	a	knowledge	of	God:	“Although	
they	knew	God
they	did	not	honor	him	as	God	or	give	thanks	to	him”	(Rom.	1:21).
This	means	that	there	is	a	sense	of	God’s	existence	and	often	a
hunger	to	know	God	that	he	allows	to	remain	in	people’s	hearts,
even	though	it	often	results	in	many	differing	man-made	religions.
Therefore,	even	when	speaking	to	people	who	held	to	false
religions,	Paul	could	find	a	point	of	contact	regarding	knowledge	of
God’s	existence,	as	he	did	when	speaking	to	the	Athenian
philosophers:	“Men	of	Athens,	I	perceive	that	in	every	way	you	are
very	religious.	.	.	.	What	therefore	you	worship	as	unknown,	this	I
proclaim	to	you”	(Acts	17:22–23).
The	common	grace	of	God	in	the	intellectual	realm	also	results	in
an	ability	to	grasp	truth	and	distinguish	it	from	error,	and	to
experience	growth	in	knowledge	that	can	be	used	in	the
investigation	of	the	universe	and	in	the	task	of	subduing	the	earth.
This	means	that	
all	science	and	technology	carried	out	by	non-
Christians	is	a	result	of	common	grace,	
allowing	them	to	make
incredible	discoveries	and	inventions,	to	develop	the	earth’s
resources	into	many	material	goods,	to	produce	and	distribute	those
resources,	and	to	have	skill	in	their	productive	work.	In	a	practical
sense	this	means	that	every	time	we	walk	into	a	grocery	store	or
ride	in	an	automobile	or	enter	a	house	we	should	remember	that	we
are	experiencing	the	results	of	the	abundant	common	grace	of	God
poured	out	so	richly	on	all	mankind.
3.	The	Moral	Realm.
	God	also	by	common	grace	restrains	people	from	being
as	evil	as	they	could	be.	Once	again	the	demonic	realm,	totally	devoted	to	evil
and	destruction,	provides	a	clear	contrast	with	human	society	in	which	evil	is
clearly	restrained.	If	people	persist	hard-heartedly	and	repeatedly	in	following
sin	over	a	course	of	time,	God	will	eventually	“give	them	up”	to	greater	and
greater	sin	(cf.	Ps.	81:12;	Rom.	1:24,	26,	28),	but	in	the	case	of	most	human
beings	they	do	not	fall	to	the	depths	to	which	their	sin	would	otherwise	take
them,	because	God	intervenes	and	puts	restraints	on	their	conduct.	One	very
effective	restraint	is	the	force	of	conscience:	Paul	says,	“When	Gentiles	who
have	not	the	law	do	by	nature	what	the	law	requires,	they	are	a	law	to
themselves,	even	though	they	do	not	have	the	law.	They	show	that	
what	the
law	requires	is	written	on	their	hearts,	
while	
their	conscience	also	bears
witness	
and	their	conflicting	thoughts	accuse	or	perhaps	excuse	them”	(Rom.
2:14–15).
This	inward	sense	of	right	and	wrong	that	God	gives	to	all	people
means	that	they	will	frequently	approve	of	moral	standards	that
reflect	many	of	the	moral	standards	in	Scripture.	Even	those	who
are	given	up	to	the	most	base	sin,	Paul	says,	“Know	God’s	decree
that	those	who	do	such	things	deserve	to	die”	(Rom.	1:32).	And	in
many	other	cases	this	inward	sense	of	conscience	leads	people	to
establish	laws	and	customs	in	society	that	are,	in	terms	of	the
outward	behavior	they	approve	or	prohibit,	quite	like	the	moral
laws	of	Scripture:	people	often	establish	laws	or	have	customs	that
respect	the	sanctity	of	marriage	and	the	family,	protect	human	life,
and	prohibit	theft	and	falsehood	in	speech.
	
3
	
Because	of	this,	people
will	frequently	live	in	ways	that	are	morally	upright	and	outwardly
conform	to	the	moral	standards	found	in	Scripture.	Though	their
moral	behavior	cannot	earn	merit	with	God	(since	Scripture	clearly
says	that	“no	man	is	justified	before	God	by	the	law,”	Gal.	3:11,	and
“All	have	turned	aside,	together	they	have	gone	wrong;	no	one	does
good,	not	even	one,”	Rom.	3:12),	nevertheless	in	some	sense	less
than	earning	God’s	eternal	approval	or	merit,	unbelievers	do	“do
good.”	Jesus	implies	this	when	he	says,	“If	you	do	good	to	those
who	do	good	to	you,	
what	credit	is	that	to	you?	For	
even	sinners	do
the	same”	
(Luke	6:33;	cf.	2	Kings	12:2	and	2	Chron.	24:2,	where
Joash	is	said	to	have	done	good	during	his	reign	as	king,	with	2
Chron.	24:17–25,	where	he	did	such	evil	as	to	make	it	apparent	that
there	was	not	saving	faith	in	his	life).	Of	course,	in	areas	where	the
gospel	has	had	great	influence	and	the	church	is	strong,	it	will	have
a	stronger	moral	influence	on	society	than	in	places	where	the
gospel	has	never	reached,	or	where	it	has	little	restraining	influence
(for	example,	in	cannibalistic	societies—or	even	in	modern	Western
society	where	belief	in	the	gospel	and	moral	absolutes	have	both
been	abandoned	by	the	dominant	culture).
God	also	demonstrates	his	common	grace	by	giving	
warnings	of
final	judgment	in	the	operation	of	the	natural	world.	
God	has	so
ordered	the	world	that	living	according	to	his	moral	standards	very
often	brings	rewards	in	the	natural	realm,	and	violating	God’s
standards	often	brings	destruction	to	people,	in	both	cases
indicating	the	eventual	direction	of	the	final	judgment:	Honesty,
hard	work,	showing	love	and	kindness	to	others,	and	faithfulness	in
marriage	and	family	will	(except	in	the	most	corrupt	societies)
bring	much	more	material	and	emotional	reward	in	this	life	than
dishonesty,	laziness,	cruelty,	marital	infidelity,	and	other	wrongs
such	as	drunkenness,	drug	abuse,	theft,	and	so	forth.	These	normal
consequences	of	sin	or	righteousness	should	serve	as	a	warning	of
judgment	to	come,	and,	in	this	way,	they	are	also	examples	of
God’s	common	grace.
4.	The	Creative	Realm.
	God	has	allowed	significant	measures	of	skill	in
artistic	and	musical	areas,	as	well	as	in	other	spheres	in	which	creativity	and
skill	can	be	expressed,	such	as	athletics,	cooking,	writing,	and	so	forth.
Moreover,	God	gives	to	us	an	ability	to	appreciate	beauty	in	many	areas	of
life.	And	in	this	area	as	well	as	in	the	physical	and	intellectual	realm,	the
blessings	of	common	grace	are	sometimes	poured	out	on	unbelievers	even
more	abundantly	than	on	believers.	Yet	in	all	cases	it	is	a	result	of	the	grace	of
God.
5.	The	Societal	Realm.
	God’s	grace	is	also	evident	in	the	existence	of	various
organizations	and	structures	in	human	society.	We	see	this	first	in	the	human
family,	evidenced	in	the	fact	that	Adam	and	Eve	remained	husband	and	wife
after	the	fall	and	then	had	children,	both	sons	and	daughters	(Gen.	5:4).	Adam
and	Eve’s	children	married	and	formed	families	for	themselves	(Gen.	4:17,
19,	26).	The	human	family	persists	today,	not	simply	as	an	institution	for
believers,	but	for	all	people.
Human	government	is	also	a	result	of	common	grace.	It	was
instituted	in	principle	by	God	after	the	flood	(see	Gen.	9:6),	and	is
clearly	stated	to	be	given	by	God	in	Romans	13:1:	“There	is	no
authority	except	from	God,	and	those	that	exist	have	been	instituted
by	God.”	It	is	clear	that	government	is	a	gift	from	God	for	mankind
generally,	for	Paul	says	the	ruler	is	“God’s	servant	for	your	good”
and	that	he	is	“the	servant	of	God	to	execute	his	wrath	on	the
wrongdoer”	(Rom.	13:4).	One	of	the	primary	means	God	uses	to
restrain	evil	in	the	world	is	human	government.	Human	laws	and
police	forces	and	judicial	systems	provide	a	powerful	deterrent	to
evil	actions,	and	these	are	necessary,	for	there	is	much	evil	in	the
world	that	is	irrational	and	that	can	only	be	restrained	by	force,
because	it	will	not	be	deterred	by	reason	or	education.	Of	course,
the	sinfulness	of	man	can	also	affect	governments	themselves,	so
that	they	become	corrupt	and	actually	encourage	evil	rather	than
encourage	good.	This	is	just	to	say	that	human	government,	like	all
the	other	blessings	of	common	grace	that	God	gives,	can	be	used
either	for	good	or	for	evil	purposes.
Other	organizations	in	human	society	include	educational
institutions,	businesses	and	corporations,	voluntary	associations
(such	as	many	charitable	and	public	service	groups),	and	countless
examples	of	ordinary	human	friendship.	All	of	these	function	to
bring	some	measure	of	good	to	human	beings,	and	all	are
expressions	of	the	common	grace	of	God.
6.	The	Religious	Realm.
	Even	in	the	realm	of	human	religion,	God’s
common	grace	brings	some	blessings	to	unbelieving	people.	Jesus	tells	us,
“Love	your	enemies	and	
pray	for	those	who	persecute	you”	
(Matt.	5:44),	and
since	there	is	no	restriction	in	the	context	simply	to	pray	for	their	salvation,
and	since	the	command	to	pray	for	our	persecutors	is	coupled	with	a
command	to	love	them,	it	seems	reasonable	to	conclude	that	God	intends	to
answer	our	prayers	even	for	our	persecutors	with	regard	to	many	areas	of	life.
In	fact,	Paul	specifically	commands	that	we	pray	“for	kings	and	all	who	are	in
high	positions”	(1	Tim.	2:1–2).	When	we	seek	good	for	unbelievers	it	is
consistent	with	God’s	own	practice	of	granting	sunshine	and	rain	“on	the	just
and	on	the	unjust”	(Matt.	5:45)	and	also	consistent	with	the	practice	of	Jesus
during	his	earthly	ministry	when	he	healed	every	person	who	was	brought	to
him	(Luke	4:40).	There	is	no	indication	that	he	required	all	of	them	to	believe
in	him	or	to	agree	that	he	was	the	Messiah	before	he	granted	physical	healing
to	them.
Does	God	answer	the	prayers	of	unbelievers?	Although	God	has	not
promised	to	answer	the	prayers	of	unbelievers	as	he	has	promised
to	answer	the	prayers	of	those	who	come	in	Jesus’	name,	and
although	he	has	no	obligation	to	answer	the	prayers	of	unbelievers,
nonetheless,	God	may	out	of	his	common	grace	still	hear	and	grant
the	prayers	of	unbelievers,	thus	demonstrating	his	mercy	and
goodness	in	yet	another	way	(cf.	Ps.	145:9,	15;	Matt.	7:22;	Luke
6:35–36).	This	is	apparently	the	sense	of	1	Timothy	4:10,	which
says	that	God	is	“the	Savior	of	all	men,	especially	of	those	who
believe.”	Here	“Savior”	cannot	be	restricted	in	meaning	to	“one
who	forgives	sins	and	gives	eternal	life,”	because	these	things	are
not	given	to	those	who	do	not	believe;	“Savior”	must	have	a	more
general	sense	here,	namely,	“one	who	rescues	from	distress,	one
who	delivers.”	In	cases	of	trouble	or	distress	God	often	does	hear
the	prayers	of	unbelievers,	and	graciously	delivers	them	from	their
trouble.	Moreover,	even	unbelievers	often	have	a	sense	of	gratitude
toward	God	for	the	goodness	of	creation,	for	deliverance	from
danger,	and	for	the	blessings	of	family,	home,	friendships,	and
country.	In	addition,	unbelievers	who	come	in	close	contact	with
the	church	and	perhaps	associate	with	it	for	a	time	can	have	some
religious	experiences	that	seem	very	close	to	the	experience	of
those	who	are	saved	(see	Heb.	4:4–6;	Matt.	7:22–23).
	
4
Finally,	even	the	proclamation	of	the	gospel	to	those	who	do	not
ultimately	accept	it	is	a	clear	declaration	of	the	mercy	and	grace	of
God,	which	gives	clear	witness	to	the	fact	that	God	does	not	delight
in	the	death	or	condemnation	of	any	of	his	creatures	(cf.	Ezek.
33:11;	1	Tim.	2:4).
7.	Common	Grace	and	Special	Grace	Influence	Each	Other.
	Common
grace,	of	course,	influences	and	enriches	the	church,	since	apart	from	God’s
common	grace	given	to	carpenters	and	other	kinds	of	craftsmen,	there	would
be	no	church	buildings;	apart	from	common	grace	given	to	printers	and
typesetters	and	bookbinders	(and	even	to	those	who	work	in	paper	mills	or	cut
trees	from	forests	to	make	paper),	there	would	be	no	Bibles.	In	countless	ways
in	everyday	activities	the	church	benefits	from	common	grace.
On	the	other	hand,	the	special	grace	that	God	gives	to	those	who	are
saved	brings	more	of	the	blessings	of	common	grace	to	unbelievers
living	in	the	realm	of	the	church’s	influence.	Unbelievers	benefit
from	the	example	of	Christian	lives	that	they	see	in	society,	from
the	prayers	and	the	acts	of	mercy	that	Christians	do	for	the
community,	from	the	knowledge	of	the	teachings	of	Scripture	and
its	wisdom	in	which	they	find	some	intellectual	and	moral	benefit,
and	from	the	influence	on	laws,	customs,	and	beliefs	of	a	society
that	comes	through	the	social	and	political	activities	of	Christians.
Historically	it	has	often	been	the	powerful	presence	of	those	whose
lives	were	changed	by	the	gospel	that	has	resulted	in	freedom	for
slaves	(in	the	British	colonies	and	the	United	States),	rights	for
women,	widespread	public	education,	technological	and	scientific
progress,	increased	productivity	in	the	economy,	a	high	value
placed	on	work	and	thrift	and	honesty,	and	so	forth.
8.	Common	Grace	Does	Not	Save	People.
	In	spite	of	all	of	this,	we	must
realize	that	common	grace	is	different	from	saving	grace.	Common	grace	does
not	change	the	human	heart	or	bring	people	to	genuine	repentance	and	faith—
it	cannot	and	does	not	save	people	(though	in	the	intellectual	and	moral
sphere	it	can	give	some	preparation	to	make	people	more	disposed	toward
accepting	the	gospel).	Common	grace	restrains	sin	but	does	not	change
anyone’s	foundational	disposition	to	sin,	nor	does	it	in	any	significant
measure	purify	fallen	human	nature.
	
5
We	must	also	recognize	that	the	actions	of	unbelievers	performed
by	virtue	of	common	grace	do	not	in	themselves	merit	God’s
approval	or	favor.	These	actions	do	not	spring	from	faith
(“Whatever	does	not	proceed	from	faith	is	sin,”	Rom.	14:23),	nor
are	they	motivated	by	a	love	for	God	(Matt.	22:37),	but	rather	love
of	self	in	some	form	or	another.	Therefore,	although	we	may	readily
say	that	the	works	of	unbelievers	that	externally	conform	to	the
laws	of	God	are	“good”	in	some	sense,	they	nonetheless	are	not
good	in	terms	of	meriting	God’s	approval	nor	of	making	God
obligated	to	the	sinner	in	any	way.
Finally,	we	should	recognize	that	unbelievers	often	receive	more
common	grace	than	believers—they	may	be	more	skillful,	harder
working,	more	intelligent,	more	creative,	or	have	more	of	the
material	benefits	of	this	life	to	enjoy.	This	in	no	way	indicates	that
they	are	more	favored	by	God	in	an	absolute	sense	or	that	they	will
gain	any	share	in	eternal	salvation,	but	only	that	God	distributes	the
blessings	of	common	grace	in	various	ways,	often	granting	very
significant	blessings	to	unbelievers.	In	all	of	this,	they	should,	of
course,	acknowledge	God’s	goodness	(Acts	14:17),	and	should
recognize	that	God’s	revealed	will	is	that	“God’s	kindness”	should
eventually	lead	them	“to	repentance”	(Rom.	2:4).
C.	Reasons	for	Common	Grace
Why	does	God	bestow	common	grace	on	undeserving	sinners	who
will	never	come	to	salvation?	We	can	suggest	at	least	four	reasons.
1.
	To	Redeem	Those	Who	Will	Be	Saved.
	Peter	says	that	the	day	of
judgment	and	final	execution	of	punishment	is	being	delayed	because	there
are	yet	more	people	who	will	be	saved:	“The	Lord	is	not	slow	about	his
promise	as	some	count	slowness,	but	is	forbearing	toward	you,	
not	wishing
that	any	should	perish,	but	that	all	should	reach	repentance.	
But	the	day	of
the	Lord	will	come	like	a	thief”	(2	Peter	3:9–10).	In	fact,	this	reason	was	true
from	the	beginning	of	human	history,	for	if	God	wanted	to	save	any	people
out	of	the	whole	mass	of	sinful	humanity,	he	could	not	have	destroyed	all
sinners	immediately	(for	then	there	would	be	no	human	race	left).	He	chose
rather	to	allow	sinful	humans	to	live	for	some	time,	so	that	they	might	have	an
opportunity	to	repent,	and	also	so	that	they	would	bear	children	and	enable
subsequent	generations	to	live	and	then	hear	the	gospel	and	repent.
2.	To	Demonstrate	God’s	Goodness	and	Mercy.
	God’s	goodness	and	mercy
are	not	only	seen	in	the	salvation	of	believers,	but	also	in	the	blessings	he
gives	to	undeserving	sinners.	When	God	“is	kind	to	the	ungrateful	and	the
selfish”	(Luke	6:35),	his	kindness	is	revealed	in	the	universe,	to	his	glory.
David	says,	“The	L
ORD
	is	
good	to	all,	
and	his	compassion	is	over	all	that	he
has	made”	(Ps.	145:9).	In	the	story	of	Jesus	talking	with	the	rich	young	ruler,
we	read,	“And	Jesus	looking	upon	him	
loved	him”	
(Mark	10:21),	even	though
the	man	was	an	unbeliever	and	would	in	a	moment	turn	away	from	Jesus
because	of	his	great	possessions.	Berkhof	says	that	God	“showers	untold
blessings	upon	all	men	and	also	clearly	indicates	that	these	are	the
expressions	of	a	favorable	disposition	in	God,	which	falls	short	however	of
the	positive	volition	to	pardon	their	sin,	to	lift	their	sentence,	and	to	grant
them	salvation.”
	
6
It	is	not	unjust	for	God	to	delay	the	execution	of	punishment	upon
sin	and	to	give	temporary	blessings	to	human	beings,	because	the
punishment	is	not	forgotten,	but	just	delayed.	In	delaying
punishment,	God	shows	clearly	that	he	has	no	pleasure	in	executing
final	judgment,	but	rather	delights	in	the	salvation	of	men	and
women.	“As	I	live,	says	the	L
ORD
	God,	I	have	no	pleasure	in	the
death	of	the	wicked,	but	that	the	wicked	turn	back	from	his	way	and
live”	(Ezek.	33:11).	God	“desires	all	men	to	be	saved	and	to	come
to	the	knowledge	of	the	truth”	(1	Tim.	2:4).	In	all	of	this	the	delay
of	punishment	gives	clear	evidence	of	God’s	mercy	and	goodness
and	love.
3.	To	Demonstrate	God’s	Justice.
	When	God	repeatedly	invites	sinners	to
come	to	faith	and	when	they	repeatedly	refuse	his	invitations,	the	justice	of
God	in	condemning	them	is	seen	much	more	clearly.	Paul	warns	that	those
who	persist	in	unbelief	are	simply	storing	up	more	wrath	for	themselves:	“By
your	hard	and	impenitent	heart	you	are	storing	up	wrath	for	yourself	on	the
day	of	wrath	when	God’s	righteous	judgment	will	be	revealed”	(Rom.	2:5).
On	the	day	of	judgment	“every	mouth”	will	be	“stopped”	(Rom.	3:19)	and	no
one	will	be	able	to	object	that	God	has	been	unjust.
4.	To	Demonstrate	God’s	Glory.
	Finally,	God’s	glory	is	shown	in	many
ways	by	the	activities	of	human	beings	in	all	the	areas	in	which	common
grace	is	operative.	In	developing	and	exercising	dominion	over	the	earth,	men
and	women	demonstrate	and	reflect	the	wisdom	of	their	Creator,	demonstrate
God-like	qualities	of	skill	and	moral	virtue	and	authority	over	the	universe,
and	so	forth.	Though	all	of	these	activities	are	tainted	by	sinful	motives,	they
nonetheless	reflect	the	excellence	of	our	Creator	and	therefore	bring	glory	to
God,	not	fully	or	perfectly,	but	nonetheless	significantly.
D.	Our	Response	to	the	Doctrine	of	Common	Grace
In	thinking	about	the	varying	kinds	of	goodness	seen	in	the	lives	of
unbelievers	because	of	God’s	abundant	common	grace,	we	should
keep	three	points	in	mind:
1.
	Common	Grace	Does	Not	Mean	That	Those	Who	Receive	It	Will	Be
Saved.
	Even	exceptionally	large	amounts	of	common	grace	do	not	imply	that
those	who	receive	it	will	be	saved.	Even	the	most	skilled,	most	intelligent,
most	wealthy	and	powerful	people	in	the	world	still	need	the	gospel	of	Jesus
Christ	or	they	will	be	condemned	for	eternity!	Even	the	most	moral	and	kind
of	our	neighbors	still	need	the	gospel	of	Jesus	Christ	or	they	will	be
condemned	for	eternity!	They	may	appear	outwardly	to	have	no	needs,	but
Scripture	still	says	that	unbelievers	are	“enemies”	of	God	(Rom.	5:10;	cf.	Col.
1:21;	James	4:4)	and	are	“against”	Christ	(Matt.	12:30).	They	“live	as
enemies	of	the	cross	of	Christ”	and	have	their	“minds	set	on	earthly	things”
(Phil.	3:18–19)	and	are	“by	nature	children	of	wrath,	like	the	rest	of	mankind”
(Eph.	2:3).
2.	We	Must	Be	Careful	Not	to	Reject	the	Good	Things	That	Unbelievers
Do	as	Totally	Evil.
	By	common	grace,	unbelievers	do	
some	
good,	and	we
should	see	God’s	hand	in	it	and	be	thankful	for	common	grace	as	it	operates
in	every	friendship,	every	act	of	kindness,	every	way	in	which	it	brings
blessing	to	others.	All	of	this—though	the	unbeliever	does	not	know	it—is
ultimately	from	God	and	he	deserves	the	glory	for	it.
3.	The	Doctrine	of	Common	Grace	Should	Stir	Our	Hearts	to	Much
Greater	Thankfulness	to	God.
	When	we	walk	down	a	street	and	see	houses
and	gardens	and	families	dwelling	in	security,	or	when	we	do	business	in	the
marketplace	and	see	the	abundant	results	of	technological	progress,	or	when
we	walk	through	the	woods	and	see	the	beauty	of	nature,	or	when	we	are
protected	by	government,
	
7
	
or	when	we	are	educated	from	the	vast	storehouse
of	human	knowledge,	we	should	realize	not	only	that	God	in	his	sovereignty
is	ultimately	responsible	for	all	of	these	blessings,	but	also	that	God	has
granted	them	all	to	sinners	who	are	
totally	undeserving	
of	any	of	them!	These
blessings	in	the	world	are	not	only	evidence	of	God’s	power	and	wisdom,
they	are	also	continually	a	manifestation	of	his	abundant	
grace.	
The
realization	of	this	fact	should	cause	our	hearts	to	swell	with	thanksgiving	to
God	in	every	activity	of	life.
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
Before	you	read	this	chapter,	did	you	have	a	different	viewpoint	on
whether	unbelievers	deserved	the	ordinary	benefits	of	the	world	around
them?	How	has	your	perspective	changed,	if	at	all?
2
.	
Do	you	know	of	examples	where	God	has	answered	the	prayers	of
unbelievers	who	were	in	difficulty,	or	answered	your	prayers	for	the
needs	of	an	unbelieving	friend?	Has	it	provided	an	opening	for	sharing
the	gospel?	Did	the	unbeliever	eventually	come	to	salvation	in	Christ?
Do	you	think	that	God	often	uses	the	blessings	of	common	grace	as	a
means	to	prepare	people	to	receive	the	gospel?
3
.	
In	what	ways	will	this	doctrine	change	the	way	you	relate	to	an
unbelieving	neighbor	or	friend?	Will	it	tend	to	make	you	thankful	for	the
good	that	you	see	in	their	lives?	How	do	you	think	this	might	affect	your
relationship	with	that	person	in	a	more	general	sense?
4
.	
As	you	look	around	the	place	where	you	are	at	this	moment,	can	you
name	at	least	twenty	different	examples	of	common	grace	that	you	can
see?	How	does	that	make	you	feel?
5
.	
Has	this	chapter	changed	the	way	you	view	creative	activities	such	as
music,	art,	architecture,	or	poetry,	or	(something	that	is	very	similar)	the
creativity	expressed	in	athletic	activities?
6
.	
If	you	are	kind	to	an	unbeliever	and	he	or	she	never	comes	to	accept
Christ,	has	it	done	any	good	in	God’s	sight	(see	Matt.	5:44–45;	Luke
6:32–36)?	What	good	has	it	done?	Why	do	you	think	that	God	is	good
even	to	those	who	will	never	be	saved—in	what	way	does	it	further	his
purposes	for	the	universe?	Do	you	think	we	have	any	obligation	to	give
more	effort	to	showing	good	to	believers	than	to	unbelievers?	Can	you
name	any	passages	of	Scripture	that	help	in	answering	this	question?
SPECIAL	TERMS
common	grace
	
special	grace
	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the
bibliography	to	chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be
found	in	
Appendix	4
.)	Note:	This	subject	is	not	often	treated	in	a
separate	section	in	systematic	theologies,	but	see	the	few	sections
listed	below	in	the	following	works:
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1930			Thomas,	210–14
5.			Lutheran
1934			Mueller,	242–54
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1871–73			Hodge,	2:654–74
1937–66			Murray,	
CW,	
2:93–119
1938			Berkhof,	432–46
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955			Ott,	238–42
Other	Works
Hoekema,	Anthony	A.	“The	Restraint	of	Sin.”	In	
Created	In	God’s
Image.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	and	Exeter:	Paternoster,	1986,	pp.	187–
202.
Hughes,	P.	E.	“Grace.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	479–82.
Kearsley,	R.	“Grace.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	280–81.
Van	Til,	Cornelius.	
Common	Grace	and	the	Gospel.	
Nutley,	N.J.:
Presbyterian	and	Reformed,	1972.
Van	Til,	Cornelius.	
In	Defense	of	the	Faith,	
vol.	5:	
An	Introduction	to
Systematic	Theology.	
n.p.:	Presbyterian	and	Reformed	Publishing	Co.,
1976,	pp.	75–99,	253–62.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
Luke	6:35–36:	
But	love	your	enemies,	and	do	good,	and	lend,	expecting
nothing	in	return;	and	your	reward	will	be	great,	and	you	will	be	sons	of	the
Most	High;	for	he	is	kind	to	the	ungrateful	and	the	selfish.	Be	merciful,	even
as	your	Father	is	merciful.
HYMN
“All	People	That	on	Earth	Do	Dwell”
This	very	old	setting	of	Psalm	100	is	a	call	to	all	people	on	earth	to
praise	God	because	of	his	abundant	goodness.
All	people	that	on	earth	do	dwell,
Sing	to	the	Lord	with	cheerful	voice;
Him	serve	with	fear,	his	praise	forthtell,
Come	ye	before	him	and	rejoice.
The	Lord	ye	know	is	God	indeed;
Without	our	aid	he	did	us	make;
We	are	his	folk,	he	doth	us	feed,
And	for	his	sheep	he	doth	us	take.
O	enter	then	his	gates	with	praise,
Approach	with	joy	his	courts	unto;
Praise,	laud,	and	bless	his	name	always,
For	it	is	seemly	so	to	do.
For	why?	The	Lord	our	God	is	good,
His	mercy	is	forever	sure;
His	truth	at	all	times	firmly	stood,
And	shall	from	age	to	age	endure.
AUTHOR:	WILLIAM	KETHE,	1561
NOTES
1
	should	be	noted	that	I	have	put	this	chapter	on	common	grace	in	part	5	of	this	book,	“The	Doctrine	of	the	Application	of
Redemption,”	not	because	common	grace	flows	directly	from	Christ’s	redemptive	work	(it	does	not),	but	because	it	has	a	role	of
preparing	for	and	assisting	in	God’s	work	of	the	application	of	redemption	to	believers.
2
Since	the	context	of	John	1	is	talking	about	Christ	coming	into	the	world,	it	is	better	to	take	the	phrase	“was	coming	into	the
world”	to	modify	the	true	light,	Christ	(so	RSV,	NASB,	NIV),	rather	than	every	man	(so	KJV,	NASB	mg.,	NIV	mg.),	though	both
are	grammatically	possible.	In	either	case,	the	verse	still	says	that	Christ	enlightens	every	man.	Though	some	have	argued	that	this
enlightening	is	just	the	shining	of	the	light	of	Christ’s	incarnate	presence	in	the	world	(so	D.	A.	Carson,	
The	Gospel	According	to
John,	
pp.	123–24),	it	is	more	likely	that	this	enlightening	is	the	light	of	general	revelation	that	all	people	receive,	the	ability	to
observe	and	understand	many	true	facts	about	God	and	the	universe	(so	Leon	Morris,	
The	Gospel	According	to	John,	
pp.	94–95).
This	is	because	(1)	when	John	specifies	that	Christ	“enlightens	
every	man”	
(rather	than	“all	men”	or	“the	world”)	he	suggests	to
us	that	this	enlightening	takes	place	for	every	individual,which	would	be	true	of	general	knowledge,	but	not	of	knowledge	of
Christ.	(2)	This	sense	allows	the	word	“enlightens”	to	speak	of	an	
actual	
enlightening,	not	just	a	potential	one:	Christ	here	is	said
to	enlighten,	not	just	to	offer	enlightenment.	(3)	This	sense	heightens	the	ironic	contrast	in	vv.	9–10:	though	Christ	gives
knowledge	to	all	men,	and	though	he	created	all	men,	yet	they	did	not	know	him	or	receive	him.
3
Of	course,	the	operation	of	conscience	is	never	perfect	in	sinful	people	in	this	life	(as	Paul	realizes	in	Rom.	2:15),	so	societies
will	vary	in	the	degree	to	which	they	approve	differing	aspects	of	God’s	moral	laws.	Nevertheless,	significant	resemblance	to	the
moral	laws	of	Scripture	is	found	in	the	laws	and	customs	of	every	human	society.
4
See	the	extended	discussion	of	Heb.	6:4–6	in	
chapter	40
.
5
The	viewpoint	on	common	grace	presented	in	this	chapter	is	consistent	with	the	Reformed	or	Calvinistic	perspective	of	the	book
as	a	whole,	a	perspective	that	has	been	argued	for	more	specifically	in	discussing	God’s	sovereignty	(chapter	13),	God’s
providence	(chapter	16),	sin	(chapter	24),	and	election,	the	gospel	call,	and	regeneration	(chapters	32–34).	We	should	note,
however,	that	an	Arminian	understanding	of	common	grace	would	be	different	at	this	point;	it	would	say	that	common	grace	gives
to	every	person	the	
ability	
to	turn	to	God	in	faith	and	repentance,	and	in	fact	
influences	
the	sinner	to	do	this	unless	he	or	she
specifically	resists	it.	Therefore,	on	an	Arminian	understanding,	common	grace	has	a	function	that	much	more	clearly	relates	to
saving	grace—in	fact,	common	grace	is	simply	an	early	expression	of	the	totality	of	saving	grace.	This	position	(that	the	ability	to
repent	and	believe	is	given	to	all	people)	is	discussed	in	chapter	32	on	election	and	chapters	33	and	34	on	the	gospel	call	and
regeneration.
6
Berkhof,	
Systematic	Theology,	
p.	445.
7
Paul	explicitly	directs	us	to	offer	to	God	“thanksgivings”	for	“kings	and	all	who	are	in	high	positions”	(1	Tim.	2:1–2).
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	32
Election	and	Reprobation
When	and	why	did	God	choose	us?	Are	some	not	chosen?
In	the	earlier	chapters	we	talked	about	the	fact	that	we	all	have
sinned	and	deserve	eternal	punishment	from	God,	and	the	fact	that
Christ	died	and	
earned	
salvation	for	us.	But	now	in	this	unit
(chapters	32–43)	we	will	look	at	the	way	God	
applies	
that	salvation
to	our	lives.	We	begin	in	this	chapter	with	God’s	work	of	election,
that	is,	his	decision	to	choose	us	to	be	saved	before	the	foundation
of	the	world.	This	act	of	election	is,	of	course,	not	(strictly
speaking)	part	of	the	
application	
of	salvation	to	us,	since	it	came
before	Christ	earned	our	salvation	when	he	died	on	the	cross.	But
we	treat	election	at	this	point	because	it	is	chronologically	the
beginning	
of	God’s	dealing	with	us	in	a	gracious	way.	Therefore,	it
is	rightly	thought	of	as	the	first	step	in	the	process	of	God’s
bringing	salvation	to	us	individually.
	
1
Other	steps	in	God’s	work	of	applying	salvation	to	our	lives	include
our	hearing	the	gospel	call,	our	being	regenerated	by	the	Holy
Spirit,	our	responding	in	faith	and	repentance,	and	God	forgiving	us
and	giving	us	membership	in	his	family,	as	well	as	granting	us
growth	in	the	Christian	life	and	keeping	us	faithful	to	himself
throughout	life.	At	the	end	of	our	life	we	die	and	go	into	his
presence,	then	when	Christ	returns	we	receive	resurrection	bodies,
and	the	process	of	acquiring	salvation	is	complete.
Various	theologians	have	given	specific	terms	to	a	number	of	these
events,	and	have	often	listed	them	in	a	specific	order	in	which	they
believe	that	they	occur	in	our	lives.	Such	a	list	of	the	events	in
which	God	applies	salvation	to	us	is	called	the	
order	of	salvation,
and	is	sometimes	referred	to	by	a	Latin	phrase,	
ordo	salutis,	
which
simply	means	“order	of	salvation.”	Before	discussing	any	of	these
elements	in	the	application	of	salvation	to	our	lives,	we	can	give	a
complete	list	here	of	the	elements	that	will	be	treated	in	the
following	chapters:
“The	Order	of	Salvation”
	1.	Election	(God’s	choice	of	people	to	be	saved)
	2.	The	gospel	call	(proclaiming	the	message	of	the	gospel)
	3.	Regeneration	(being	born	again)
	4.	Conversion	(faith	and	repentance)
	5.	Justification	(right	legal	standing)
	6.	Adoption	(membership	in	God’s	family)
	7.	Sanctification	(right	conduct	of	life)
	8.	Perseverance	(remaining	a	Christian)
	9.	Death	(going	to	be	with	the	Lord)
10.	Glorification	(receiving	a	resurrection	body)
We	should	note	here	that	items	2–6	and	part	of	7	are	all	involved	in
“becoming	a	Christian.”	Numbers	7	and	8	work	themselves	out	in	this	life,
number	9	occurs	at	the	end	of	this	life,	and	number	10	occurs	when	Christ
returns.
	
2
We	begin	our	discussion	of	the	order	of	salvation	with	the	first
element,	election.	In	connection	with	this	we	will	also	discuss	at	the
end	of	this	chapter	the	question	of	“reprobation,”	the	decision	of
God	to	pass	over	those	who	will	not	be	saved,	and	to	punish	them
for	their	sins.	As	will	be	explained	below,	election	and	reprobation
are	different	in	several	important	respects,	and	it	is	important	to
distinguish	these	so	that	we	do	not	think	wrongly	about	God	or	his
activity.
The	term	
predestination	
is	also	frequently	used	in	this	discussion.
In	this	textbook,	and	in	Reformed	theology	generally,
predestination	
is	a	broader	term	and	includes	the	two	aspects	of
election	(for	believers)	and	reprobation	(for	unbelievers).	However,
the	term	
double	predestination	
is	not	a	helpful	term	because	it	gives
the	impression	that	both	election	and	reprobation	are	carried	out	in
the	same	way	by	God	and	have	no	essential	differences	between
them,	which	is	certainly	not	true.	Therefore,	the	term	
double
predestination	
is	not	generally	used	by	Reformed	theologians,
though	it	is	sometimes	used	to	refer	to	Reformed	teaching	by	those
who	criticize	it.	The	term	
double	predestination	
will	not	be	used	in
this	book	to	refer	to	election	and	reprobation,	since	it	blurs	the
distinctions	between	them	and	does	not	give	an	accurate	indication
of	what	is	actually	being	taught.
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
We	may	define	election	as	follows:	
Election	is	an	act	of	God	before
creation	in	which	he	chooses	some	people	to	be	saved,	not	on
account	of	any	foreseen	merit	in	them,	but	only	because	of	his
sovereign	good	pleasure.
There	has	been	much	controversy	in	the	church	and	much
misunderstanding	over	this	doctrine.	Many	of	the	controversial
questions	regarding	man’s	will	and	responsibility	and	regarding	the
justice	of	God	with	respect	to	human	choices	have	been	discussed
at	some	length	in	connection	with	God’s	providence	(chapter	16).
We	will	focus	here	only	on	those	additional	questions	that	apply
specifically	to	the	question	of	election.
Our	approach	in	this	chapter	will	be	first	simply	to	cite	a	number	of
passages	from	the	New	Testament	that	discuss	election.	Then	we
will	attempt	to	understand	the	purpose	of	God	that	the	New
Testament	authors	see	in	the	doctrine	of	election.	Finally,	we	will
attempt	to	clarify	our	understanding	of	this	doctrine	and	answer
some	objections,	and	also	to	consider	the	doctrine	of	reprobation.
A.	Does	the	New	Testament	Teach	Predestination?
Several	passages	in	the	New	Testament	seem	to	affirm	quite	clearly
that	God	ordained	beforehand	those	who	would	be	saved.	For
example,	when	Paul	and	Barnabas	began	to	preach	to	the	Gentiles
in	Antioch	in	Pisidia,	Luke	writes,	“And	when	the	Gentiles	heard
this,	they	were	glad	and	glorified	the	word	of	God;	and	
as	many	as
were	ordained	to	eternal	life	believed”	
(Acts	13:48).	It	is	significant
that	Luke	mentions	the	fact	of	election	almost	in	passing.	It	is	as	if
this	were	the	normal	occurrence	when	the	gospel	was	preached.
How	many	believed?	“As	many	as	were	ordained	to	eternal	life
believed.”
In	Romans	8:28–30,	we	read:
We	know	that	in	everything	God	works	for	good	with	those	who	love
him,	who	are	called	according	to	his	purpose.	
For	those	whom	he
foreknew	he	also	predestined	to	be	conformed	to	the	image	of	his	Son,
in	order	that	he	might	be	the	first-born	among	many	brethren.	
And
those	whom	he	predestined	he	also	called;	and	those	whom	he	called
he	also	justified;	and	those	whom	he	justified	he	also	glorified.
	
3
In	the	following	chapter,	when	talking	about	God’s	chosing	Jacob
and	not	Esau,	Paul	says	it	was	not	because	of	anything	that	Jacob	or
Esau	had	done,	but	simply	in	order	that	God’s	purpose	of	election
might	continue.
Though	they	were	not	yet	born	and	had	done	nothing	either	good	or
bad,	
in	order	that	God’s	purpose	of	election	might	continue,	
not
because	of	works	but	because	of	his	call,	she	was	told,	“The	elder	will
serve	the	younger.”	As	it	is	written,	“Jacob	I	loved,	but	Esau	I	hated.”
(Rom.	9:11–13)
Regarding	the	fact	that	some	of	the	people	of	Israel	were	saved,	but
others	were	not,	Paul	says:	“Israel	failed	to	obtain	what	it	sought.
The	elect	
obtained	it,	but	the	rest	were	hardened”	(Rom.	11:7).	Here
again	Paul	indicates	two	distinct	groups	within	the	people	of	Israel.
Those	who	were	“the	elect”	obtained	the	salvation	that	they	sought,
while	those	who	were	not	the	elect	simply	“were	hardened.”
Paul	talks	explicitly	about	God’s	choice	of	believers	before	the
foundation	of	the	world	in	the	beginning	of	Ephesians.
“
He	chose	us	in	him	before	the	foundation	of	the	world,	
that	we
should	be	holy	and	blameless	before	him.	
He	destined	us	in	love	
to	be
his	sons	through	Jesus	Christ,	according	to	the	purpose	of	his	will,	to
the	praise	of	his	glorious	grace.”	(Eph.	1:4–6)
Here	Paul	is	writing	to	believers	and	he	specifically	says	that	God
“chose	us”	in	Christ,	referring	to	believers	generally.	In	a	similar
way,	several	verses	later	he	says,	“We	who	first	hoped	in	Christ
have	been	
destined	and	appointed	
to	live	for	the	praise	of	his	glory”
(Eph.	1:12).
He	writes	to	the	Thessalonians,	“For	we	know,	brethren	beloved	by
God,	that	
he	has	chosen	you;	
for	our	gospel	came	to	you	not	only	in
word,	but	also	in	power	and	in	the	Holy	Spirit	and	with	full
conviction”	(1	Thess.	1:4–5).
Paul	says	that	the	fact	that	the	Thessalonians	
believed	
the	gospel
when	he	preached	it	(“for	our	gospel	came	to	you	.	.	.	in	power	.	.	.
and	with	full	conviction”)	
is	the	reason	he	knows	that	God	chose
them.	
As	soon	as	they	came	to	faith	Paul	concluded	that	long	ago
God	had	chosen	them,	and	therefore	they	had	believed	when	he
preached.	He	later	writes	to	the	same	church,	“We	are	bound	to	give
thanks	to	God	always	for	you,	brethren	beloved	by	the	Lord,
because	
God	chose	you	from	the	beginning	to	be	saved,	
through
sanctification	by	the	Spirit	and	belief	in	the	truth”	(2	Thess.	2:13).
Although	the	next	text	does	not	specifically	mention	the	election	of
human	beings,	it	is	interesting	at	this	point	also	to	notice	what	Paul
says	about	angels.	When	he	gives	a	solemn	command	to	Timothy,
he	writes,	“In	the	presence	of	God	and	of	Christ	Jesus	and	of	
the
elect	angels	
I	charge	you	to	keep	these	rules	without	favor”	(1	Tim.
5:21).	Paul	is	aware	that	there	are	good	angels	witnessing	his
command	and	witnessing	Timothy’s	response	to	it,	and	he	is	so	sure
that	it	is	God’s	act	of	election	that	has	affected	every	one	of	those
good	angels	that	he	can	call	them	“
elect	angels.”
When	Paul	talks	about	the	reason	why	God	saved	us	and	called	us
to	himself,	he	explicitly	denies	that	it	was	because	of	our	works,	but
points	rather	to	God’s	own	purpose	and	his	unmerited	grace	in
eternity	past.	He	says	God	is	the	one	“who	saved	us	and	called	us
with	a	holy	calling,	not	in	virtue	of	our	works	but	in	virtue	of	
his
own	purpose	
and	the	
grace	which	he	gave	us	in	Christ	Jesus	ages
ago”	
(2	Tim.	1:9).
When	Peter	writes	an	epistle	to	hundreds	of	Christians	in	many
churches	in	Asia	Minor,	he	writes,	“To	
God’s	elect	.	.	.	
scattered
throughout	Pontus,	Galatia,	Cappadocia,	Asia	and	Bithynia”	(1
Peter	1:1	NIV).	He	later	calls	them	“a	
chosen	
race”	(1	Peter	2:9).
In	John’s	vision	in	Revelation,	those	who	do	not	give	in	to
persecution	and	begin	to	worship	the	beast	are	persons	whose
names	have	been	written	in	the	book	of	life	before	the	foundation	of
the	world:	“And	authority	was	given	it	over	every	tribe	and	people
and	tongue	and	nation,	and	all	who	dwell	on	earth	will	worship	it,
every	one	whose	name	has	not	been	written	before	the	foundation	of
the	world	in	the	book	of	life	
of	the	Lamb	that	was	slain”	(Rev.	13:7–
8)
	
4
	
In	a	similar	way,	we	read	of	the	beast	from	the	bottomless	pit	in
Revelation	17:	“The	dwellers	on	earth	
whose	names	have	not	been
written	in	the	book	of	life	from	the	foundation	of	the	world,	
will
marvel	to	behold	the	beast,	because	it	was	and	is	not	and	is	to
come”	(Rev.	17:8).
B.	How	Does	the	New	Testament	Present	the	Teaching	of	Election?
After	reading	this	list	of	verses	on	election,	it	is	important	to	view
this	doctrine	in	the	way	the	New	Testament	itself	views	it.
1.
	As	a	Comfort.
	The	New	Testament	authors	often	present	the	doctrine	of
election	as	a	comfort	to	believers.	When	Paul	assures	the	Romans	that	“in
everything	God	works	for	good	with	those	who	love	him,	who	are	called
according	to	his	purpose”	(Rom.	8:28),	he	gives	God’s	work	of	predestination
as	a	reason	why	we	can	be	assured	of	this	truth.	He	explains	in	the	next	verse,
“
For	
those	whom	he	foreknew	he	also	predestined	to	be	conformed	to	the
image	of	his	Son	.	.	.	And	those	whom	he	predestined	he	also	called	.	.	.
justified	.	.	.	glorified”	(Rom.	8:29–30).	Paul’s	point	is	to	say	that	God	has
always	
acted	for	the	good	of	those	whom	he	called	to	himself.	If	Paul	looks
into	the	distant	past	before	the	creation	of	the	world,	he	sees	that	God
foreknew	and	predestined	his	people	to	be	conformed	to	the	image	of	Christ.
	
5
If	he	looks	at	the	recent	past	he	finds	that	God	called	and	justified	his	people
whom	he	had	predestined.	And	if	he	then	looks	toward	the	future	when	Christ
returns,	he	sees	that	God	has	determined	to	give	perfect,	glorified	bodies	to
those	who	believe	in	Christ.	From	eternity	to	eternity	God	has	acted	with	the
good	of	his	people	in	mind.	But	if	God	has	
always	
acted	for	our	good	and	will
in	the	future	act	for	our	good,	Paul	reasons,	then	
will	he	not	also	in	our
present	circumstances	
work	every	circumstance	together	for	our	good	as
well?	In	this	way	predestination	is	seen	as	a	comfort	for	believers	in	the
everyday	events	of	life.
2.	As	a	Reason	to	Praise	God.
	Paul	says,	“He	destined	us	in	love	to	be	his
sons	through	Jesus	Christ,	according	to	the	purpose	of	his	will,	
to	the	praise
of	his	glorious	grace”	
(Eph.	1:5–6).	Similarly,	he	says,	“We	who	first	hoped
in	Christ	have	been	destined	and	appointed	to	live	
for	the	praise	of	his	glory”
(Eph.	1:12).
Paul	tells	the	Christians	at	Thessalonica,	“
We	give	thanks	to	God
always	for	you	all.	.	.	.	
For	we	know,	
brethren	beloved	by	God,	
that
he	has	chosen	you”	
(1	Thess.	1:2,	4).	The	reason	Paul	can	give
thanks	to	God	for	the	Thessalonian	Christians	is	that	he	knows	God
is	ultimately	responsible	for	their	salvation	and	has	in	fact	chosen
them	to	be	saved.	This	is	made	even	clearer	in	2	Thessalonians
2:13:	“But	
we	are	bound	to	give	thanks	to	God	
always	for	you,
brethren	beloved	by	the	Lord,	
because	God	chose	you	
from	the
beginning	to	be	saved.”	Paul	was	obligated	to	give	thanks	to	God
for	the	Christians	at	Thessalonica	because	he	knew	that	their
salvation	was	ultimately	due	to	God’s	choice	of	them.	Therefore	it
is	appropriate	for	Paul	to	thank	God	for	them	rather	than	praising
them	for	their	own	saving	faith.
Understood	in	this	way,	the	doctrine	of	election	does	increase	praise
given	to	God	for	our	salvation	and	seriously	diminishes	any	pride
that	we	might	feel	if	we	thought	that	our	salvation	was	due	to
something	good	in	us	or	something	for	which	we	should	receive
credit.
3.	As	an	Encouragement	to	Evangelism.
	Paul	says,	“I	endure	everything	for
the	sake	of	the	elect,	that	they	also	may	obtain	salvation	in	Christ	Jesus	with
its	eternal	glory”	(2	Tim.	2:10).	He	knows	that	God	has	chosen	some	people
to	be	saved,	and	he	sees	this	as	an	encouragement	to	preach	the	gospel,	even
if	it	means	enduring	great	suffering.	Election	is	Paul’s	guarantee	that	there
will	be	some	success	for	his	evangelism,	for	he	knows	that	some	of	the	people
he	speaks	to	will	be	the	elect,	and	they	will	believe	the	gospel	and	be	saved.	It
is	as	if	someone	invited	us	to	come	fishing	and	said,	“I	guarantee	that	you	will
catch	some	fish—they	are	hungry	and	waiting.”
C.	Misunderstandings	of	the	Doctrine	of	Election
1.
	Election	Is	Not	Fatalistic	or	Mechanistic.
	Sometimes	those	who	object	to
the	doctrine	of	election	say	that	it	is	“fatalism”	or	that	it	presents	a
“mechanistic	system”	for	the	universe.	Two	somewhat	different	objections	are
involved	here.	By	“fatalism”	is	meant	a	system	in	which	human	choices	and
human	decisions	really	do	not	make	any	difference.	In	fatalism,	no	matter
what	we	do,	things	are	going	to	turn	out	as	they	have	been	previously
ordained.	Therefore,	it	is	futile	to	attempt	to	influence	the	outcome	of	events
or	the	outcome	of	our	lives	by	putting	forth	any	effort	or	making	any
significant	choices,	because	these	will	not	make	any	difference	any	way.	In	a
true	fatalistic	system,	of	course,	our	humanity	is	destroyed	for	our	choices
really	mean	nothing,	and	the	motivation	for	moral	accountability	is	removed.
In	a	mechanistic	system	the	picture	is	one	of	an	impersonal
universe	in	which	all	things	that	happen	have	been	inflexibly
determined	by	an	impersonal	force	long	ago,	and	the	universe
functions	in	a	mechanical	way	so	that	human	beings	are	more	like
machines	or	robots	than	genuine	persons.	Here	also	genuine	human
personality	would	be	reduced	to	the	level	of	a	machine	that	simply
functions	in	accordance	with	predetermined	plans	and	in	response
to	predetermined	causes	and	influences.
By	contrast	to	the	mechanistic	picture,	the	New	Testament	presents
the	entire	outworking	of	our	salvation	as	something	brought	about
by	a	
personal	
God	in	relationship	with	
personal	
creatures.	God
“destined	us	
in	love	
to	be	his	sons	through	Jesus	Christ”	(Eph.	1:5).
God’s	act	of	election	was	neither	impersonal	nor	mechanistic,	but
was	permeated	with	personal	love	for	those	whom	he	chose.
Moreover,	the	personal	care	of	God	for	his	creatures,	even	those
who	rebel	against	him,	is	seen	clearly	in	God’s	plea	through
Ezekiel,	“As	I	live,	says	the	Lord	GOD,	
I	have	no	pleasure	in	the
death	of	the	wicked,	but	that	the	wicked	turn	from	his	way	and	live;
turn	back,	turn	back	from	your	evil	ways;	for	why	will	you	die,	O
house	of	Israel?”	(Ezek.	33:11).
When	talking	about	our	response	to	the	gospel	offer,	Scripture
continually	views	us	not	as	mechanistic	creatures	or	robots,	but	as
genuine	persons,	
personal	creatures	who	make	willing	choices	to
accept	or	reject	the	gospel.
	
6
	
Jesus	invites	everyone,	“
Come	to	me,
all	who	labor	and	are	heavy	laden,	and	I	will	give	you	rest”	(Matt.
11:28).	And	we	read	the	invitation	at	the	end	of	Revelation:	“The
Spirit	and	the	Bride	say,	‘Come.’	And	let	him	who	hears	say,
‘Come.’	And	let	him	who	is	thirsty	come,	let	
him	who	desires	
take
the	water	of	life	without	price”	(Rev.	22:17).	This	invitation	and
many	others	like	it	are	addressed	to	genuine	persons	who	are
capable	of	hearing	the	invitation	and	responding	to	it	by	a	decision
of	their	wills.	Regarding	those	who	will	not	accept	him,	Jesus
clearly	emphasizes	their	hardness	of	heart	and	their	stubborn	refusal
to	come	to	him:	“Yet	you	
refuse	
to	come	to	me	that	you	may	have
life”	(John	5:40).	And	Jesus	cries	out	in	sorrow	to	the	city	that	had
rejected	him,	“O	Jerusalem,	Jerusalem,	killing	the	prophets	and
stoning	those	who	are	sent	to	you!	How	often	would	I	have
gathered	your	children	together	as	a	hen	gathers	her	brood	under
her	wings,	
and	you	would	not!”	
(Matt.	23:37).
In	contrast	to	the	charge	of	fatalism,	we	also	see	a	much	different
picture	in	the	New	Testament.	Not	only	do	we	make	willing	choices
as	real	persons,	but	these	choices	are	also	
real	choices	
because	they
do	affect	the	course	of	events	in	the	world.	They	affect	our	own
lives	and	they	affect	the	lives	and	destinies	of	others.	So,	“
He	who
believes	in	him	
is	not	condemned;	
he	who	does	not	believe	
is
condemned	already,	because	he	has	not	believed	in	the	name	of	the
only	Son	of	God”	(John	3:18).	Our	personal	decisions	to	believe	or
not	believe	in	Christ	have	eternal	consequences	in	our	lives,	and
Scripture	is	quite	willing	to	talk	about	our	decision	to	believe	or	not
believe	as	the	factor	that	decides	our	eternal	destiny.
The	implication	of	this	is	that	we	certainly	must	preach	the	gospel,
and	people’s	eternal	destiny	hinges	on	whether	we	proclaim	the
gospel	or	not.	Therefore	when	the	Lord	one	night	told	Paul,	“Do	not
be	afraid,	but	speak	and	do	not	be	silent;	for	I	am	with	you,	and	no
man	shall	attack	you	to	harm	you;	for	
I	have	many	people	in	this
city”	
(Acts	18:9–10),	Paul	did	not	simply	conclude	that	the	“many
people”	who	belong	to	God	would	be	saved	whether	he	stayed	there
preaching	the	gospel	or	not.	Rather,	“
he	stayed	a	year	and	six
months,	
teaching	the	word	of	God	among	them”	(Acts	18:11)—this
was	longer	than	Paul	stayed	in	any	other	city	except	Ephesus	during
his	three	missionary	journeys.	When	Paul	was	told	that	God	had
many	elect	people	in	Corinth,	he	stayed	a	long	time	and	preached,
in	order	that	those	elect	people	might	be	saved!	Paul	is	quite	clear
about	the	fact	that	unless	people	preach	the	gospel	others	will	not
be	saved:
But	how	are	men	to	call	upon	him	in	whom	they	have	not	believed?
And	how	are	they	to	believe	in	him	of	whom	they	have	never	heard?
And	how	are	they	to	hear	without	a	preacher?	
.	.	.	So	faith	comes
from	what	is	heard,	and	what	is	heard	comes	by	the	preaching	of
Christ.	(Rom.	10:14,	17)
Did	Paul	know	before	he	went	to	a	city	who	was	elected	by	God	for
salvation	and	who	was	not?	No,	he	did	not.	That	is	something	that
God	does	not	show	to	us	ahead	of	time.	But	once	people	come	to
faith	in	Christ	then	we	can	be	confident	that	God	had	earlier	chosen
them	for	salvation.	This	is	exactly	Paul’s	conclusion	regarding	the
Thessalonians;	he	says	that	he	knows	that	God	chose	them	because
when	he	preached	to	them,	the	gospel	came	in	power	and	with	full
conviction:	“For	we	know,	brethren	beloved	by	God,	that	he	has
chosen	you;	
for	our	gospel	came	to	you	
not	only	in	word,	but	also
in	
power	
and	in	the	
Holy	Spirit	
and	
with	full	conviction”	
(1	Thess.
1:4–5).	Far	from	saying	that	whatever	he	did	made	no	difference,
and	that	God’s	elect	would	be	saved	whether	he	preached	or	not,
Paul	endured	a	life	of	incredible	hardship	in	order	to	bring	the
gospel	to	those	whom	God	had	chosen.	At	the	end	of	a	life	filled
with	suffering	he	said,	“Therefore	
I	endure	everything	for	the	sake
of	the	elect,	that	they	also	may	obtain	salvation	
in	Christ	Jesus	with
its	eternal	glory”	(2	Tim.	2:10).
2.	Election	Is	Not	Based	on	God’s	Foreknowledge	of	Our	Faith.
	Quite
commonly	people	will	agree	that	God	predestines	some	to	be	saved,	but	they
will	say	that	he	does	this	by	looking	into	the	future	and	seeing	who	will
believe	in	Christ	and	who	will	not.	If	he	sees	that	a	person	is	going	to	come	to
saving	faith,	then	he	will	predestine	that	person	to	be	saved,	
based	on
foreknowledge	of	that	person’s	faith.	
If	he	sees	that	a	person	will	not	come	to
saving	faith,	then	he	does	not	predestine	that	person	to	be	saved.	In	this	way,
it	is	thought,	the	ultimate	reason	why	some	are	saved	and	some	are	not	lies
within	the	people	themselves,	
not	within	God.	All	that	God	does	in	his
predestining	work	is	to	give	confirmation	to	the	decision	he	knows	people
will	make	on	their	own.	The	verse	commonly	used	to	support	this	view	is
Romans	8:29:	“For	those	
whom	he	foreknew	
he	also	predestined	to	be
conformed	to	the	image	of	his	Son.”
	
7
a.	Foreknowledge	of	Persons,	Not	Facts:
	But	this	verse	can	hardly	be	used
to	demonstrate	that	God	based	his	predestination	on	foreknowledge	of	
the	fact
that	a	person	would	believe.	
The	passage	speaks	rather	of	the	fact	that	God
knew	
persons	
(“
those	whom	
he	foreknew”),	not	that	he	knew	some	
fact	about
them,	
such	as	the	fact	that	they	would	believe.	It	is	a	personal,	relational
knowledge	that	is	spoken	of	here:	God,	looking	into	the	future,	thought	of
certain	people	in	saving	relationship	to	him,	and	in	that	sense	he	“knew	them”
long	ago.	This	is	the	sense	in	which	Paul	can	talk	about	God’s	“knowing”
someone,	for	example,	in	1	Corinthians	8:3:	“But	if	one	loves	God,	one	is
known	by	him.”	
Similarly,	he	says,	“but	now	that	you	have	come	to	know
God,	or	rather	
to	be	known	by	God	.	.	.”	
(Gal.	4:9).	When	people	
know	
God	in
Scripture,	or	when	God	
knows	
them,	it	is	personal	knowledge	that	involves	a
saving	relationship.	Therefore	in	Romans	8:29,	“those	whom	he	
foreknew”	
is
best	understood	to	mean,	“those	whom	he	long	ago	
thought	of	in	a	saving
relationship	to	himself.”	
The	text	actually	says	nothing	about	God
foreknowing	or	foreseeing	that	certain	people	would	believe,	nor	is	that	idea
mentioned	in	any	other	text	of	Scripture.
	
8
Sometimes	people	say	that	God	elected	
groups	
of	people,	but	not
individuals	to	salvation.	In	some	Arminian	views,	God	just	elected
the	church	as	a	group,	while	the	Swiss	theologian	Karl	Barth
(1886–1968)	said	that	God	elected	Christ,	and	all	people	in	Christ.
But	Romans	8:29	talks	about	certain	people	whom	God	foreknew
(“
those	whom	
he	foreknew”),	not	just	undefined	or	unfilled	groups.
And	in	Ephesians	Paul	talks	about	certain	people	whom	God	chose,
including	himself:	“He	
chose	us	
in	him	before	the	foundation	of	the
world”	(Eph.	1:4).	To	talk	about	God	choosing	a	group	with	no
people	in	it	is	not	biblical	election	at	all.	But	to	talk	about	God
choosing	a	group	of	people	means	that	he	chose	specific	individuals
who	constituted	that	group.
	
9
b.	Scripture	Never	Speaks	of	Our	Faith	As	the	Reason	God	Chose	Us:
	In
addition,	when	we	look	beyond	these	specific	passages	that	speak	of
foreknowledge	and	look	at	verses	that	talk	about	the	
reason	
God	chose	us,	we
find	that	Scripture	never	speaks	of	our	faith	or	the	fact	that	we	would	come	to
believe	in	Christ	as	the	reason	God	chose	us.	In	fact,	Paul	seems	explicitly	to
exclude	the	consideration	of	what	people	would	do	in	life	from	his
understanding	of	God’s	choice	of	Jacob	rather	than	Esau:	he	says,	“Though
they	were	not	yet	born	and	had	done	nothing	either	good	or	bad,	
in	order	that
God’s	purpose	of	election	might	continue,	
not	because	of	works	but	because
of	his	call,	she	was	told,	‘The	elder	will	serve	the	younger.’	As	it	is	written,
‘Jacob	I	loved,	but	Esau	I	hated’	”	(Rom.	9:11–13).	Nothing	that	Jacob	or
Esau	would	do	in	life	influenced	God’s	decision;	it	was	simply	in	order	that
his	purpose	of	election	might	continue.
When	discussing	the	Jewish	people	who	have	come	to	faith	in
Christ,	Paul	says,	“So	too	at	the	present	time	there	is	a	remnant,
chosen	by	grace.	
But	if	it	is	by	grace,	it	is	no	longer	on	the	basis	of
works”	(Rom.	11:5–6).	Here	again	Paul	emphasizes	God’s	grace
and	the	complete	absence	of	human	merit	in	the	process	of	election.
Someone	might	object	that	faith	is	not	viewed	as	a	“work”	in
Scripture	and	therefore	faith	should	be	excluded	from	the	quotation
above	(“It	is	no	longer	on	the	basis	of	
works”
).	Based	on	this
objection,	Paul	could	actually	mean,	“But	if	it	is	by	grace,	it	is	no
longer	on	the	basis	of	works,	but	rather	on	the	basis	of	whether
someone	would	believe.”	However,	this	is	unlikely	in	this	context:
Paul	is	not	contrasting	human	faith	and	human	works;	he	is
contrasting	God’s	sovereign	choosing	of	people	with	
any	
human
activity,	and	he	points	to	God’s	sovereign	will	as	the	ultimate	basis
for	God’s	choice	of	the	Jews	who	have	come	to	Christ.
Similarly,	when	Paul	talks	about	election	in	Ephesians,	there	is	no
mention	of	any	foreknowledge	of	the	fact	that	we	would	believe,	or
any	idea	that	there	was	anything	worthy	or	meritorious	in	us	(such
as	a	tendency	to	believe)	that	was	the	basis	for	God’s	choosing	us.
Rather,	Paul	says,	“He	destined	us	
in	love	
to	be	his	sons	through
Jesus	Christ,	
according	to	the	purpose	of	his	will,	
to	the	praise	of
his	glorious	grace	
which	he	freely	bestowed	on	us	
in	the	Beloved”
(Eph.	1:5–6).	Now	if	God’s	grace	is	to	be	praised	for	election,	and
not	human	ability	to	believe	or	decision	to	believe,	then	once	again
it	is	consistent	for	Paul	to	mention	nothing	of	human	faith	but	only
to	mention	God’s	predestining	activity,	his	purpose	and	will,	and	his
freely	given	grace.
Again	in	2	Timothy,	Paul	says	that	God	“saved	us	and	called	us
with	a	holy	calling,	not	in	virtue	of	our	works	but	
in	virtue	of	his
own	purpose	
and	the	grace	which	he	gave	us	in	Christ	Jesus	ages
ago”	(2	Tim.	1:9).	Once	again	God’s	sovereign	purpose	is	seen	as
the	ultimate	reason	for	our	salvation,	and	Paul	connects	this	with
the	fact	that	God	gave	us	grace	in	Christ	Jesus	ages	ago—another
way	of	speaking	of	the	truth	that	God	freely	gave	favor	to	us	when
he	chose	us	without	reference	to	any	foreseen	merit	or	worthiness
on	our	part.
c.	Election	Based	on	Something	Good	in	Us	(Our	Faith)	Would	Be	the
Beginning	of	Salvation	by	Merit:
	Yet	another	kind	of	objection	can	be
brought	against	the	idea	that	God	chose	us	because	he	foreknew	that	we
would	come	to	faith.	If	the	
ultimate	
determining	factor	in	whether	we	will	be
saved	or	not	is	our	own	decision	to	accept	Christ,	then	we	shall	be	more
inclined	to	think	that	we	deserve	some	credit	for	the	fact	that	we	were	saved:
in	distinction	from	other	people	who	continue	to	reject	Christ,	we	were	wise
enough	in	our	judgment	or	good	enough	in	our	moral	tendencies	or	perceptive
enough	in	our	spiritual	capacities	to	decide	to	believe	in	Christ.	But	once	we
begin	to	think	this	way	then	we	seriously	diminish	the	glory	that	is	to	be	given
to	God	for	our	salvation.	We	become	uncomfortable	speaking	like	Paul	who
says	that	God	“destined	us	.	.	.	
according	to	the	purpose	of	his	will,	
to	the
praise	of	his	glorious	
grace”	
(Eph.	1:5–6),	and	we	begin	to	think	that	God
“destined	us	.	.	.	according	to	the	fact	that	he	knew	that	we	would	have
enough	tendencies	toward	goodness	and	faith	within	us	that	we	would
believe.”	When	we	think	like	this	we	begin	to	sound	very	much	unlike	the
New	Testament	when	it	talks	about	election	or	predestination.	By	contrast,	if
election	is	solely	based	on	God’s	own	good	pleasure	and	his	sovereign
decision	to	love	us	in	spite	of	our	lack	of	goodness	or	merit,	then	certainly	we
have	a	profound	sense	of	appreciation	to	him	for	a	salvation	that	is	totally
undeserved,	and	we	will	forever	be	willing	to	praise	his	“glorious	grace”
(Eph.	1:6).
In	the	final	analysis,	the	difference	between	two	views	of	election
can	be	seen	in	the	way	they	answer	a	very	simple	question.	Given
the	fact	that	in	the	final	analysis	some	people	will	choose	to	accept
Christ	and	some	people	will	not,	the	question	is,	“What	makes
people	differ?”	That	is,	what	
ultimately	
makes	the	difference
between	those	who	believe	and	those	who	do	not?	If	our	answer	is
that	it	is	ultimately	based	on	something	God	does	(namely,	his
sovereign	election	of	those	who	would	be	saved),	then	we	see	that
salvation	at	its	most	foundational	level	is	based	on	
grace	alone.	
On
the	other	hand,	if	we	answer	that	the	ultimate	difference	between
those	who	are	saved	and	those	who	are	not	is	because	of	
something
in	man	
(that	is,	a	tendency	or	disposition	to	believe	or	not	believe),
then	salvation	ultimately	depends	on	a	combination	of	grace	plus
human	ability.
	
10
d.	Predestination	Based	on	Foreknowledge	Still	Does	Not	Give	People
Free	Choice:
	The	idea	that	God’s	predestination	of	some	to	believe	is	based
on	foreknowledge	of	their	faith	encounters	still	another	problem:	upon
reflection,	this	system	turns	out	to	give	no	real	freedom	to	man	either.	For	if
God	can	look	into	the	future	and	see	that	person	A	
will	
come	to	faith	in	Christ,
and	that	person	B	
will	not	
come	to	faith	in	Christ,	then	those	facts	are	already
fixed,	
they	are	already	
determined.	
If	we	assume	that	God’s	knowledge	of	the
future	is	
true	
(which	it	must	be),	then	it	is	absolutely	certain	that	person	A
will	believe	and	person	B	will	not.	There	is	no	way	that	their	lives	could	turn
out	any	differently	than	this.	Therefore	it	is	fair	to	say	that	their	destinies	are
still	
determined,	
for	they	could	not	be	otherwise.	But	
by	what	
are	these
destinies	determined?	If	they	are	determined	by	God	himself,	then	we	no
longer	have	election	based	ultimately	on	foreknowledge	of	faith,	but	rather	on
God’s	sovereign	will.	But	if	these	destinies	are	not	determined	by	God,	then
who	or	what	determines	them?	Certainly	no	Christian	would	say	that	there	is
some	powerful	being	other	than	God	controlling	people’s	destinies.	Therefore
it	seems	that	the	only	other	possible	solution	is	to	say	they	are	determined	by
some	impersonal	force,	some	kind	of	fate,	operative	in	the	universe,	making
things	turn	out	as	they	do.	But	what	kind	of	benefit	is	this?	We	have	then
sacrificed	election	in	love	by	a	personal	God	for	a	kind	of	determinism	by	an
impersonal	force	and	God	is	no	longer	to	be	given	the	ultimate	credit	for	our
salvation.
e.	Conclusion:	Election	Is	Unconditional:
	It	seems	best,	for	the	previous
four	reasons,	to	reject	the	idea	that	election	is	based	on	God’s	foreknowledge
of	our	faith.	We	conclude	instead	that	the	reason	for	election	is	simply	God’s
sovereign	choice—he	“destined	us	in	love	to	be	his	sons”	(Eph.	1:5).	God
chose	us	simply	because	he	decided	to	bestow	his	love	upon	us.	It	was	not
because	of	any	foreseen	faith	or	foreseen	merit	in	us.
This	understanding	of	election	has	traditionally	been	called
“unconditional	election.”
	
11
	
It	is	“unconditional”	because	it	is	not
conditioned	upon	
anything	that	God	sees	in	us	that	makes	us
worthy	of	his	choosing	us.
	
12
D.	Objections	to	the	Doctrine	of	Election
It	must	be	said	that	the	doctrine	of	election	as	presented	here	is	by
no	means	universally	accepted	in	the	Christian	church,	either	in
Catholicism	or	Protestantism.	There	is	a	long	history	of	acceptance
of	the	doctrine	as	here	presented,	but	many	others	have	objected	to
it	as	well.	Among	current	evangelicals,	those	in	more	Reformed	or
Calvinistic	circles	(conservative	Presbyterian	denominations,	for
example)	will	accept	this	view,	as	will	many	Lutherans	and
Anglicans	(Episcopalians)	and	a	large	number	of	Baptists	and
people	in	independent	churches.	On	the	other	hand,	it	will	be
rejected	quite	decisively	by	nearly	all	Methodists,	as	well	as	by
many	others	in	Baptist,	Anglican,	and	independent	churches.
	
13
While	a	number	of	the	objections	to	election	are	more	specific
forms	of	objection	to	the	doctrine	of	providence	presented	in
chapter	16,	and	have	been	answered	in	more	detail	there,	a	few
particular	objections	should	be	mentioned	here.
1.
	Election	Means	That	We	Do	Not	Have	a	Choice	in	Whether	We	Accept
Christ	or	Not.
	According	to	this	objection,	the	doctrine	of	election	denies	all
the	gospel	invitations	that	appeal	to	the	will	of	man	and	ask	people	to	make	a
choice	in	whether	to	respond	to	Christ’s	invitation	or	not.	In	response	to	this,
we	must	affirm	that	the	doctrine	of	election	is	fully	able	to	accommodate	the
idea	that	we	have	a	voluntary	choice	and	we	make	willing	decisions	in
accepting	or	rejecting	Christ.	Our	choices	are	voluntary	because	they	are	what
we	want	to	do	and	what	we	decide	to	do.
	
14
	
This	does	not	mean	that	our
choices	are	absolutely	free,	because	(as	explained	in	chapter	16,	on
providence),	God	can	work	sovereignly	through	our	desires	so	that	he
guarantees	that	our	choices	come	about	as	he	has	ordained,	but	this	can	still
be	understood	as	a	real	choice	because	God	has	created	us	and	he	ordains	that
such	a	choice	is	real.	In	short,	we	can	say	that	God	causes	us	to	choose	Christ
voluntarily.	The	mistaken	assumption	underlying	this	objection	is	that	a
choice	must	be	absolutely	free	(that	is,	not	in	any	way	caused	by	God)	in
order	for	it	to	be	a	genuine	human	choice.
2.	On	This	Definition	of	Election,	Our	Choices	Are	Not	Real	Choices.
Continuing	the	discussion	in	the	previous	paragraph,	someone	might	object
that	if	a	choice	is	caused	by	God,	it	may	appear	to	us	to	be	voluntary	and
willed	by	us,	but	it	is	nonetheless	not	a	genuine	or	real	choice,	because	it	is
not	absolutely	free.	Once	again	we	must	respond	by	challenging	the
assumption	that	a	choice	must	be	absolutely	free	in	order	to	be	genuine	or
valid.	If	God	makes	us	in	a	certain	way	and	then	tells	us	that	our	voluntary
choices	are	real	and	genuine	choices,	then	we	must	agree	that	they	are.	God	is
the	definition	of	what	is	real	and	genuine	in	the	universe.	By	contrast,	we
might	ask	where	Scripture	ever	says	that	our	choices	have	to	be	free	from
God’s	influence	or	control	in	order	to	be	real	or	genuine	choices.	It	does	not
seem	that	Scripture	ever	speaks	in	this	way.
3.	The	Doctrine	of	Election	Makes	Us	Puppets	or	Robots,	Not	Real
Persons.
	According	to	this	objection,	if	God	really	causes	everything	that	we
choose	with	regard	to	salvation,	then	we	are	no	longer	real	persons.	Once
again	it	must	be	answered	that	God	has	created	us	and	we	must	allow	him	to
define	what	genuine	personhood	is.	The	analogy	of	a	“puppet”	or	a	“robot”
reduces	us	to	a	sub-human	category	of	things	that	have	been	created	by	man.
But	genuine	human	beings	are	far	greater	than	puppets	or	robots,	because	we
do	have	a	genuine	will	and	we	do	make	voluntary	decisions	based	on	our	own
preferences	and	wants.	In	fact,	it	is	this	ability	to	make	willing	choices	that	is
one	thing	that	distinguishes	us	from	much	of	the	lower	creation.	We	are	real
people	created	in	God’s	image,	and	God	has	allowed	us	to	make	genuine
choices	that	have	real	effects	on	our	lives.
4.	The	Doctrine	of	Election	Means	That	Unbelievers	Never	Had	a	Chance
to	Believe.
	This	objection	to	election	says	that	if	God	had	decreed	from
eternity	that	some	people	would	not	believe,	then	there	was	no	genuine
chance	for	them	to	believe,	and	the	entire	system	functions	unfairly.	Two
responses	can	be	made	to	this	objection.	First,	we	must	note	that	the	Bible
does	not	allow	us	to	say	that	unbelievers	had	no	chance	to	believe.	When
people	rejected	Jesus	he	always	put	the	blame	on	their	willful	choice	to	reject
him,	not	on	anything	decreed	by	God	the	Father.	“Why	do	you	not	understand
what	I	say?	It	is	because	you	cannot	bear	to	hear	my	word.	You	are	of	your
father	the	devil,	and	your	
will	
is	to	do	your	father’s	desires”	(John	8:43–44).
He	says	to	Jerusalem,	“How	often	would	I	have	gathered	your	children
together	.	.	.	
and	you	would	not!”	
(Matt.	23:37).	He	said	to	the	Jews	who
rejected	him,	“You	
refuse	to	come	to	me	
that	you	may	have	life”	(John	5:40).
Romans	1	makes	it	plain	that	all	people	are	confronted	with	a	revelation	from
God	of	such	clarity	that	they	are	“without	excuse”	(Rom.	1:20).	This	is	the
consistent	pattern	in	Scripture:	people	who	remain	in	unbelief	do	so	because
they	are	unwilling	to	come	to	God,	and	the	blame	for	such	unbelief	always
lies	with	the	unbelievers	themselves,	never	with	God.
At	a	second	level,	the	answer	to	this	question	must	simply	be	Paul’s
answer	to	a	similar	objection:	“But	who	are	you,	a	man,	to	answer
back	to	God?	Will	what	is	molded	say	to	its	molder,	‘Why	have	you
made	me	thus?’	”	(Rom.	9:20).
5.	Election	Is	Unfair.
	Sometimes	people	regard	the	doctrine	of	election	as
unfair,	since	it	teaches	that	God	chooses	some	to	be	saved	and	passes	over
others,	deciding	not	to	save	them.	How	can	this	be	fair?
Two	responses	may	be	given	at	this	point.	First,	we	must	remember
that	
it	would	be	perfectly	fair	for	God	not	to	save	anyone,	
just	as	he
did	with	the	angels:	“God	did	not	spare	the	angels	when	they
sinned,	but	cast	them	into	hell	and	committed	them	to	pits	of	nether
gloom	to	be	kept	until	the	judgment”	(2	Peter	2:4).
	
15
	
What	would
be	perfectly	fair	for	God	would	be	to	do	with	human	beings	as	he
did	with	angels,	that	is,	to	save	none	of	those	who	sinned	and
rebelled	against	him.	But	if	he	does	save	
some	at	all,	
then	this	is	a
demonstration	of	grace	that	goes	far	beyond	the	requirements	of
fairness	and	justice.
But	at	a	deeper	level	this	objection	would	say	that	it	is	not	fair	for
God	to	create	some	people	who	he	knew	would	sin	and	be	eternally
condemned,	and	whom	he	would	not	redeem.	Paul	raises	this
objection	in	Romans	9.	After	saying	that	God	“has	mercy	upon
whomever	he	wills,	and	he	hardens	the	heart	of	whomever	he	wills”
(Rom.	9:18),
	
16
	
Paul	then	raises	this	precise	objection:	“You	will
say	to	me	then,	‘Why	does	he	still	find	fault?	For	who	can	resist	his
will?’	”	(Rom.	9:19).	Here	is	the	heart	of	the	“unfairness”	objection
against	the	doctrine	of	election.	If	each	person’s	ultimate	destiny	is
determined	by	God,	not	by	the	person	himself	or	herself	(that	is,
even	when	people	make	willing	choices	that	determine	whether
they	will	be	saved	or	not,	if	God	is	actually	behind	those	choices
somehow	causing	them	to	occur),	then	how	can	this	be	fair?
Paul’s	response	is	not	one	that	appeals	to	our	pride,	nor	does	he
attempt	to	give	a	philosophical	explanation	of	why	this	is	just.	He
simply	calls	on	God’s	rights	as	the	omnipotent	Creator:
But	who	are	you,	a	man,	to	answer	back	to	God?	Will	what	is	molded
say	to	its	molder,	“Why	have	you	made	me	thus?”	Has	the	potter	no
right	over	the	clay,	to	make	out	of	the	same	lump	one	vessel	for
beauty	and	another	for	menial	use?	What	if	God,	desiring	to	show	his
wrath	and	to	make	known	his	power,	has	endured	with	much	patience
the	vessels	of	wrath	made	for	destruction,	in	order	to	make	known	the
riches	of	his	glory	for	the	vessels	of	mercy,	which	he	has	prepared
beforehand	for	glory,	even	us	whom	he	has	called,	not	from	the	Jews
only	but	also	from	the	Gentiles?	(Rom.	9:20–24)
	
17
Paul	simply	says	that	there	is	a	point	beyond	which	we	cannot	answer	back	to
God	or	question	his	justice.	He	has	done	what	he	has	done	according	to	his
sovereign	will.	He	is	the	Creator;	we	are	the	creatures,	and	we	ultimately	have
no	basis	from	which	to	accuse	him	of	unfairness	or	injustice.
	
18
	
When	we	read
these	words	of	Paul	we	are	confronted	with	a	decision	whether	or	not	to
accept	what	God	says	here,	and	what	he	does,	simply	because	he	is	God	and
we	are	not.	It	is	a	question	that	reaches	deep	into	our	understanding	of
ourselves	as	creatures	and	of	our	relationship	to	God	as	our	Creator.
This	objection	of	unfairness	takes	a	slightly	different	form	when
people	say	that	it	is	
unfair	of	God	to	save	some	people	and	not	to
save	all.	
This	objection	is	based	on	an	idea	of	justice	among	human
beings	that	we	sense	intuitively.	We	recognize	in	human	affairs	that
it	is	right	to	treat	equal	people	in	an	equal	way.	Therefore	it	seems
intuitively	appropriate	to	us	to	say	that	if	God	is	going	to	save	
some
sinners	he	ought	to	save	
all	
sinners.	But	in	answer	to	this	objection
it	must	be	said	that	we	really	have	no	right	to	impose	on	God	our
intuitive	sense	of	what	is	appropriate	among	human	beings.
Whenever	Scripture	begins	to	treat	this	area	it	goes	back	to	God’s
sovereignty	as	Creator	and	says	he	has	a	right	to	do	with	his
creation	as	he	wills	(see	Rom.	9:19–20,	quoted	above).
	
19
	
If	God
ultimately	decided	to	create	some	creatures	to	be	saved	and	others
not	to	be	saved,	then	that	was	his	sovereign	choice,	and	we	have	no
moral	or	scriptural	basis	on	which	we	can	insist	that	it	was	not	fair.
6.	The	Bible	Says	That	God	Wills	to	Save	Everyone.
	Another	objection	to
the	doctrine	of	election	is	that	it	contradicts	certain	passages	of	Scripture	that
say	that	God	wills	for	all	to	be	saved.	Paul	writes	of	God	our	Savior,	“
who
desires	all	men	to	be	saved	and	to	come	to	the	knowledge	of	the	truth”	
(1
Tim.	2:4).	And	Peter	says,	“The	Lord	is	not	slow	about	his	promise	as	some
count	slowness,	but	is	forbearing	toward	you,	
not	wishing	that	any	should
perish,	
but	that	all	should	reach	repentance”	(2	Peter	3:9).	Do	not	these
passages	contradict	the	idea	that	God	has	only	chosen	certain	people	to	be
saved?
One	common	solution	to	this	question	(from	the	Reformed
perspective	advocated	in	this	book)	is	to	say	that	these	verses	speak
of	God’s	
revealed	will	
(telling	us	what	we	should	do),	not	his
hidden	will	
(his	eternal	plans	for	what	will	happen).
	
20
	
The	verses
simply	tell	us	that	God	invites	and	commands	every	person	to
repent	and	come	to	Christ	for	salvation,	but	they	do	not	tell	us
anything	about	God’s	secret	decrees	regarding	who	will	be	saved.
The	Arminian	theologian	Clark	Pinnock	objects	to	the	idea	that
God	has	a	secret	and	a	revealed	will—he	calls	it	“the	exceedingly
paradoxical	notion	of	two	divine	wills	regarding	salvation.”
	
21
	
But
Pinnock	never	really	answers	the	question	of	why	all	are	not	saved
(from	an	Arminian	perspective).	Ultimately	Arminians	
also	
must
say	that	God	
wills	
something	more	strongly	than	he	wills	the
salvation	of	all	people,	
for	in	fact	all	are	not	saved.	
Arminians
claim	that	the	reason	why	all	are	not	saved	is	that	God	wills	to
preserve	the	free	will	of	man	
more	than	
he	wills	to	save	everyone.
But	is	this	not	also	making	a	distinction	in	two	aspects	of	the	will	of
God?	On	the	one	hand	God	wills	that	all	be	saved	(1	Tim.	2:5–6;	2
Peter	3:9).	But	on	the	other	hand	he	wills	to	preserve	man’s
absolutely	free	choice.	In	fact,	he	wills	the	second	thing	
more	than
the	first.	But	this	means	that	Arminians	also	must	say	that	1
Timothy	2:5–6	and	2	Peter	3:9	do	not	say	that	God	wills	the
salvation	of	everyone	in	an	absolute	or	unqualified	way—they	too
must	say	that	the	verses	only	refer	to	one	kind	or	one	aspect	of
God’s	will.
Here	the	difference	between	the	Reformed	and	the	Arminian
conception	of	God’s	will	is	clearly	seen.	Both	Calvinists	and
Arminians	agree	that	God’s	commands	in	Scripture	reveal	to	us
what	he	wants	us	to	do,	and	both	agree	that	the	commands	in
Scripture	invite	us	to	repent	and	trust	in	Christ	for	salvation.
Therefore,	in	one	sense	both	agree	that	God	wills	that	we	be	saved
—it	is	the	will	that	he	reveals	to	us	explicitly	in	the	gospel
invitation.
But	both	sides	must	also	say	that	there	is	something	else	that	God
deems	more	important	than	saving	everyone.	Reformed	theologians
say	that	God	deems	
his	own	glory	
more	important	than	saving
everyone,	and	that	(according	to	Rom.	9)	God’s	glory	is	also
furthered	by	the	fact	that	some	are	not	saved.	Arminian	theologians
also	say	that	something	else	is	more	important	to	God	than	the
salvation	of	all	people,	namely,	the	preservation	of	
man’s	free	will.
So	in	a	Reformed	system	God’s	highest	value	is	his	own	glory,	and
in	an	Arminian	system	God’s	highest	value	is	the	free	will	of	man.
These	are	two	distinctly	different	conceptions	of	the	nature	of	God,
and	it	seems	that	the	Reformed	position	has	much	more	explicit
biblical	support	than	the	Arminian	position	does	on	this	question.
	
22
E.	The	Doctrine	of	Reprobation
When	we	understand	election	as	God’s	sovereign	choice	of	some
persons	to	be	saved,	then	there	is	necessarily	another	aspect	of	that
choice,	namely,	God’s	sovereign	decision	to	pass	over	others	and
not	to	save	them.	This	decision	of	God	in	eternity	past	is	called
reprobation.	
Reprobation	is	the	sovereign	decision	of	God	before
creation	to	pass	over	some	persons,	in	sorrow	deciding	not	to	save
them,	and	to	punish	them	for	their	sins,	and	thereby	to	manifest	his
justice.
In	many	ways	the	doctrine	of	reprobation	is	the	most	difficult	of	all
the	teachings	of	Scripture	for	us	to	think	about	and	to	accept,
because	it	deals	with	such	horrible	and	eternal	consequences	for
human	beings	made	in	the	image	of	God.	The	love	that	God	gives
us	for	our	fellow	human	beings	and	the	love	that	he	commands	us
to	have	toward	our	neighbor	cause	us	to	recoil	against	this	doctrine,
and	it	is	right	that	we	feel	such	dread	in	contemplating	it.
	
23
	
It	is
something	that	we	would	not	want	to	believe,	and	would	not
believe,	unless	Scripture	clearly	taught	it.
But	are	there	Scripture	passages	that	speak	of	such	a	decision	by
God?	Certainly	there	are	some.	Jude	speaks	of	some	persons	“who
long	ago	were	designated	for	this	condemnation,	
ungodly	persons
who	pervert	the	grace	of	our	God	into	licentiousness	and	deny	our
only	Master	and	Lord,	Jesus	Christ”	(Jude	4).
Moreover,	Paul,	in	the	passage	referred	to	above,	speaks	in	the
same	way	of	Pharaoh	and	others:
For	the	Scripture	says	to	Pharaoh,	“I	have	raised	you	up	for	the	very
purpose	of	showing	my	power	in	you,	so	that	my	name	may	be
proclaimed	in	all	the	earth.”	So	then	he	has	mercy	upon	whomever	he
wills,	and	he	hardens	the	heart	of	whomever	he	wills.	.	.	.	What	if
God,	desiring	to	show	his	wrath	and	to	make	known	his	power,	has
endured	with	much	patience	the	vessels	of	wrath	made	for
destruction?	(Rom.	9:17–22)
Regarding	the	results	of	the	fact	that	God	failed	to	choose	all	for	salvation,
Paul	says,	“The	elect	obtained	it,	but	the	rest	were	hardened”	(Rom.	11:7).
And	Peter	says	of	those	who	reject	the	gospel,	“they	stumble	because	they
disobey	the	word,	
as	they	were	destined	to	do”	
(1	Peter	2:8).
	
24
In	spite	of	the	fact	that	we	recoil	against	this	doctrine,	we	must	be
careful	of	our	attitude	toward	God	and	toward	these	passages	of
Scripture.	We	must	never	begin	to	wish	that	the	Bible	was	written
in	another	way,	or	that	it	did	not	contain	these	verses.	Moreover,	if
we	are	convinced	that	these	verses	teach	reprobation,	then	we	are
obligated	both	to	believe	it	and	accept	it	as	fair	and	just	of	God,
even	though	it	still	causes	us	to	tremble	in	horror	as	we	think	of	it.
In	this	context	it	may	surprise	us	to	see	that	Jesus	can	thank	God
both	
for	hiding	the	knowledge	of	salvation	from	some	and	for
revealing	it	to	others:	“Jesus	declared,	‘I	thank	you,	Father,	Lord	of
heaven	and	earth,	that	you	have	hidden	these	things	from	the	wise
and	understanding	and	revealed	them	to	babes;	yea,	Father,	for	such
was	your	gracious	will’	”	(Matt.	11:25–26).
Moreover,	we	must	recognize	that	somehow,	in	God’s	wisdom,	the
fact	of	reprobation	and	the	eternal	condemnation	of	some	will	show
God’s	justice	and	also	result	in	his	glory.	Paul	says,	“What	if	God,
desiring	to	show	his	wrath	and	to	make	known	his	power,	
has
endured	with	much	patience	the	vessels	of	wrath	made	for
destruction”	(Rom.	9:22).	Paul	also	notes	that	the	fact	of	such
punishment	on	the	“vessels	of	wrath”	serves	to	show	the	greatness
of	God’s	mercy	toward	us:	God	does	this	“in	order	to	make	known
the	riches	of	his	glory	for	the	vessels	of	mercy”	(Rom.	9:23).
We	also	must	remember	that	
there	are	important	differences
between	election	and	reprobation	as	they	are	presented	in	the	Bible.
Election	to	salvation	is	viewed	as	a	cause	for	rejoicing	and	praise	to
God,	who	is	worthy	of	praise	and	receives	all	the	credit	for	our
salvation	(see	Eph.	1:3–6;	1	Peter	1:1–3).	God	is	viewed	as	actively
choosing	us	for	salvation,	and	doing	so	in	love	and	with	delight.
But	reprobation	is	viewed	as	something	that	brings	God	sorrow,	not
delight	(see	Ezek.	33:11),	and	the	blame	for	the	condemnation	of
sinners	is	always	put	on	the	people	or	angels	who	rebel,	never	on
God	himself	(see	John	3:18–19;	5:40).	So	in	the	presentation	of
Scripture	the	cause	of	election	lies	in	God,	and	the	cause	of
reprobation	lies	in	the	sinner.	Another	important	difference	is	that
the	ground	of	election	is	God’s	grace,	whereas	the	ground	of
reprobation	is	God’s	justice.	Therefore	“double	predestination”	is
not	a	helpful	or	accurate	phrase,	because	it	neglects	these
differences	between	election	and	reprobation.
The	sorrow	of	God	at	the	death	of	the	wicked	(“I	have	no	pleasure
in	the	death	of	the	wicked,	but	that	the	wicked	turn	from	his	way
and	live,”	Ezek.	33:11)	helps	us	understand	how	appropriate	it	was
that	Paul	himself	felt	great	sorrow	when	he	thought	about	the
unbelieving	Jews	who	had	rejected	Christ.	Paul	says:
I	am	speaking	the	truth	in	Christ,	I	am	not	lying;	my	conscience	bears
me	witness	in	the	Holy	Spirit,	that	
I	have	great	sorrow	and	unceasing
anguish	in	my	heart.	
For	I	could	wish	that	I	myself	were	accursed	and
cut	off	from	Christ	for	the	sake	of	my	brethren,	my	kinsmen	by	race.
They	are	Israelites.	.	.	.	(Rom.	9:1–4)
We	ought	also	to	feel	this	great	sorrow	as	well	when	we	think	about	the	fate
of	unbelievers.
But	it	might	be	objected	at	this	point,	if	God	genuinely	feels	sorrow
at	the	punishment	of	the	wicked,	then	why	does	he	allow	it	or	even
decree	that	it	will	come	about?	The	answer	must	be	that	God	knows
that	this	will	ultimately	result	in	greater	glory	for	himself.	It	will
show	his	power	and	wrath	and	justice	and	mercy	in	a	way	that
could	not	otherwise	be	demonstrated.	Certainly	in	our	own	human
experience	it	is	possible	to	do	something	that	causes	us	great
sorrow	but	which	we	know	will	result	in	long-term	greater	good.
And	so,	after	this	faint	human	analogy,	we	may	somewhat
understand	that	God	can	decree	something	that	causes	him	sorrow
yet	ultimately	will	further	his	glory.
F.	Practical	Application	of	the	Doctrine	of	Election
In	terms	of	our	own	relationship	with	God,	the	doctrine	of	election
does	have	significant	practical	application.	When	we	think	of	the
biblical	teaching	on	both	election	and	reprobation,	it	is	appropriate
to	apply	it	to	our	own	lives	individually.	It	is	right	for	each
Christian	to	ask	of	himself	or	herself,	“Why	am	I	a	Christian?	What
is	the	final	reason	why	God	decided	to	save	me?”
The	doctrine	of	election	tells	us	that	I	am	a	Christian	simply
because	God	in	eternity	past	decided	to	set	his	love	on	me.	But	why
did	he	decide	to	set	his	love	on	me?	Not	for	anything	good	in	me,
but	simply	because	he	decided	to	love	me.	There	is	no	more
ultimate	reason	than	that.
It	humbles	us	before	God	to	think	in	this	way.	It	makes	us	realize
that	we	have	no	claim	on	God’s	grace	whatsoever.	Our	salvation	is
totally	due	to	grace	alone.	Our	only	appropriate	response	is	to	give
God	eternal	praise.
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
Do	you	think	that	God	chose	you	individually	to	be	saved	before	he
created	the	world?	Do	you	think	he	did	it	on	the	basis	of	the	fact	that	he
knew	you	would	believe	in	Christ,	or	was	it	“unconditional	election,”	not
based	on	anything	that	he	foresaw	in	you	that	made	you	worthy	of	his
love?	No	matter	how	you	answered	the	previous	question,	explain	how
your	answer	makes	you	feel	when	you	think	about	yourself	in
relationship	to	God.
2
.	
Does	the	doctrine	of	election	give	you	any	comfort	or	assurance	about
your	future?
3
.	
After	reading	this	chapter,	do	you	honestly	feel	that	you	would	like	to
give	thanks	or	praise	to	God	for	choosing	you	to	be	saved?	Do	you	sense
any	unfairness	in	the	fact	that	God	did	not	decide	to	save	everyone?
4
.	
If	you	agree	with	the	doctrine	of	election	as	presented	in	this	chapter,
does	it	diminish	your	sense	of	individual	personhood	or	make	you	feel
somewhat	like	a	robot	or	a	puppet	in	God’s	hands?	Do	you	think	it
should	make	you	feel	this	way?
5
.	
What	effect	do	you	think	this	chapter	will	have	on	your	motivation	for
evangelism?	Is	this	a	positive	or	negative	effect?	Can	you	think	of	ways
in	which	the	doctrine	of	election	can	be	used	as	a	positive
encouragement	to	evangelism	(see	1	Thess.	1:4–5;	2	Tim.	2:10)?
6
.	
Whether	you	adopt	a	Reformed	or	Arminian	perspective	on	the	question
of	election,	can	you	think	of	some	positive	benefits	in	the	Christian	life
that	those	who	hold	the	
opposite	
position	from	yours	seem	more
frequently	to	experience	than	you	do?	Even	though	you	do	not	agree
with	the	other	position,	can	you	list	some	helpful	concerns	or	practical
truths	about	the	Christian	life	that	you	might	learn	from	that	position?	Is
there	anything	that	Calvinists	and	Arminians	could	do	to	bring	about
greater	understanding	and	less	division	on	this	question?
SPECIAL	TERMS
determinism
	
	
	
foreknowledge
election
	
	
	
predestination
fatalism
	
	
	
reprobation
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the
bibliography	to	chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be
found	in	
Appendix	4
.)
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1930			Thomas,	236–57
1882–92			Litton,	351–63
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1847			Finney,	481–515
1875–76			Pope,	2:363–67
1892–94			Miley,	2:254–308
1940			Wiley,	2:335–57
1983–			Cottrell,	2:331–502
3.			Baptist
1767			Gill,	1:251–88,	300–306
1887			Boyce,	341–67
1907			Strong,	779–90
1917			Mullins,	338–358
1976–83			Henry,	6:76–107
1983–85			Erickson,	907–28
4.			Dispensational
1947			Chafer,	3:165–82
1949			Thiessen,	257–63
1986			Ryrie,	310–18
5.			Lutheran
1917–24			Pieper,	3:473–506
1934			Mueller,	585–612
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1559			Calvin,	2:920–86	(3.21–24)
1861			Heppe,	150–89
1871–73			Hodge,	2:313–53
1878			Dabney,	223–46
1887–1921			Warfield,	
BTS,	
270–333;	
SSW,	
1:103–11,
285–98;	
BD,	
3–70;	
PS,	
13–112
1937–66			Murray,	
CW,	
1:119–23;	
CW,	
2:123–31;
RAA,
79–87
1938			Berkhof,	109–25
1962			Buswell,	2:133–56
7.			Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988–92			Williams,	2:13–22
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955			Ott,	242–46
2.			Roman	Catholic:	Post-Vatican	II
1980			McBrien	(no	explicit	treatment)
Other	Works
Basinger,	David,	and	Randall	Basinger,	eds.	
Predestination	and	Free
Will.	
Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,	1985.
Berkouwer,	G.	C.	
Divine	Election.	
Trans.	by	Hugo	Bekker.	Grand
Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1960.
Carson,	D.	A.	
Divine	Sovereignty	and	Human	Responsibility:	Biblical
Perspectives	in	Tension.	
Atlanta:	John	Knox	Press,	1981.
Coppedge,	Allan.	
John	Wesley	in	Theological	Debate.	
Wilmore,	Ky.:
Wesley	Heritage	Press,	1987.
Feinberg,	John	S.	“God	Ordains	All	Things.”	In	
Predestination	and	Free
Will:	Four	Views	of	Divine	Sovereignty	and	Human	Freedom.	
David
Basinger	&	Randall	Basinger,	eds.	Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity
Press,	1986.
Godfrey,	William	R.	“Predestination.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	528–30.
Klein,	William	W.	
The	New	Chosen	People:	A	Corporate	View	of
Election.	
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1990.
Klooster,	F.	H.	“Elect,	Election.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	348–49.
Nettles,	Thomas.	
By	His	Grace	and	for	His	Glory:	A	Historical,
Theological	and	Practical	Study	of	the	Doctrines	of	Grace	in	Baptist
Life.	
Grand	Rapids:	Baker	Book	House,	1986.
Packer,	J.	I.	“Election.”	In	
IBD,	
Vol.	1,	pp.	435–38.
Pinnock,	Clark	H.,	ed.	
Grace	Unlimited.	
Minneapolis:	Bethany,	1975.
_____.	
The	Grace	of	God,	the	Will	of	Man:	A	Case	for	Arminianism.
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1989.
Piper,	John.	
The	Justification	of	God:	An	Exegetical	and	Theological
Study	of	Romans	9:1–23.	
Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1983.
Poythress,	Vern.	“Using	Multiple	Thematic	Centers	in	Theological
Synthesis:	Holiness	as	a	Test	Case	in	Developing	a	Pauline	Theology.”
Unpublished	manuscript	available	from	the	Campus	Bookstore,
Westminster	Theological	Seminary,	P.O.	Box	27009,	Philadelphia,	PA,
19118.	(a	study	on	Pauline	themes	used	to	describe	the	application	of
redemption)
Reid,	W.	S.	“Reprobation.”	In	
EDT,	
p.	937.
Schreiner,	Thomas,	and	Bruce	Ware,	editors.	
The	Grace	of	God,	the
Bondage	of	the	Will:	A	Case	for	Calvinism	
(proposed	title).	2	vols.
Forthcoming:	Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	projected	in	1995.
Shank,	R.	
Elect	in	the	Son:	A	Study	of	the	Doctrine	of	Election.
Springfield,	Mo.:	Westcott,	1970.
Sproul,	R.	C.	
Chosen	by	God.	
Wheaton,	Ill.:	Tyndale,	1986.
Steele,	David	N.	and	Curtis	C.	Thomas.	
The	Five	Points	of	Calvinism—
Defined,	Defended,	Documented.	
International	Library	of	Philosophy	and
Theology:	Biblical	and	Theological	Studies,	ed.	J.	Marcellus	Kik.
Phillipsburg,	N.J.:	Presbyterian	and	Reformed,	1963.
Storms,	C.	Samuel.	
Chosen	for	Life:	An	Introductory	Guide	to	the
Doctrine	of	Divine	Election.	
Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1987.
Warfield,	B.	B.	
The	Plan	of	Salvation.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1942.
_____.	“Predestination.”	In	
Biblical	and	Theological	Studies.
Philadelphia:	Presbyterian	and	Reformed,	1952.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
Ephesians	
1
:3–6:	
Blessed	be	the	God	and	Father	of	our	Lord	Jesus	Christ,
who	has	blessed	us	in	Christ	with	every	spiritual	blessing	in	the	heavenly
places,	even	as	he	chose	us	in	him	before	the	foundation	of	the	world,	that	we
should	be	holy	and	blameless	before	him.	He	destined	us	in	love	to	be	his	sons
through	Jesus	Christ,	according	to	the	purpose	of	his	will,	to	the	praise	of	his
glorious	grace	which	he	freely	bestowed	on	us	in	the	Beloved.
HYMN
“When	This	Passing	World	Is	Done”
This	hymn	reminds	us	that	when	we	are	once	in	heaven	and	look
back	on	our	life	we	will	realize	how	much	more	we	owe	to	God’s
mercy	and	grace	than	we	ever	realized	in	this	life.	The	last	stanza
especially	emphasizes	the	fact	that	our	election	is	not	based	on
anything	good	in	ourselves:	“Chosen	not	for	good	in	me.”
When	this	passing	world	is	done,
When	has	sunk	yon	glaring	sun,
When	we	stand	with	Christ	in	glory,
Looking	o’er	life’s	finished	story,
Then,	Lord,	shall	I	fully	know,
Not	till	then,	how	much	I	owe.
When	I	hear	the	wicked	call
On	the	rocks	and	hills	to	fall,
When	I	see	them	start	to	shrink
On	the	fiery	deluge	brink,
Then,	Lord,	shall	I	fully	know,
Not	till	then,	how	much	I	owe.
When	I	stand	before	the	throne,
Dressed	in	beauty	not	my	own,
When	I	see	thee	as	thou	art,
Love	thee	with	unsinning	heart,
Then,	Lord,	shall	I	fully	know,
Not	till	then,	how	much	I	owe.
When	the	praise	of	heav’n	I	hear,
Loud	as	thunders	to	the	ear,
Loud	as	many	waters’	noise,
Sweet	as	harp’s	melodious	voice,
Then,	Lord,	shall	I	fully	know,
Not	till	then,	how	much	I	owe.
Chosen	not	for	good	in	me,
Wakened	up	from	wrath	to	flee,
Hidden	in	the	Savior’s	side,
By	the	Spirit	sanctified,
Teach	me,	Lord,	on	earth	to	show,
By	my	love,	how	much	I	owe.
AUTHOR:	ROBERT	MURRAY	MCCHEYNE,	1837
NOTES
1
This	chapter	could	be	placed	elsewhere	in	the	sequence	of	topics	treated.	It	could	be	placed	immediately	after	chapter	16,	on
God’s	providence,	for	example,	since	election	is	just	one	aspect	of	God’s	providential	control	of	the	world.	Or	it	could	be	placed
in	chapter	25,	as	part	of	the	treatment	of	the	covenant	of	grace	between	God	and	man.	Or	it	could	be	placed	in	chapter	40,	as	part
of	the	discussion	of	perseverance,	especially	related	to	the	question	of	assurance	of	salvation,	since	God’s	choice	of	us	to	be	saved
gives	great	assurance	that	he	will	fulfill	his	purposes.	But	I	have	chosen	to	place	it	here	at	the	beginning	of	the	chapters	that
discuss	God’s	personal	dealing	with	us	in	grace.	(Note	the	similar	ordering	of	topics	by	Paul	in	Rom.	8:29-30.)
2
For	a	discussion	of	the	order	of	events	in	this	list,	see	John	Murray,	
Redemption	Accomplished	and	Applied	
(Grand	Rapids:
Eerdmans,	1955),	pp.	79–87.	New	approaches	to	a	synthesis	of	Pauline	themes	in	the	order	of	salvation	are	found	in	Vern
Poythress,	“Using	Multiple	Thematic	Centers	in	Theological	Synthesis:	Holiness	as	a	Test	Case	in	Developing	a	Pauline
Theology”	(unpublished	manuscript	available	from	the	Campus	Bookstore,	Westminster	Theological	Seminary,	P.O.	Box	27009,
Philadelphia,	PA,	19118).
3
Clark	Pinnock	says	that	this	text	does	not	speak	of	predestination	to	salvation,	but	rather	to	a	certain	privilege,	that	of	being
conformed	to	Jesus	Christ:	“There	is	no	predestination	to	salvation	or	damnation	in	the	Bible.	There	is	only	a	predestination	for
those	who	are	already	children	of	God	with	respect	to	certain	privileges	out	ahead	of	them”	(p.	
18).	But	such	a	view	does	not	do
justice	to	Rom.	8:29–30,	because	those	who	are	said	to	be	predestined	in	this	verse	are	not	yet	children	of	God,	because	Paul	here
speaks	of	predestination	before	calling	or	justification.	Moreover,	the	privilege	of	being	conformed	to	the	image	of	Christ	is	not
just	for	some	Christians,	but	for	all.
4
Grammatically	the	phrase	“before	the	foundation	of	the	world”	could	modify	either	“whose	name	has	not	been	written”	(as	here,
in	the	RSV;	also	in	the	NASB	and	NIV	mg.),	or	“the	lamb	that	was	slain”	(so	KJV,	NIV).	But	the	parallel	expression	in	Rev.	17:8,
“whose	names	have	not	been	
written	in	the	book	of	life	from	the	foundation	of	the	world,”	
seems	decisive,	and	there	only	one
sense	is	possible	(the	parallel	wording	is	striking	in	the	Greek	text,	since	the	two	verses	share	eleven	identical	words	in	talking
about	people	whose	names	are	written	in	the	book	of	life).	Moreover,	the	RSV/NASB	reading	makes	much	better	sense	in	light	of
the	rest	of	Scripture:	the	Bible	often	talks	about	God	choosing	us	before	the	foundation	of	the	world,	but	nowhere	else	does
Scripture	say	that	Christ	was	slain	from	the	foundation	of	the	world—a	statement	that	simply	is	not	true	in	any	literal	sense,
because	Christ	was	not	slain	until	he	died	on	the	cross.	Therefore,	on	the	NIV/KJV	reading,	the	verse	must	be	interpreted	to	mean
something	like,	“God	
planned	
from	the	foundation	of	the	world	that	Christ	would	be	slain”—but	that	is	not	what	the	text	actually
says,	on	either	reading.
5
See	the	discussion	at	the	beginning	of	
chapter	32
	on	the	meaning	of	“foreknow”	here.
6
See	
chapter	16
,	for	a	more	extensive	discussion	of	how	we	can	be	genuine	persons	and	make	real	choices	when	God	has
beforehand	ordained	what	we	do.
7
The	idea	that	predestination	is	based	on	God’s	foreknowledge	of	those	who	would	believe	is	argued	in	Jack	W.	Cottrell,
“Conditional	Election,”	in	
Grace	Unlimited,	
pp.	51–73.	Cottrell	says,	“Through	his	foreknowledge	God	sees	who	will	believe
upon	Jesus	Christ	as	Savior	and	Lord,	and	become	united	with	him	in	Christian	baptism;	then	even	before	the	creation	of	the
world	he	predestines	these	believers	to	share	the	glory	of	the	risen	Christ”	(p.	
62).
8
Rom.	11:2	similarly	speaks	of	God’s	foreknowing	
persons,	
not	facts	about	people	or	the	fact	that	they	would	believe:	“God	has
not	rejected	his	people	
whom	he	foreknew.”
9
In	answer	to	Barth’s	view	that	all	are	chosen	in	Christ,	see	the	discussion	below	on	reprobation	(the	fact	that	some	are	not
chosen),	and	
chapter	7
,	and	
chapter	56
,	on	the	fact	that	those	who	do	not	believe	in	Christ	will	not	be	saved.
10
The	fact	that	the	Arminian	position	ultimately	makes	something	in	man	the	determining	factor	in	whether	people	are	saved	or
not	is	seen	clearly	in	the	statement	of	I.	Howard	Marshall:	“The	effect	of	the	call	of	God	is	to	place	man	in	a	position	where	he	can
say	‘yes’	or	‘no’	(which	he	could	not	do	before	God	called	him;	till	then	he	was	in	a	continuous	attitude	of	‘no’)”	(“Predestination
in	the	New	Testament,”	in	
Grace	Unlimited,	
p.	140).	In	this	statement	of	Marshall’s	we	see	that	the	final	determinant	of	whether
people	are	saved	or	not	is	whether	they	say	yes	or	no	to	God’s	call,	and	therefore	salvation	still	ultimately	depends	on	something
in	man,	an	ability	or	tendency	within	him	that	persuades	him	to	say	yes	rather	than	no.
11
Unconditional	election	is	the	“U”	in	the	acronym	TULIP,	which	stands	for	“the	five	points	of	Calvinism.”	The	other	letters
stand	for	
T
otal	depravity	(see	
chapter	24
),	
L
imited	atonement	(see	
chapter	27
),	
I
rresistible	grace	(see	
chapter	34
),	and
P
erseverance	of	the	saints	(see	
chapter	40
).	See	also	the	beginning	of	
chapter	32
.
12
Regarding	the	doctrine	of	election,	there	has	been	a	dispute	in	Reformed	circles	(those	who	hold	to	election	as	presented	here)
between	two	positions	known	as	
supralapsarianism	
and	
infralapsarianism.	
The	difference	concerns	what	happened	in	God’s	mind
before	the	foundation	of	the	world.	It	does	not	concern	something	that	happened	in	time,	but	rather	it	concerns	the	
logical	
order	of
God’s	thoughts.	The	question	is	whether,	in	logical	order,	(a)	God	decided	first	that	he	would	
save	some	people	
and	second	that	he
would	
allow	sin	
into	the	world	so	that	he	could	save	them	from	it	(the	supralapsarian	position),	or	whether	it	was	the	other	way
around,	so	that	(b)	God	first	decided	that	he	would	
allow	sin	
into	the	world	and	second	decided	that	he	would	
save	some	people
from	it	(the	infralapsarian	position).	The	word	
supralapsarian	
means	“before	the	fall,”	and	the	word	
infralapsarian	
means	“after
the	fall.”	The	discussion	is	complex	and	highly	speculative	because	there	is	very	little	direct	biblical	data	to	help	us	with	it.	Good
arguments	have	been	advanced	in	support	of	each	view,	and	there	is	probably	some	element	of	truth	in	each	one.	But	in	the	last
analysis	it	seems	wiser	to	say	that	Scripture	does	not	give	us	enough	data	to	probe	into	this	mystery,	and,	moreover,	it	does	not
seem	very	edifying	to	do	so.
In	fact,	I	have	decided	to	mention	the	discussion	in	this	textbook	at	this	point	only	because	the	words	“supralapsarian”	and
“infralapsarian”	are	sometimes	used	in	theological	circles	as	symbols	for	the	most	abstract	and	obscure	of	theological	discussions,
and	it	seemed	to	me	appropriate	simply	to	inform	the	reader	of	the	nature	of	this	dispute	and	the	meaning	of	these	terms.	For	those
interested,	a	further	discussion	is	found	in	Berkhof,	
Systematic	Theology,	
pp.	118–25.
13
For	a	full	discussion	of	objections	to	election,	the	reader	may	refer	to	two	excellent	recent	collections	of	essays	from	what	is
called	an	“Arminian”	perspective,	a	perspective	that	rejects	the	view	of	election	advocated	in	this	chapter:	see	Clark	H.	Pinnock,
ed.,	
Grace	Unlimited	
(Minneapolis:	Bethany	Fellowship,	1975),	and	Clark	H.	Pinnock,	ed.,	
The	Grace	of	God,	the	Will	of	Man:	A
Case	for	Arminianism.	
In	response	to	these	two	books,	Tom	Schreiner	and	Bruce	Ware	have	edited	a	substantial	collection	of
essays	from	Reformed	scholars,	with	a	proposed	title	
The	Grace	of	God,	the	Bondage	of	the	Will:	A	Case	for	Calvinism
(forthcoming;	projected	from	Baker	Book	House,	Grand	Rapids,	in	1995).
14
Grant	R.	Osborne,	“Exegetical	Notes	on	Calvinist	Texts,”	in	
Grace	Unlimited,	
pp.	167–89,	several	times	points	out	evidence	of
human	volition	or	human	choice	involved	in	the	immediate	context	of	texts	that	talk	about	election	or	predestination.	A
representative	example	is	seen	on	p.	
175,	where	Osborne	discusses	Acts	13:48,	“as	many	as	were	ordained	to	eternal	life
believed.”	Osborne	responds,	“While	we	agree	that	the	basic	thrust	is	divine	election,	this	does	not	negate	the	presence	of	human
volition,	as	seen	in	the	context”	(p.	
175).	Such	a	response	seems	to	assume	that	a	Reformed	view	denies	human	volition	or	choice.
But	it	must	be	answered	that	the	Reformed	position	as	traditionally	argued	certainly	allows	for	genuine	human	volition	or	human
will	in	choices	that	are	made,	and	simply	says	that	God	is	so	wise	and	powerful	that	he	
ordains	
that	we	respond	
willingly.	
Osborne
does	not	directly	interact	with	this	position.
15
See	
chapter	19
,	for	a	discussion	of	the	fact	that	it	would	be	fair	for	God	to	save	no	one.
16
One	Arminian	view	of	this	verse	is	given	by	Jack	Cottrell.	He	argues	that	Rom.	9:18,	“He	has	mercy	upon	whomever	he	will,
and	he	hardens	the	heart	of	whomever	he	will,”	refers	not	to	God’s	choice	of	people	for	salvation,	but	to	God’s	choice	of	people
for	certain	kinds	of	service:	“He	chooses	whom	he	pleases	for	service,	not	salvation”	(“The	Nature	of	the	Divine	Sovereignty,”	in
The	Grace	of	God,	the	Will	of	Man,	
p.	114).	This	is	not	a	convincing	interpretation,	however,	because	the	entire	context	definitely
concerns	salvation:	Paul	says,	“I	have	great	sorrow	and	unceasing	anguish	in	my	heart”	and	“I	could	wish	that	I	myself	were
accursed	and	cut	off	from	Christ	for	the	sake	of	my	brethren,	my	kinsmen	by	race”	(Rom.	9:2,	3),	not	because	the	Jews	were	not
chosen	for	some	particular	service,	but	because	they	were	not	saved!	He	speaks	in	v.	
8	not	of	those	who	were	chosen	for	service
and	those	who	were	not,	but	of	those	who	are	“children	of	God”	and	those	who	are	not.	And	he	speaks	in	v.	22	not	of	some	who
missed	an	opportunity	for	service,	but	of	“vessels	of	wrath	made	for	destruction.”	Salvation	is	in	view	in	the	entire	context.
17
James	D.	Strauss,	“God’s	Promise	and	Universal	History:	The	Theology	of	Romans	9,”	in	
Grace	Unlimited,	
argues	that	in
Romans	9	“vessels	of	wrath	
made	for	destruction”	
should	rather	be	translated	“fitted	themselves”	for	wrath	(p.	200).	But	he	gives
no	examples	of	a	genuine	reflexive	use	of	the	verb	
katartizō,	
which	would	be	required	here.	BAGD,	pp.	417–18,	note	that	the
passive	
can	be	used	intransitively	(as	here	if	we	translate	“made	for	destruction,”	as	the	RSV),	but	they	give	no	example	of	an
active	or	middle	voice	of	this	verb	being	used	without	a	direct	object.	Moreover,	Strauss’	suggestion,	“fitted	themselves”	for
wrath,	would	not	really	fit	the	picture	of	a	potter	making	vessels	of	various	sorts,	for	pots	do	not	make	themselves,	but	the	potter
makes	them.
Another	objection	brought	by	Strauss	is	to	say	that	the	potter	and	clay	imagery	in	Rom.	9:20–23	is	derived	from	Old	Testament
passages	that	emphasize	God’s	call	for	people	freely	to	choose	repentance	and	faith.	He	says	that	this	negates	the	idea	of	sovereign
predestining	on	God’s	part	(p.	199).	But	here	Strauss	simply	misunderstands	the	Reformed	position,	which	never	denies	human
responsibility	or	human	willingness	in	making	choices.
18
For	further	discussion,	see	John	Piper,	
The	Justification	of	God:	An	Exegetical	and	Theological	Study	of	Romans	9:1–23	
(Grand
Rapids:	Baker,	1983).
19
I.	Howard	Marshall,	“Predestination	in	the	New	Testament,”	(in	
Grace	Unlimited,	
p.	136),	specifically	says,	“I	cannot	see	how
it	can	be	just	arbitrarily	to	save	one	guilty	sinner	and	not	another.”	But	that	seems	to	be	precisely	Paul’s	point	in	Rom.	9:18–20:
God	does	save	some	and	decide	not	to	save	others,	and	we	have	no	right,	as	creatures,	to	say	that	this	is	unjust.
20
For	a	discussion	of	the	difference	between	God’s	revealed	will	and	his	secret	will,	see	
chapter	13
	also	
chapter	16
.	See	also	John
Piper,	“Are	There	Two	Wills	in	God?	Divine	Election	and	God’s	Desire	for	All	to	Be	Saved,”	in	
The	Grace	of	God,	the	Bondage
of	the	Will,	
ed.	Tom	Schreiner	and	Bruce	Ware.
21
Clark	Pinnock,	“Introduction,”	in	
Grace	Unlimited,	
p.	13.
22
See	
chapter	15
,	and	
chapter	21
,	on	the	fact	that	God	created	us	and	the	whole	universe	for	his	own	glory.	An	Arminian	may
object	to	putting	the	difference	this	way,	and	may	say	that	God	is	more	glorified	when	we	choose	him	out	of	an	absolutely	free
will,	but	this	is	simply	a	doubtful	assumption	based	on	intuition	or	human	analogy,	and	has	no	specific	support	from	Scripture.
Moreover,	to	be	consistent	it	seems	the	Arminian	would	also	have	to	take	account	of	the	millions	who	do	not	choose	God,	and
would	have	to	say	that	God	is	also	more	glorified	by	the	free	choices	of	the	millions	who	freely	decide	against	God—otherwise,
why	would	God	allow	them	to	persist	in	this	free	choice	of	rebellion?
23
John	Calvin	himself	says	of	reprobation,	“The	decree	is	dreadful	indeed,	I	confess.”	Calvin,	
Institutes,	
3.23.7	(2:955);	but	it
should	be	noted	that	his	Latin	word	
horribilis	
does	not	mean	“hateful”	but	rather	“fearful,	awe-inspiring.”
24
See	discussion	of	this	verse	in	Wayne	Grudem,	
1	Peter,	
pp.	107–10.	The	verse	does	not	simply	say	that	God	destined	the	
fact
that	those	who	disobey	would	stumble,	but	speaks	rather	of	God	destining	certain	
people	
to	disobey	and	stumble:	“as	they	were
destined	to	do.”	(The	Greek	verb	
etethēsan,	
“they	were	destined,”	requires	a	plural	subject.)
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	33
The	Gospel	Call	and	Effective	Calling
What	is	the	gospel	message?	How	does	it	become	effective?
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
When	Paul	talks	about	the	way	that	God	brings	salvation	into	our
lives,	he	says,	“Those	whom	he	
predestined	
he	also	
called;	
and
those	whom	he	called	he	also	
justified;	
and	those	whom	he	justified
he	also	
glorified”	
(Rom.	8:30).	Here	Paul	points	to	a	definite	order
in	which	the	blessings	of	salvation	come	to	us.	Although	long	ago,
before	the	world	was	made,	God	“predestined”	us	to	be	his	children
and	to	be	conformed	to	the	image	of	his	Son,	Paul	points	to	the	fact
that	in	the	actual	outworking	of	his	purpose	in	our	lives	God
“called”	us	(here	in	this	context,	God	the	Father	is	specifically	in
view).	Then	Paul	immediately	lists	justification	and	glorification,
showing	that	these	come	after	calling.	Paul	indicates	that	there	is	a
definite	order	in	God’s	saving	purpose	(though	not	every	aspect	of
our	salvation	is	mentioned	here).	So	we	will	begin	our	discussion	of
the	different	parts	of	our	experience	of	salvation	with	the	topic	of
calling.
A.	Effective	Calling
When	Paul	says,	“Those	whom	he	predestined	
he	
also	called;	and
those	whom	
he	
called	he	also	justified”	(Rom.	8:30),	he	indicates
that	calling	is	an	act	of	God.	In	fact,	it	is	specifically	an	act	of	God
the	Father,	for	he	is	the	one	who	predestines	people	“to	be
conformed	to	the	image	of	his	Son”	(Rom.	8:29).	Other	verses
describe	more	fully	what	this	calling	is.	When	God	calls	people	in
this	powerful	way,	he	calls	them	“out	of	darkness	into	his
marvelous	light”	(1	Peter	2:9);	he	calls	them	“into	the	fellowship	of
his	Son”	(1	Cor.	1:9;	cf.	Acts	2:39)	and	“into	his	own	kingdom	and
glory”	(1	Thess.	2:12;	cf.	1	Peter	5:10;	2	Peter	1:3).	People	who
have	been	called	by	God	“belong	to	Jesus	Christ”	(Rom.	1:6).	They
are	called	to	“be	saints”	(Rom.	1:7;	1	Cor.	1:2),	and	have	come	into
a	realm	of	peace	(1	Cor.	7:15;	Col.	3:15),	freedom	(Gal.	5:13),	hope
(Eph.	1:18;	4:4),	holiness	(1	Thess.	4:7),	patient	endurance	of
suffering	(1	Peter	2:20–21;	3:9),	and	eternal	life	(1	Tim.	6:12).
These	verses	indicate	that	no	powerless,	merely	human	calling	is	in
view.	This	calling	is	rather	a	kind	of	“summons”	from	the	King	of
the	universe	and	it	has	such	power	that	it	brings	about	the	response
that	it	asks	for	in	people’s	hearts.	It	is	an	act	of	God	that	
guarantees
a	response,	because	Paul	specifies	in	Romans	8:30	that	all	who
were	“called”	were	also	“justified.”
	
1
	
This	calling	has	the	capacity
to	draw	us	out	of	the	kingdom	of	darkness	and	bring	us	into	God’s
kingdom	so	we	can	join	in	full	fellowship	with	him:	“God	is
faithful,	by	whom	you	were	
called	into	the	fellowship	of	his	Son,
Jesus	Christ	our	Lord”	(1	Cor.	1:9).
	
2
This	powerful	act	of	God	is	often	referred	to	as	
effective	calling,	
to
distinguish	it	from	the	general	gospel	invitation	that	goes	to	all
people	and	which	some	people	reject.	This	is	not	to	say	that	human
gospel	proclamation	is	not	involved.	In	fact,	God’s	effective	calling
comes	
through	
the	human	preaching	of	the	gospel,	because	Paul
says,	“To	this	he	called	you	
through	our	gospel,	
so	that	you	may
obtain	the	glory	of	our	Lord	Jesus	Christ”	(2	Thess.	2:14).	Of
course,	there	are	many	who	hear	the	general	call	of	the	gospel
message	and	do	not	respond.	But	in	some	cases	the	gospel	call	is
made	so	effective	by	the	working	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in	people’s
hearts	that	they	do	respond;	we	can	say	that	they	have	received
“effective	calling.”
	
3
We	may	define	effective	calling	as	follows:	
Effective	calling	is	an
act	of	God	the	Father,	speaking	through	the	human	proclamation	of
the	gospel,	in	which	he	summons	people	to	himself	in	such	a	way
that	they	respond	in	saving	faith.
It	is	important	that	we	not	give	the	impression	that	people	will	be
saved	by	the	power	of	this	call	
apart	from	
their	own	willing
response	to	the	gospel	(see	
chapter	35
	on	the	personal	faith	and
repentance	that	are	necessary	for	conversion).	Although	it	is	true
that	effective	calling	awakens	and	brings	forth	a	response	from	us,
we	must	always	insist	that	this	response	still	has	to	be	a	voluntary,
willing	response	in	which	the	individual	person	puts	his	or	her	trust
in	Christ.
This	is	why	prayer	is	so	important	to	effective	evangelism.	Unless
God	works	in	peoples’	hearts	to	make	the	proclamation	of	the
gospel	effective,	there	will	be	no	genuine	saving	response.	Jesus
said,	“No	one	can	come	to	me	unless	the	Father	who	sent	me	draws
him”	(John	6:44).
An	example	of	the	gospel	call	working	effectively	is	seen	in	Paul’s
first	visit	to	Philippi.	When	Lydia	heard	the	gospel	message,	“The
Lord	
opened	her	heart	
to	give	heed	to	what	was	said	by	Paul”	(Acts
16:14).
In	distinction	from	effective	calling,	which	is	entirely	an	act	of	God,
we	may	talk	about	the	
gospel	call	
in	general	which	comes	through
human	speech.	This	gospel	call	is	offered	to	all	people,	even	those
who	do	not	accept	it.	Sometimes	this	gospel	call	is	referred	to	as
external	calling	
or	
general	calling.	
By	contrast,	the	effective	calling
of	God	that	actually	brings	about	a	willing	response	from	the
person	who	hears	it	is	sometimes	called	
internal	calling.	
The	gospel
call	is	general	and	external	and	often	rejected,	while	the	effective
call	is	particular,	internal,	and	
always	
effective.	However,	this	is	not
to	diminish	the	importance	of	the	gospel	call—it	is	the	means	God
has	appointed	through	which	effective	calling	will	come.	Without
the	gospel	call,	no	one	could	respond	and	be	saved!	“How	are	they
to	believe	in	him	of	whom	they	have	never	heard?”	(Rom.	10:14).
Therefore	it	is	important	to	understand	exactly	what	the	gospel	call
is.
B.	The	Elements	of	the	Gospel	Call
In	human	preaching	of	the	gospel,	three	important	elements	must	be
included.
1.
	Explanation	of	the	Facts	Concerning	Salvation.
	Anyone	who	comes	to
Christ	for	salvation	must	have	at	least	a	basic	understanding	of	who	Christ	is
and	how	he	meets	our	needs	for	salvation.	Therefore	an	explanation	of	the
facts	concerning	salvation	must	include	at	least	the	following:
1.	All	people	have	sinned	(Rom.	3:23).
2.	The	penalty	for	our	sin	is	death	(Rom.	6:23).
3.	Jesus	Christ	died	to	pay	the	penalty	for	our	sins	(Rom.	5:8).
But	understanding	those	facts	and	even	agreeing	that	they	are	true
is	not	enough	for	a	person	to	be	saved.	There	must	also	be	an
invitation	for	a	personal	response	on	the	part	of	the	individual	who
will	repent	of	his	or	her	sins	and	trust	personally	in	Christ.
2.	Invitation	to	Respond	to	Christ	Personally	in	Repentance	and	Faith.
When	the	New	Testament	talks	about	people	coming	to	salvation	it	speaks	in
terms	of	a	personal	response	to	an	invitation	from	Christ	himself.	That
invitation	is	beautifully	expressed,	for	example,	in	the	words	of	Jesus:
Come	to	me,	
all	you	who	are	weary	and	burdened,	and	I	will	give	you
rest.	Take	my	yoke	upon	you	and	learn	from	me,	for	I	am	gentle	and
humble	in	heart,	and	you	will	find	rest	for	your	souls.	For	my	yoke	is
easy	and	my	burden	is	light.	(Matt.	11:28–30	NIV)
It	is	important	to	make	clear	that	these	are	not	just	words	spoken	a
long	time	ago	by	a	religious	leader	in	the	past.	Every	non-Christian
hearing	these	words	should	be	encouraged	to	think	of	them	as
words	that	Jesus	Christ	is	
even	now,	
at	
this	very	moment,	
speaking
to	him	or	to	her	individually.	Jesus	Christ	is	a	Savior	who	is	now
alive	in	heaven,	and	each	non-Christian	should	think	of	Jesus	as
speaking	directly	to	him	or	her,	saying,	“
Come	to	me	.	.	.	
and	I	will
give	you	rest”	(Matt.	11:28).	This	is	a	genuine	
personal	
invitation
that	seeks	a	personal	response	from	each	one	who	hears	it.
John	also	talks	about	the	need	for	personal	response	when	he	says,
“He	came	to	his	own	home,	and	his	own	people	received	him	not.
But	to	all	who	received	him,	
who	believed	in	his	name,	he	gave
power	to	become	children	of	God”	(John	1:11–12).	In	emphasizing
the	need	to	“receive”	Christ,	John,	too,	points	to	the	necessity	of	an
individual	response.	To	those	inside	a	lukewarm	church	who	do	not
realize	their	spiritual	blindness	the	Lord	Jesus	again	issues	an
invitation	that	calls	for	personal	response:	“Behold,	I	stand	at	the
door	and	knock;	if	any	one	hears	my	voice	and	opens	the	door,	I
will	come	in	to	him	and	eat	with	him,	and	he	with	me”	(Rev.	3:20).
Finally,	just	five	verses	from	the	end	of	the	entire	Bible,	there	is
another	invitation	from	the	Holy	Spirit	and	the	church	to	come	to
Christ:	“The	Spirit	and	the	Bride	say,	‘Come.’	And	let	him	who
hears	say,	‘Come.’	And	let	him	who	is	thirsty	come,	let	him	who
desires	take	the	water	of	life	without	price”	(Rev.	22:17).
But	what	is	involved	in	coming	to	Christ?	Although	this	will	be
explained	more	fully	in	chapter	35,	it	is	sufficient	to	note	here	that
if	we	come	to	Christ	and	trust	him	to	save	us	from	our	sin,	we
cannot	any	longer	cling	to	sin	but	must	willingly	renounce	it	in
genuine	repentance.	In	some	cases	in	Scripture	both	repentance	and
faith	are	mentioned	together	when	referring	to	someone’s	initial
conversion	(Paul	said	that	he	spent	his	time	“testifying	both	to	Jews
and	to	Greeks	of	
repentance	
to	God	and	of	
faith	
in	our	Lord	Jesus
Christ,”	Acts	20:21).	But	at	other	times	only	repentance	of	sins	is
named	and	saving	faith	is	assumed	as	an	accompanying	factor
(“that	
repentance	
and	forgiveness	of	sins	should	be	preached	in	his
name	to	all	nations”	[Luke	24:47;	cf.	Acts	2:37–38;	3:19;	5:31;
17:30;	Rom.	2:4;	2	Cor.	7:10;	et	al.]).	Therefore,	any	genuine
gospel	proclamation	must	include	an	invitation	to	make	a	conscious
decision	to	forsake	one’s	sins	and	come	to	Christ	in	faith,	asking
Christ	for	forgiveness	of	sins.	If	either	the	need	to	repent	of	sins	or
the	need	to	trust	in	Christ	for	forgiveness	is	neglected,	there	is	not	a
full	and	true	proclamation	of	the	gospel.
	
4
But	what	is	promised	for	those	who	come	to	Christ?	This	is	the
third	element	of	the	gospel	call.
3.	A	Promise	of	Forgiveness	and	Eternal	Life.
	Although	the	words	of
personal	invitation	spoken	by	Christ	do	have	promises	of	rest,	and	power	to
become	children	of	God,	and	partaking	of	the	water	of	life,	it	is	helpful	to
make	explicit	just	what	Christ	promises	to	those	who	come	to	him	in
repentance	and	faith.	The	primary	thing	that	is	promised	in	the	gospel
message	is	the	promise	of	forgiveness	of	sins	and	eternal	life	with	God.	“For
God	so	loved	the	world	that	he	gave	his	only	Son,	that	whoever	believes	in
him	
should	not	perish	but	have	eternal	life”	
(John	3:16).	And	in	Peter’s
preaching	of	the	gospel	he	says,	“Repent	therefore,	and	turn	again,	
that	your
sins	may	be	blotted	out”	
(Acts	3:19;	cf.	2:38).
Coupled	with	the	promise	of	forgiveness	and	eternal	life	should	be
an	assurance	that	Christ	will	accept	all	who	come	to	him	in	sincere
repentance	and	faith	seeking	salvation:	“Him	who	comes	to	me	I
will	not	cast	out”	(John	6:37).
C.	The	Importance	of	the	Gospel	Call
The	doctrine	of	the	gospel	call	is	important,	because	if	there	were
no	gospel	call	we	could	not	be	saved.	“How	are	they	to	believe	in
him	of	whom	they	have	never	heard?”	(Rom.	10:14).
The	gospel	call	is	important	also	because	through	it	God	addresses
us	in	the	fullness	of	our	humanity.	He	does	not	save	us
“automatically”	without	seeking	for	a	response	from	us	as	whole
persons.	Rather,	he	addresses	the	gospel	call	to	our	intellects,	our
emotions,	and	our	wills.	He	speaks	to	our	intellects	by	explaining
the	facts	of	salvation	in	his	Word.	He	speaks	to	our	emotions	by
issuing	a	heartfelt	personal	invitation	to	respond.	He	speaks	to	our
wills	by	asking	us	to	hear	his	invitation	and	respond	willingly	in
repentance	and	faith—to	decide	to	turn	from	our	sins	and	receive
Christ	as	Savior	and	rest	our	hearts	in	him	for	salvation.
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
Can	you	remember	the	first	time	you	heard	the	gospel	and	responded	to
it?	Can	you	describe	what	it	felt	like	in	your	heart?	Do	you	think	the
Holy	Spirit	was	working	to	make	that	gospel	call	effective	in	your	life?
Did	you	resist	it	at	the	time?
2
.	
In	your	explanation	of	the	gospel	call	to	other	people,	have	some
elements	been	missing?	If	so,	what	difference	would	it	make	if	you
added	those	elements	to	your	explanation	of	the	gospel?	Do	you	think
those	elements	are	important	to	add?	What	is	the	one	thing	most	needed
to	make	your	proclamation	of	the	gospel	more	effective?
3
.	
Before	reading	this	chapter,	had	you	thought	of	Jesus	in	heaven	speaking
the	words	of	the	gospel	invitation	personally	to	people	even	today?	If
non-Christians	do	begin	to	think	of	Jesus	speaking	to	them	in	this	way,
how	do	you	think	it	will	affect	their	response	to	the	gospel?
4
.	
Do	you	understand	the	elements	of	the	gospel	call	clearly	enough	to
present	them	to	others?	Could	you	easily	turn	in	the	Bible	to	find	four	or
five	appropriate	verses	that	would	explain	the	gospel	call	clearly	to
people?	(Memorizing	the	elements	of	the	gospel	call	and	the	verses	that
explain	it	should	be	one	of	the	first	disciplines	of	anyone’s	Christian
life.)
SPECIAL	TERMS
effective	calling
	
	
	
the	gospel	call
external	calling
	
	
	
internal	calling
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the
bibliography	to	chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be
found	in	
Appendix	4
.)
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92			Litton,	239–55
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1875–76			Pope,	336–57
1940			Wiley,	2:334–57
1960			Purkiser,	269–78
3.			Baptist
1767			Gill,	1:530–37;	2:121–31
1887			Boyce,	367–73
1907			Strong,	790–93
1917			Mullins,	365–68
1983–85			Erickson,	929–33
4.			Dispensational
1947			Chafer,	3:210–24,	371–93
1949			Thiessen,	257–63
1986		Ryrie,	324–25,	335–39
5.			Lutheran
1917–24			Pieper,	2:423–26,	502;	3:220–52
1934			Mueller,	364–65,	470–85
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1559			Calvin,	1:537–42	(3.1)
1861			Heppe,	510–42
1871–73			Hodge,	2:639–732
1878			Dabney,	553–79
1937–66			Murray,	
CW,	
1:124–34,	143–65;	
CW,
2:161–66;	
CW,	
4:113–32;	
RAA,	
88–94
1938			Berkhof,	454–64
1962			Buswell,	2:157–68
7.			Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988–92			Williams,	2:13–33
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955			Ott	(no	explicit	treatment)
2.			Roman	Catholic:	Post-Vatican	II
1980			McBrien	(no	explicit	treatment)
Other	Works
Aldrich,	Joseph	C.	
Life-Style	Evangelism:	Crossing	Traditional
Boundaries	to	Reach	the	Unbelieving	World.	
Portland:	Multnomah,
1981.
Alleine,	Joseph.	
Sure	Guide	to	Heaven.	
Carlisle,	Pa.:	Banner	of	Truth,
1978.	First	published	in	1672	as	
An	Alarm	to	the	Unconverted.
Baxter,	Richard.	
A	Call	to	the	Unconverted	to	Turn	and	Live.	
Reprint:
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1953.
Coleman,	Robert	E.	
The	Master	Plan	of	Evangelism.	
Old	Tappan,	N.J.:
Revell,	1963.
Hoekema,	Anthony	A.	
Saved	by	Grace.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	and
Exeter:	Paternoster,	1989,	pp.	68–92.
Kevan,	Ernest	F.	
Salvation.	
Phillipsburg,	N.J.:	Presbyterian	and
Reformed,	1973.
Little,	Paul.	
How	to	Give	Away	Your	Faith.	
Revised	by	Marie	Little.
Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,	1988.
Kennedy,	D.	James.	
Evangelism	Explosion.	
3d	ed.	Wheaton,	Ill.:
Tyndale,	1983.
MacArthur,	John	F.,	Jr.	
The	Gospel	According	to	Jesus.	
Grand	Rapids:
Zondervan,	1988.
Murray,	John.	“Effectual	Calling.”	In	
Redemption	Accomplished	and
Applied.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1955,	pp.	88–94.
Packer,	J.	I.	“Call,	Calling.”	In	
EDT,	
p.	184.
_____.	
Evangelism	and	the	Sovereignty	of	God.	
Downers	Grove,	Ill.:
InterVarsity	Press,	1961.
Wells,	David	F.	
God	the	Evangelist:	How	the	Holy	Spirit	Works	to	Bring
Men	and	Women	to	Faith.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1987.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
Matthew	
11
:28–30:	
Come	to	me,	all	who	labor	and	are	heavy	laden,	and	I
will	give	you	rest.	Take	my	yoke	upon	you,	and	learn	from	me;	for	I	am	gentle
and	lowly	in	heart,	and	you	will	find	rest	for	your	souls.	For	my	yoke	is	easy,
and	my	burden	is	light.
HYMN
“I	Heard	the	Voice	of	Jesus	Say”
I	heard	the	voice	of	Jesus	say,	“Come	unto	me	and	rest;
Lay	down,	thou	weary	one,	lay	down	thy	head	upon	my	breast.”
I	came	to	Jesus	as	I	was,	weary	and	worn	and	sad,
I	found	in	him	a	resting	place,	and	he	has	made	me	glad.
I	heard	the	voice	of	Jesus	say,	“Behold,	I	freely	give
The	living	water;	thirsty	one,	stoop	down	and	drink,	and	live.”
I	came	to	Jesus,	and	I	drank	of	that	life-giving	stream;
My	thirst	was	quenched,	my	soul	revived,	and	now	I	live	in	him.
I	heard	the	voice	of	Jesus	say,	“I	am	this	dark	world’s	light;
Look	unto	me,	thy	morn	shall	rise,	and	all	thy	day	be	bright.”
I	looked	to	Jesus,	and	I	found	in	him	my	star,	my	sun;
And	in	that	light	of	life	I’ll	walk,	till	trav’lling	days	are	done.
AUTHOR:	HORATIUS	BONAR,	1846
NOTES
1
See	the	discussion	of	justification	in	
chapter	36
.
2
1	Thess.	2:12	speaks	of	God	“who	
calls	you	into	
his	own	kingdom	and	glory,”	but	the	sense	would	even	more	closely	parallel	1
Cor.	1:9	if	we	adopt	the	well-attested	textual	variant	
kalesantos	
(aorist	participle)	and	translated,	“who	
has	called	you	into	
his	own
kingdom	and	glory.”
3
The	older	term	used	for	“effective	calling”	was	“effectual	calling,”	but	the	term	
effectual	
is	not	as	commonly	used	in	English
today.
4
See	
chapter	35
,	for	a	fuller	discussion	of	the	need	for	both	genuine	repentance	and	genuine	faith,	and	a	discussion	of	the	question
of	whether	someone	can	be	saved	by	“accepting	Jesus	as	Savior	but	not	as	Lord.”
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	34
Regeneration
What	does	it	mean	to	be	born	again?
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
We	may	define	regeneration	as	follows:	
Regeneration	is	a	secret	act
of	God	in	which	he	imparts	new	spiritual	life	to	us.	
This	is
sometimes	called	“being	born	again”	(using	language	from	John
3:3–8).
A.	Regeneration	Is	Totally	a	Work	of	God
In	some	of	the	elements	of	the	application	of	redemption	that	we
discuss	in	subsequent	chapters,	we	play	an	active	part	(this	is	true,
for	example,	of	conversion,	sanctification	and	perseverance).	But	in
the	work	of	regeneration	we	play	no	active	role	at	all.	It	is	instead
totally	a	work	of	God.	We	see	this,	for	example,	when	John	talks
about	those	to	whom	Christ	gave	power	to	become	children	of	God
—they	“were	born,	not	of	blood	nor	of	the	will	of	the	flesh	nor	of
the	will	of	man,	but	of	God”	(John	1:13).	Here	John	specifies	that
children	of	God	are	those	who	are	“born	.	.	.	of	God”	and	our
human	will	(“the	will	of	man”)	does	not	bring	about	this	kind	of
birth.
The	fact	that	we	are	passive	in	regeneration	is	also	evident	when
Scripture	refers	to	it	as	being	“born”	or	being	“born	again”	(cf.
James	1:18;	1	Peter	1:3;	John	3:3–8).	We	did	not	choose	to	be	made
physically	alive	and	we	did	not	choose	to	be	born—it	is	something
that	happened	to	us;	similarly,	these	analogies	in	Scripture	suggest
that	we	are	entirely	passive	in	regeneration.
This	sovereign	work	of	God	in	regeneration	was	also	predicted	in
the	prophecy	of	Ezekiel.	Through	him	God	promised	a	time	in	the
future	when	he	would	give	new	spiritual	life	to	his	people:
A	
new	heart	
I	will	give	you,	and	
a	new	spirit	I	will	put	within	you;
and	I	will	take	out	of	your	flesh	the	heart	of	stone	and	give	you	a	heart
of	flesh.	And	I	will	put	my	spirit	within	you,	and	cause	you	to	walk	in
my	statutes	and	be	careful	to	observe	my	ordinances.	(Ezek.	36:26–
27)
Which	member	of	the	Trinity	is	the	one	who	causes	regeneration?
When	Jesus	speaks	of	being	“born	of	the	Spirit”	(John	3:8),	he
indicates	that	it	is	especially	God	the	Holy	Spirit	who	produces
regeneration.	But	other	verses	also	indicate	the	involvement	of	God
the	Father	in	regeneration:	Paul	specifies	that	it	is	God	who	“made
us	alive	together	with	Christ”	(Eph.	2:5;	cf.	Col.	2:13).	And	James
says	that	it	is	the	“Father	of	lights”	who	gave	us	new	birth:	“Of	his
own	will	
he	brought	us	forth	
by	the	word	of	truth	that	we	should	be
a	kind	of	first	fruits	of	his	creatures”	(James	1:17–18).
	
1
	
Finally,
Peter	says	that	God	“according	to	his	abundant	mercy	
has	given	us
new	birth	.	.	.	
through	the	resurrection	of	Jesus	Christ	from	the
dead”	(1	Peter	1:3,	author’s	translation).	We	can	conclude	that	both
God	the	Father	and	God	the	Holy	Spirit	bring	about	regeneration.
What	is	the	connection	between	effective	calling
	
2
	
and
regeneration?	As	we	will	see	later	in	this	chapter,	Scripture
indicates	that	regeneration	must	come	before	we	can	respond	to
effective	calling	with	saving	faith.	Therefore	we	can	say	that
regeneration	comes	before	the	
result	
of	effective	calling	(our	faith).
But	it	is	more	difficult	to	specify	the	exact	relationship	in	time
between	regeneration	and	the	human	proclamation	of	the	gospel
through	which	God	works	in	effective	calling.	At	least	two	passages
suggest	that	God	regenerates	us	at	the	same	time	as	he	speaks	to	us
in	effective	calling:	Peter	says,	“You	have	been	
born	anew,	
not	of
perishable	seed	but	of	imperishable,	
through	the	living	and	abiding
word	of	God.	.	.	.	
That	word	is	the	good	news	which	was	preached
to	you”	(1	Peter	1:23,	25).	And	James	says,	“He	chose	to	
give	us
birth	through	the	word	of	truth”	
(James	1:18	NIV).	As	the	gospel
comes	to	us,	God	speaks	through	it	to	summon	us	to	himself
(effective	calling)	and	to	give	us	new	spiritual	life	(regeneration)	so
that	we	are	enabled	to	respond	in	faith.	Effective	calling	is	thus	God
the	Father	
speaking	powerfully	to	us,	
and	regeneration	is	God	the
Father	and	God	the	Holy	Spirit	
working	powerfully	in	us,	
to	make
us	alive.	These	two	things	must	have	happened	simultaneously	as
Peter	was	preaching	the	gospel	to	the	household	of	Cornelius,	for
while	he	was	still	preaching	“the	Holy	Spirit	fell	on	all	who	heard
the	word”	(Acts	10:44).
Sometimes	the	term	
irresistible	grace
	
3
	
is	used	in	this	connection.	It
refers	to	the	fact	that	God	effectively	calls	people	and	also	gives
them	regeneration,	and	both	actions	guarantee	that	we	will	respond
in	saving	faith.	The	term	
irresistible	grace	
is	subject	to
misunderstanding,	however,	since	it	
seems	
to	imply	that	people	do
not	make	a	voluntary,	willing	choice	in	responding	to	the	gospel—a
wrong	idea,	and	a	wrong	understanding	of	the	term	
irresistible
grace.	
The	term	does	preserve	something	valuable,	however,
because	it	indicates	that	God’s	work	reaches	into	our	hearts	to	bring
about	a	response	that	is	absolutely	certain—even	though	we
respond	voluntarily.
	
4
B.	The	Exact	Nature	of	Regeneration	Is	Mysterious	to	Us
Exactly	what	happens	in	regeneration	is	mysterious	to	us.	We	know
that	somehow	we	who	were	spiritually	dead	(Eph.	2:1)	have	been
made	alive	to	God	and	in	a	very	real	sense	we	have	been	“born
again”	(John	3:3,	7;	Eph.	2:5;	Col.	2:13).	But	we	don’t	understand
how	this	happens	or	what	exactly	God	does	to	us	to	give	us	this
new	spiritual	life.	Jesus	says,	“The	wind	blows	where	it	wills,	and
you	hear	the	sound	of	it,	but	you	do	not	know	whence	it	comes	or
whither	it	goes;	so	it	is	with	every	one	who	is	born	of	the	Spirit”
(John	3:8).
Scripture	views	regeneration	as	something	that	affects	us	as	whole
persons.	Of	course,	our	“spirits	are	alive”	to	God	after	regeneration
(Rom.	8:10),	but	that	is	simply	because	we	as	
whole	persons	
are
affected	by	regeneration.	It	is	not	just	that	our	spirits	were	dead
before—
we	
were	dead	to	God	in	trespasses	and	sins	(see	Eph.	2:1).
And	it	is	not	correct	to	say	that	the	only	thing	that	happens	in
regeneration	is	that	our	spirits	are	made	alive	(as	some	would
teach),
	
5
	
for	
every	part	of	us	
is	affected	by	regeneration:	“If	any	one
is	in	Christ,	
he	is	a	new	creation;	
the	old	has	passed	away,	behold,
the	new	has	come”	(2	Cor.	5:17).
Because	regeneration	is	a	work	of	God	within	us	in	which	he	gives
us	new	life	it	is	right	to	conclude	that	it	is	an	
instantaneous	event.	
It
happens	only	once.	At	one	moment	we	are	spiritually	dead,	and
then	at	the	next	moment	we	have	new	spiritual	life	from	God.
Nevertheless,	we	do	not	always	know	exactly	when	this
instantaneous	change	occurs.	Especially	for	children	growing	up	in
a	Christian	home,	or	for	people	who	attend	an	evangelical	church	or
Bible	study	over	a	period	of	time	and	grow	gradually	in	their
understanding	of	the	gospel,	there	may	not	be	a	dramatic	crisis	with
a	radical	change	of	behavior	from	“hardened	sinner”	to	“holy
saint,”	but	there	will	be	an	instantaneous	change	nonetheless,	when
God	through	the	Holy	Spirit,	in	an	unseen,	invisible	way,	awakens
spiritual	life	within.	The	change	will	
become	evident	
over	time	in
patterns	of	behavior	and	desires	that	are	pleasing	to	God.
In	other	cases	(in	fact,	probably	most	cases	when	adults	become
Christians)	regeneration	takes	place	at	a	clearly	recognizable	time
at	which	the	person	realizes	that	previously	he	or	she	was	separated
from	God	and	spiritually	dead,	but	immediately	afterward	there	was
clearly	new	spiritual	life	within.	The	results	can	usually	be	seen	at
once—a	heartfelt	trusting	in	Christ	for	salvation,	an	assurance	of
sins	forgiven,	a	desire	to	read	the	Bible	and	pray	(and	a	sense	that
these	are	meaningful	spiritual	activities),	a	delight	in	worship,	a
desire	for	Christian	fellowship,	a	sincere	desire	to	be	obedient	to
God’s	Word	in	Scripture,	and	a	desire	to	tell	others	about	Christ.
People	may	say	something	like	this:	“I	don’t	know	exactly	what
happened,	but	before	that	moment	I	did	not	trust	in	Christ	for
salvation.	I	was	still	wondering	and	questioning	in	my	mind.	But
after	that	moment	I	realized	that	I	did	trust	in	Christ	and	he	was	my
Savior.	Something	happened	in	my	heart.”
	
6
	
Yet	even	in	these	cases
we	are	not	quite	sure	exactly	what	has	happened	in	our	hearts.	It	is
just	as	Jesus	said	with	respect	to	the	wind—we	hear	its	sound	and
we	see	the	result,	but	we	cannot	actually	see	the	wind	itself.	So	it	is
with	the	working	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in	our	hearts.
C.	In	This	Sense	of	“Regeneration,”	It	Comes	Before	Saving	Faith
Using	the	verses	quoted	above,	we	have	defined	regeneration	to	be
the	act	of	God	awakening	spiritual	life	within	us,	bringing	us	from
spiritual	
death	
to	spiritual	
life.	
On	this	definition,	it	is	natural	to
understand	that	regeneration	comes	before	saving	faith.	It	is	in	fact
this	work	of	God	that	gives	us	the	spiritual	
ability	
to	respond	to
God	in	faith.	However,	when	we	say	that	it	comes	“before”	saving
faith,	it	is	important	to	remember	that	they	usually	come	so	close
together	that	it	will	ordinarily	seem	to	us	that	they	are	happening	at
the	same	time.	As	God	addresses	the	effective	call	of	the	gospel	to
us,	he	regenerates	us	and	we	respond	in	faith	and	repentance	to	this
call.	So	
from	our	perspective	
it	is	hard	to	tell	any	difference	in	time,
especially	because	regeneration	is	a	spiritual	work	that	we	cannot
perceive	with	our	eyes	or	even	understand	with	our	minds.
Yet	there	are	several	passages	that	tell	us	that	this	secret,	hidden
work	of	God	in	our	spirits	does	in	fact	come	before	we	respond	to
God	in	saving	faith	(though	often	it	may	be	only	seconds	before	we
respond).	When	talking	about	regeneration	with	Nicodemus,	Jesus
said,	“Unless	one	is	born	of	water	and	the	Spirit,	
he	cannot	enter
the	kingdom	of	God”	
(John	3:5).	Now	we	enter	the	kingdom	of	God
when	we	become	Christians	at	conversion.	But	Jesus	says	that	we
have	to	be	born	“of	the	Spirit”	before	we	can	do	that.
	
7
	
Our	inability
to	come	to	Christ	on	our	own,	without	an	initial	work	of	God	within
us,	is	also	emphasized	when	Jesus	says,	“No	one	can	come	to	me
unless	the	Father	who	sent	me	draws	him”	(John	6:44),	and	“No
one	can	come	to	me	unless	it	is	granted	him	by	the	Father”	(John
6:65).	This	inward	act	of	regeneration	is	described	beautifully	when
Luke	says	of	Lydia,	“
The	Lord	opened	her	heart	
to	give	heed	to
what	was	said	by	Paul”	(Acts	16:14).	First	the	Lord	opened	her
heart,	then	she	was	able	to	give	heed	to	Paul’s	preaching	and	to
respond	in	faith.
By	contrast,	Paul	tells	us,	“The	man	without	the	Spirit	(literally,	the
“natural	man”)	does	not	accept	the	things	that	come	from	the	Spirit
of	God,	for	they	are	foolishness	to	him,	and	he	cannot	understand
them,	because	they	are	spiritually	discerned”	(1	Cor.	2:14	NIV).	He
also	says	of	people	apart	from	Christ,	“no	one	understands,	No	one
seeks	for	God”	(Rom.	3:11).
The	solution	to	this	spiritual	deadness	and	inability	to	respond	only
comes	when	God	gives	us	new	life	within.	“But	God,	who	is	rich	in
mercy,	out	of	the	great	love	with	which	he	loved	us,	even	
when	we
were	dead	through	our	trespasses,	
made	us	alive	together	with
Christ”	(Eph.	2:4–5).	Paul	also	says,	“
When	you	were	dead	in	your
sins	
and	in	the	uncircumcision	of	your	sinful	nature,	
God	made	you
alive	with	Christ”	
(Col.	2:13	NIV).
	
8
The	idea	that	regeneration	comes	before	saving	faith	is	not	always
understood	by	evangelicals	today.	Sometimes	people	will	even	say
something	like,	“If	you	believe	in	Christ	as	your	Savior,	then	(after
you	believe)	you	will	be	born	again.”	But	Scripture	itself	never	says
anything	like	that.	This	new	birth	is	viewed	by	Scripture	as
something	that	God	does	within	us	in	order	to	enable	us	to	believe.
The	reason	that	evangelicals	often	think	that	regeneration	comes
after	saving	faith	is	that	they	
see	the	results	
(love	for	God	and	his
Word,	and	turning	from	sin)	
after	
people	come	to	faith,	and	they
think	that	regeneration	must	therefore	have	come	after	saving	faith.
Yet	here	we	must	decide	on	the	basis	of	what	Scripture	tells	us,
because	regeneration	itself	is	not	something	we	see	or	know	about
directly:	“The	wind	blows	where	it	wills,	and	you	hear	the	sound	of
it,	but	you	do	not	know	whence	it	comes	or	whither	it	goes;	so	it	is
with	every	one	who	is	born	of	the	Spirit”	(John	3:8).
Because	Christians	often	tend	to	focus	on	the	
results	
of
regeneration,	rather	than	the	hidden	spiritual	act	of	God	itself,	some
evangelical	statements	of	faith	have	contained	wording	that
suggests	that	regeneration	comes	after	saving	faith.	So,	for
example,	the	statement	of	faith	of	the	Evangelical	Free	Church	of
America	(which	has	been	adapted	by	a	number	of	other	evangelical
organizations)	says,
We	believe	that	the	true	Church	is	composed	of	all	such	persons	who
through	saving	faith	
in	Jesus	Christ	
have	been	regenerated	
by	the
Holy	Spirit	and	are	united	together	in	the	body	of	Christ	of	which	He
is	the	Head.	(paragraph	8)
Here	the	word	“regeneration”	apparently	means	the	
outward
evidence	of	regeneration	
that	is	seen	in	a	changed	life,	evidence
that	certainly	does	come	after	saving	faith.	Thus	“being	born	again”
is	thought	of	not	in	terms	of	the	initial	impartation	of	new	life,	but
in	terms	of	the	
total	life	change	that	results	
from	that	impartation.	If
the	term	“regeneration”	is	understood	in	this	way,	then	it	would	be
true	that	regeneration	comes	after	saving	faith.
Nevertheless,	if	we	are	to	use	language	that	closely	conforms	to	the
actual	wording	of	Scripture,	it	would	be	better	to	restrict	the	word
“regeneration”	to	the	instantaneous,	
initial	
work	of	God	in	which	he
imparts	spiritual	life	to	us.	Then	we	can	emphasize	that	we	do	not
see	regeneration	itself	but	only	the	results	of	it	in	our	lives,	and	that
faith	in	Christ	for	salvation	is	the	first	result	that	we	see.	In	fact,	we
can	never	know	that	we	have	been	regenerated	until	we	come	to
faith	in	Christ,	for	that	is	the	outward	evidence	of	this	hidden,
inward	work	of	God.	Once	we	do	come	to	saving	faith	in	Christ,	we
know	that	we	have	been	born	again.
By	way	of	application,	we	should	realize	that	the	explanation	of	the
gospel	message	in	Scripture	does	not	take	the	form	of	a	command,
“Be	born	again	and	you	will	be	saved,”	but	rather,	“Believe	in	Jesus
Christ	and	you	will	be	saved.”
	
9
	
This	is	the	consistent	pattern	in	the
preaching	of	the	gospel	throughout	the	book	of	Acts,	and	also	in	the
descriptions	of	the	gospel	given	in	the	Epistles.
D.	Genuine	Regeneration	Must	Bring	Results	in	Life
In	an	earlier	section	we	saw	a	beautiful	example	of	the	first	result	of
regeneration	in	a	person’s	life,	when	Paul	spoke	the	gospel	message
to	Lydia	and	“the	Lord	opened	her	heart	to	give	heed	to	what	was
said	by	Paul”	(Acts	16:14;	cf.	John	6:44,	65;	1	Peter	1:3).	Similarly,
John	says,	“Everyone	who	believes	that	Jesus	is	the	Christ	
is	born
of	God”	
(1	John	5:1	NIV).
	
10
	
But	there	are	also	other	results	of
regeneration,	many	of	which	are	specified	in	John’s	first	epistle.	For
example,	John	says,	“No	one	who	is	born	of	God	will	continue	to
sin,	because	God’s	seed	remains	in	him;	he	
cannot	go	on	sinning,
because	he	has	been	born	of	God”	(1	John	3:9	NIV).	Here	John
explains	that	a	person	who	is	born	again	has	that	spiritual	“seed”
(that	life-generating	and	growing	power)	within	him,	and	that	this
keeps	the	person	living	a	life	free	of	continual	sin.	This	does	not	of
course	mean	that	the	person	will	have	a	perfect	life,	but	only	that
the	pattern	of	life	will	not	be	one	of	continuing	indulgence	in	sin.
When	people	are	asked	to	characterize	a	regenerated	
person’s	life,	the	adjective	that	comes	to	mind	should	not	be
“sinner,”	but	rather	something	like	“obedient	to	Christ”	or
“obedient	to	Scripture.”	We	should	notice	that	John	says	this	is	true
of	everyone	who	is	truly	born	again:	“
No	one	
who	is	born	of	God
will	continue	to	sin.”	Another	way	of	looking	at	this	is	to	say	that
“every	one	who	does	what	is	right	has	been	born	of	him”	(1	John
2:29).
A	genuine,	Christlike	
love	
will	be	one	specific	result	in	life:
“Everyone	who	loves	has	been	born	of	God	and	knows	God”	(1
John	4:7	NIV).	Another	effect	of	the	new	birth	is	
overcoming	the
world:	
“And	his	commands	are	not	burdensome,	for	everyone	born
of	God	has	overcome	the	world”	(1	John	5:3–4	NIV).	Here	John
explains	that	regeneration	gives	the	ability	to	overcome	the
pressures	and	temptations	of	the	world	that	would	otherwise	keep
us	from	obeying	God’s	commandments	and	following	his	paths.
John	says	that	we	will	overcome	these	pressures	and	therefore	it
will	not	be	“burdensome”	to	obey	God’s	commands	but,	he	implies,
it	will	rather	be	joyful.	He	goes	on	to	explain	that	the	process
through	which	we	gain	victory	over	the	world	is	continuing	in	faith:
“This	is	the	victory	that	has	overcome	the	world,	even	our	faith”	(1
John	5:4	NIV).
Finally,	John	notes	that	another	result	of	regeneration	is	
protection
from	Satan	
himself:	“We	know	that	anyone	born	of	God	does	not
continue	to	sin;	the	one	who	was	born	of	God	[that	is,	Jesus]	keeps
him	safe,	
and	the	evil	one	cannot	harm	him”	
(1	John	5:18	NIV).
Though	there	may	be	attacks	from	Satan,	John	reassures	his	readers
that	“the	one	who	is	in	you	is	greater	than	the	one	who	is	in	the
world”	(1	John	4:4	NIV),	and	this	greater	power	of	the	Holy	Spirit
within	us	keeps	us	safe	from	ultimate	spiritual	harm	by	the	evil	one.
We	should	realize	that	John	emphasizes	these	as	
necessary	
results
in	the	lives	of	those	who	are	born	again.	If	there	is	genuine
regeneration	in	a	person’s	life,	he	or	she	
will	
believe	that	Jesus	is
the	Christ,	and	
will	
refrain	from	a	life	pattern	of	continual	sin,	and
will	
love	his	brother,	and	
will	
overcome	the	temptations	of	the
world,	and	
will	
be	kept	safe	from	ultimate	harm	by	the	evil	one.
These	passages	show	that	it	is	impossible	for	a	person	to	be
regenerated	and	not	become	truly	converted.
	
11
Other	results	of	regeneration	are	listed	by	Paul	where	he	speaks	of
the	
“fruit	of	the	Spirit,”	
that	is,	the	result	in	life	that	is	produced	by
the	power	of	the	Holy	Spirit	working	within	every	believer:	“But
the	fruit	of	the	Spirit	is	love,	joy,	peace,	patience,	kindness,
goodness,	faithfulness,	gentleness,	self-control”	(Gal.	5:22–23).	If
there	is	true	regeneration	then	these	elements	of	the	fruit	of	the
Spirit	will	be	more	and	more	evident	in	that	person’s	life.	But	by
contrast,	those	who	are	unbelievers,	including	those	who	are
pretending	to	be	believers	but	are	not,	will	clearly	lack	of	these
character	traits	in	their	lives.	Jesus	told	his	disciples:
Beware	of	false	prophets,	who	come	to	you	in	sheep’s	clothing	but
inwardly	are	ravenous	wolves.	
You	will	know	them	by	their	fruits.	
Are
grapes	gathered	from	thorns,	or	figs	from	thistles?	So,	every	sound
tree	bears	good	fruit,	but	the	bad	tree	bears	evil	fruit.	A	sound	tree
cannot	bear	evil	fruit,	nor	can	a	bad	tree	bear	good	fruit.	Every	tree
that	does	not	bear	good	fruit	is	cut	down	and	thrown	into	the	fire.
Thus	you	will	know	them	by	their	fruits.	(Matt.	7:15–20)
Neither	Jesus	nor	Paul	nor	John	point	to	activity	in	the	church	or
miracles	as	evidence	of	regeneration.	They	rather	point	to	character
traits	in	life.	In	fact,	immediately	after	the	verses	quoted	above
Jesus	warns	that	on	the	day	of	judgment	many	will	say	to	him,
“Lord,	Lord,	did	we	not	prophesy	in	your	name,	and	cast	out
demons	in	your	name,	and	do	many	mighty	works	in	your	name?”
But	he	will	declare	to	them,	“I	
never	knew	you;	
depart	from	me,
you	evildoers”	(Matt.	7:22–23).	Prophecy,	exorcism,	and	many
miracles	and	mighty	works	in	Jesus’	name	(to	say	nothing	of	other
kinds	of	intensive	church	activity	in	the	strength	of	the	flesh	over
perhaps	decades	of	a	person’s	life)	do	not	provide	convincing
evidence	that	a	person	is	truly	born	again.	Apparently	all	these	can
be	produced	in	the	natural	man	or	woman’s	own	strength,	or	even
with	the	help	of	the	evil	one.	But	genuine	love	for	God	and	his
people,	heartfelt	obedience	to	his	commands,	and	the	Christlike
character	traits	that	Paul	calls	the	fruit	of	the	Spirit,	demonstrated
consistently	over	a	period	of	time	in	a	person’s	life,	simply	
cannot
be	produced	by	Satan	or	by	the	natural	man	or	woman	working	in
his	or	her	own	strength.	These	can	only	come	about	by	the	Spirit	of
God	working	within	and	giving	us	new	life.
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
Have	you	been	born	again?	Is	there	evidence	of	the	new	birth	in	your
life?	Do	you	remember	a	specific	time	when	regeneration	occurred	in
your	life?	Can	you	describe	how	you	knew	that	something	had
happened?
2
.	
If	you	(or	friends	who	come	to	you)	are	not	sure	whether	you	have	been
born	again,	what	would	Scripture	encourage	you	to	do	in	order	to	gain
greater	assurance	(or	to	be	truly	born	again	for	the	first	time)?	(Note:
further	discussion	of	repentance	and	saving	faith	is	given	in	the	next
chapter.)
3
.	
Have	you	thought	before	that	regeneration	is	prior	to	saving	faith?	Are
you	convinced	of	it	now,	or	is	there	still	some	question	in	your	mind?
4
.	
What	do	you	think	about	the	fact	that	your	regeneration	was	totally	a
work	of	God,	and	that	you	contributed	nothing	to	it?	How	does	it	make
you	feel	toward	yourself?	How	does	it	make	you	feel	toward	God?	By
way	of	analogy,	how	do	you	feel	about	the	fact	that	when	you	were	born
physically	you	had	no	choice	in	the	matter?
5
.	
Are	there	areas	where	the	results	of	regeneration	are	not	very	clearly
seen	in	your	own	life?	Do	you	think	it	is	possible	for	a	person	to	be
regenerated	and	then	stagnate	spiritually	so	that	there	is	little	or	no
growth?	What	circumstances	might	a	person	live	in	that	would	lead	to
such	spiritual	stagnation	and	lack	of	growth	(if	that	is	possible),	even
though	the	person	was	truly	born	again?	To	what	degree	does	the	kind	of
church	one	attends,	the	teaching	one	receives,	the	kind	of	Christian
fellowship	one	has,	and	the	regularity	of	one’s	personal	time	of	Bible
reading	and	prayer,	affect	one’s	own	spiritual	life	and	growth?
6
.	
If	regeneration	is	entirely	a	work	of	God	and	human	beings	can	do
nothing	to	bring	it	about,	then	what	good	does	it	do	to	preach	the	gospel
to	people	at	all?	Is	it	somewhat	absurd	or	even	cruel	to	preach	the	gospel
and	ask	for	a	response	from	people	who	cannot	respond	because	they	are
spiritually	dead?	How	do	you	resolve	this	question?
SPECIAL	TERMS
born	again
	
	
	
irresistible	grace
born	of	the	Spirit
	
	
	
regeneration
born	of	water
	
	
	
	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the
bibliography	to	chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be
found	in	
Appendix	4
.)
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92			Litton,	320–28
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1847			Finney,	282–364
1892–94			Miley,	2:327–36
1960			Purkiser,	292–97
3.			Baptist
1767			Gill,	2:107–21
1887			Boyce,	373–82
1907			Strong,	809–29
1917			Mullins,	385–89
1983–85			Erickson,	932–33,	942–46
4.			Dispensational
1947			Chafer,	6:104–21
1949			Thiessen,	271–76
1986			Ryrie,	325–26
5.			Lutheran
1917–24			Pieper,	2:498–501
1934			Mueller,	363–64
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1559			Calvin,	1:592–621	(3.3)
1724–58			Edwards,	543–65,	849–55
1861			Heppe,	518–27
1871–73			Hodge,	2:682–732;	3:3–40
1878			Dabney,	579–99
1887–1921			Warfield,	
BTS,	
351–74;	
SSW,	
2:321–24
1889			Shedd,	2b,	490–528
1937–66			Murray,	
CW,	
2:167–201;	
RAA,	
95–105
1938			Berkhof,	465–79
1962			Buswell,	2:168–75
7.			Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988–92			Williams,	2:35–59
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955			Ott,	219–49
2.			Roman	Catholic:	Post-Vatican	II
1980			McBrien,	2:991–1005
Other	Works
Hoekema,	Anthony	A.	“Regeneration.”	In	
Saved	by	Grace.	
Grand
Rapids:	Eerdmans,	and	Exeter:	Paternoster,	1989,	pp.	93–112.
Kevan,	E.	F.	
Salvation.	
Phillipsburg,	N.J.:	Presbyterian	and	Reformed,
1973.
Packer,	J.	I.	“Regeneration.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	924–26.
Toon,	Peter.	
Born	Again:	A	Biblical	and	Theological	Study	of
Regeneration.	
Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1987.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
John	3:5–8:	
Jesus	answered,	“Truly,	truly,	I	say	to	you,	unless	one	is	born	of
water	and	the	Spirit,	he	cannot	enter	the	kingdom	of	God.	That	which	is	born
of	the	flesh	is	flesh,	and	that	which	is	born	of	the	Spirit	is	spirit.	Do	not
marvel	that	I	said	to	you,	‘You	must	be	born	anew.’	The	wind	blows	where	it
wills,	and	you	hear	the	sound	of	it,	but	you	do	not	know	whence	it	comes	or
whither	it	goes;	so	it	is	with	every	one	who	is	born	of	the	Spirit.”
HYMN
“I	Sought	the	Lord,	and	Afterward	I	Knew”
This	hymn	beautifully	expresses	thanks	to	God	for	the	fact	that,
though	we	did	not	know	it,	he	sought	us,	worked	in	our	hearts	in	a
mysterious	way,	and	enabled	us	to	believe,	before	we	came	to	trust
in	him.
I	sought	the	Lord,	and	afterward	I	knew
He	moved	my	soul	to	seek	him,	seeking	me;
It	was	not	I	that	found,	O	Savior	true,
No,	I	was	found	of	thee.
Thou	didst	reach	forth	thy	hand	and	mine	enfold;
I	walked	and	sank	not	on	the	storm–vexed	sea,
’Twas	not	so	much	that	I	on	thee	took	hold,
As	thou,	dear	Lord,	on	me.
I	find,	I	walk,	I	love,	but,	O	the	whole
Of	love	is	but	my	answer,	Lord,	to	thee;
For	thou	wert	long	beforehand	with	my	soul,
Always	thou	lovedst	me.
ANON.,	C.	1904
NOTES
1
When	James	says	that	God	“brought	us	forth,”	he	uses	language	that	ordinarily	applies	to	physical	birth	(being	brought	forth	out
of	our	mothers’	wombs,	and	into	the	world)	and	applies	it	to	spiritual	birth.
2
See	
chapter	33
,	on	effective	calling.
3
This	is	the	“I”	in	the	“five	points	of	Calvinism”	represented	by	the	acronym	TULIP.	The	other	letters	stand	for	
T
otal	depravity
(see	
chapter	24
),	
U
nconditional	election	(see	
chapter	32
),	
L
imited	atonement	(see	
chapter	27
),	and	
P
erseverance	of	the	saints	(see
chapter	40
)	See	also	
chapter	32.
4
Some	people	will	object	here	that	God	cannot	
guarantee	
a	response	that	is	still	willing	and	voluntary	on	our	part.	But	this
objection	simply	inserts	into	the	discussion	a	definition	of	“voluntary”	or	“willing”	that	is	not	itself	supported	by	Scripture;	see
discussion	in	
chapter	16
,	on	God’s	providence	in	relation	to	our	voluntary	decisions.
5
This	view	of	regeneration	usually	depends	on	viewing	man	as	trichotomous	or	consisting	of	three	parts	(body,	soul	and	spirit),	a
position	we	discussed	at	the	beginning	of	
chapter	23
.	But	if	we	reject	trichotomy	and	see	“soul”	and	“spirit”	as	synonyms	in
Scripture	that	speak	of	the	immaterial	part	of	our	nature,	then	such	an	explanation	is	not	persuasive.	Even	for	those	who	accept
trichotomy,	the	Scriptures	that	speak	of	us	as	a	new	creation	and	that	say	that	
we	
have	been	born	again	(not	just	our	spirits),	should
be	good	reason	for	seeing	more	in	regeneration	than	merely	making	our	spirits	alive.
6
C.	S.	Lewis	tells	the	story	of	his	own	conversion:	“I	know	very	well	when,	but	hardly	how,	the	final	step	was	taken.	I	was	driven
to	Whipsnade	one	sunny	morning.	When	we	set	out	I	did	not	believe	that	Jesus	Christ	is	the	Son	of	God,	and	when	we	reached	the
zoo	I	did.	Yet	I	had	not	exactly	spent	the	journey	in	thought.	Nor	in	great	emotion”	(
Surprised	by	Joy	
[New	York:	Harcourt,	Brace
and	World,	1955],	p.	
237).
7
When	Jesus	talks	about	being	“born	of	water”	here,	the	most	likely	interpretation	of	this	is	that	he	is	referring	to	
spiritual
cleansing	from	sin,	
which	Ezekiel	prophesied	when	he	said,	“I	will	sprinkle	clean	water	upon	you,	and	you	shall	be	clean	from	all
your	uncleannesses,	and	from	all	your	idols	I	will	cleanse	you.	A	new	heart	I	will	give	you,	and	a	new	spirit	I	will	put	within	you”
(Ezek.	36:25–26).	Here	the	water	symbolizes	spiritual	cleansing	from	sin,	just	as	the	new	heart	and	new	spirit	speak	of	the	new
spiritual	life	that	God	will	give.	Ezekiel	is	prophesying	that	God	will	give	an	internal	cleansing	from	the	pollution	of	sin	in	the
heart	at	the	same	time	as	he	awakens	new	spiritual	life	within	his	people.	The	fact	that	these	two	ideas	are	connected	so	closely	in
this	well-known	prophecy	from	Ezekiel,	and	the	fact	that	Jesus	assumes	that	Nicodemus	should	have	understood	this	truth	(“Are
you	a	teacher	of	Israel,	and	yet	you	do	not	understand	this?”	[John	3:10]),	together	with	the	fact	that	throughout	the	conversation
Jesus	is	talking	about	intensely	spiritual	concerns,	all	suggest	that	this	is	the	most	likely	understanding	of	the	passage.	Another
suggestion	has	been	that	“born	of	water”	refers	to	physical	birth	and	the	“water”	(or	amniotic	fluid)	that	accompanies	it,	but	it
would	hardly	be	necessary	for	Jesus	to	specify	that	one	has	to	be	born	in	this	way	when	he	is	talking	about	spiritual	birth,	and	it	is
questionable	whether	first-century	Jews	would	have	understood	the	phrase	in	this	way	either.	Another	interpretation	is	that	Jesus	is
referring	to	the	water	of	baptism	here,	but	baptism	or	any	other	similar	ceremony	is	not	in	view	in	this	passage	(and	it	would	have
been	anachronistic	for	Jesus	to	speak	of	Christian	baptism	here,	since	that	did	not	begin	until	Pentecost);	moreover,	this	would
make	Jesus	teach	that	a	physical	act	of	baptism	is	necessary	for	salvation,	something	that	would	contradict	the	New	Testament
emphasis	on	salvation	by	faith	alone	as	necessary	for	salvation,	and	something	which,	if	it	were	true,	we	would	certainly	expect	to
find	taught	much	more	explicitly	in	the	other	New	Testament	passages	that	clearly	deal	with	baptism	(see	
chapter	49
	on	baptism).
8
The	RSV	translates	Col.	2:13	with	a	relative	clause:	“And	you,	
who	were	dead	
in	trespasses	and	the	uncircumcision	of	your
flesh,	God	made	alive	together	with	him,”	but	the	Greek	text	has	no	relative	pronoun	(
hous
),	which	Paul	could	easily	have	used,
but	rather	has	a	participial	phrase	with	the	present	participle	
ontas,	
“being,”	giving	a	nuance	of	continuing	activity	that	occurred	
at
the	same	time	
that	the	action	of	the	main	verb	(“made	alive”)	took	place.	Thus,	the	NIV	expresses	the	appropriate	sense:	at	the
time	when	we	were	continuing	in	the	state	of	being	dead	in	our	sins,	God	made	us	alive.	No	matter	whether	we	translate	the
participle	as	concessive,	causative,	or	expressing	attendant	circumstances,	or	with	any	other	sense	possible	to	the	participle,	this
temporal	nuance	of	time	simultaneous	with	the	main	verb	would	still	be	present	as	well.	Yet	the	NIV,	in	translating	it	as	an
explicitly	temporal	participle	(“
when	
you	were	dead”)	seems	to	have	given	the	best	rendering	of	the	intended	sense	of	the	verse.
9
It	is	true	that	Jesus	tells	Nicodemus	that	he	needs	to	be	born	again	(John	3:7:	“Do	not	marvel	that	I	said	to	you,	‘You	must	be
born	anew’	”),	but	this	is	not	a	command	to	Nicodemus	to	do	something	that	no	one	can	ever	do	(that	is,	give	himself	new
spiritual	life).	It	is	an	indicative	sentence,	not	an	imperative	sentence.	It	is	a	statement	of	fact	designed	to	point	out	to	Nicodemus
his	total	spiritual	need	and	lack	of	ability	on	his	own	to	enter	the	kingdom	of	God.	A	little	later,	when	Jesus	begins	to	speak	about
the	response	that	is	expected	from	Nicodemus,	he	speaks	about	the	personal	response	of	faith	as	the	thing	necessary:	“So	must	the
Son	of	man	be	lifted	up,	that	
whoever	believes	in	him	
may	have	eternal	life”	(John	3:14–15).
10
The	perfect	participle	translated	here	“is	born”	could	more	explicitly	be	translated	“has	been	born	and	continues	in	the	new	life
that	resulted	from	that	event.”
11
Since	we	indicated	above	that	a	person	is	first	regenerated,	and	then	subsequently	comes	to	saving	faith,	there	will	be	a	brief
time	in	which	someone	is	regenerated	and	the	results	(faith,	love,	etc.)	are	not	yet	seen.	But	John	is	saying	that	the	results	
will
follow;	they	are	inevitable	once	someone	is	born	again.
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	35
Conversion	(Faith	and	Repentance)
What	is	true	repentance?	What	is	saving	faith?	Can	people	accept
Jesus	as	Savior	and	not	as	Lord?
The	last	two	chapters	have	explained	how	God	himself	(through	the
human	preaching	of	the	Word)	issues	the	gospel	call	to	us	and,	by
the	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit,	regenerates	us,	imparting	new	spiritual
life	within.	In	this	chapter	we	examine	our	response	to	the	gospel
call.	We	may	define	conversion	as	follows:	
Conversion	is	our
willing	response	to	the	gospel	call,	in	which	we	sincerely	repent	of
sins	and	place	our	trust	in	Christ	for	salvation.
The	word	
conversion	
itself	means	“turning”—here	it	represents	a
spiritual	turn,	a	turning	
from	
sin	
to	
Christ.	The	turning	from	sin	is
called	
repentance,	
and	the	turning	to	Christ	is	called	
faith.	
We	can
look	at	each	of	these	elements	of	conversion,	and	in	one	sense	it
does	not	matter	which	one	we	discuss	first,	for	neither	one	can
occur	without	the	other,	and	they	must	occur	together	when	true
conversion	takes	place.	For	the	purposes	of	this	chapter,	we	shall
examine	saving	faith	first,	and	then	repentance.
A.	True	Saving	Faith	Includes	Knowledge,	Approval,	and	Personal	Trust
1.
	Knowledge	Alone	Is	Not	Enough.
	Personal	saving	faith,	in	the	way
Scripture	understands	it,	involves	more	than	mere	knowledge.	Of	course	
it	is
necessary	that	we	have	some	knowledge	of	who	Christ	is	and	what	he	has
done,	
for	“how	are	they	to	believe	in	him	of	whom	they	have	never	heard?”
(Rom.	10:14).	But	knowledge	about	the	
facts	
of	Jesus’	life,	death,	and
resurrection	for	us	is	not	enough,	for	people	can	know	facts	but	rebel	against
them	or	dislike	them.	For	example,	Paul	tells	us	that	many	people	know	God’s
laws	but	dislike	them:	“Though	they	
know	
God’s	decree	that	those	who	do
such	things	deserve	to	die,	they	not	only	do	them	but	approve	those	who
practice	them”	(Rom.	1:32).	Even	the	demons	know	who	God	is	and	know	the
facts	about	Jesus’	life	and	saving	works,	for	James	says,	“You	believe	that
God	is	one;	you	do	well.	Even	the	demons	believe—and	shudder”	(James
2:19).	But	that	knowledge	certainly	does	not	mean	that	the	demons	are	saved.
2.	Knowledge	and	Approval	Are	Not	Enough.
	Moreover,	merely	knowing
the	facts	and	
approving	
of	them	or	
agreeing	
that	they	are	true	is	not	enough.
Nicodemus	knew	that	Jesus	had	come	from	God,	for	he	said,	“Rabbi,	we
know	that	you	are	a	teacher	come	from	God;	for	no	one	can	do	these	signs
that	you	do,	unless	God	is	with	him”	(John	3:2).	Nicodemus	had	evaluated	the
facts	of	the	situation,	including	Jesus’	teaching	and	his	remarkable	miracles,
and	had	drawn	a	correct	conclusion	from	those	facts:	Jesus	was	a	teacher
come	from	God.	But	this	alone	did	not	mean	that	Nicodemus	had	saving	faith,
for	he	still	had	to	put	his	trust	in	Christ	for	salvation;	he	still	had	to	“believe	in
him.”	King	Agrippa	provides	another	example	of	knowledge	and	approval
without	saving	faith.	Paul	realized	that	King	Agrippa	knew	and	apparently
viewed	with	approval	the	Jewish	Scriptures	(what	we	now	call	the	Old
Testament).	When	Paul	was	on	trial	before	Agrippa,	he	said,	“King	Agrippa,
do	you	believe	the	prophets?	I	know	that	
you	believe”
	(Acts	26:27).	Yet
Agrippa	did	not	have	saving	faith,	for	he	said	to	Paul,	“In	a	short	time	you
think	to	make	me	a	Christian!”	(Acts	26:28).
3.	I	Must	Decide	to	Depend	on	Jesus	to	Save	Me	Personally.
	In	addition	to
knowledge	of	the	facts	of	the	gospel	and	approval	of	those	facts,	in	order	to
be	saved,	I	must	decide	to	depend	on	Jesus	to	save	me.	In	doing	this	I	move
from	being	an	interested	observer	of	the	facts	of	salvation	and	the	teachings	of
the	Bible	to	being	someone	who	enters	into	a	new	relationship	with	Jesus
Christ	as	a	living	person.	We	may	therefore	define	saving	faith	in	the
following	way:	
Saving	faith	is	trust	in	Jesus	Christ	as	a	living	person	for
forgiveness	of	sins	and	for	eternal	life	with	God.
This	definition	emphasizes	that	saving	faith	is	not	just	a	belief	in
facts	but	
personal	trust	in	Jesus	
to	save	
me.	
As	we	will	explain	in
the	following	chapters,	much	more	is	involved	in	salvation	than
simply	forgiveness	of	sins	and	eternal	life,	but	someone	who
initially	comes	to	Christ	seldom	realizes	the	extent	of	the	blessings
of	salvation	that	will	come.	Moreover,	we	may	rightly	summarize
the	two	major	concerns	of	a	person	who	trusts	in	Christ	as
“forgiveness	of	sins”	and	“eternal	life	with	God.”	Of	course,	eternal
life	with	God	involves	such	matters	as	a	declaration	of
righteousness	before	God	(part	of	justification,	as	explained	in	the
next	chapter),	adoption,	sanctification,	and	glorification,	but	these
things	may	be	understood	in	detail	later.	The	main	thing	that
concerns	an	unbeliever	who	comes	to	Christ	is	the	fact	that	sin	has
separated	him	or	her	from	the	fellowship	with	God	for	which	we
were	made.	The	unbeliever	comes	to	Christ	seeking	to	have	sin	and
guilt	removed	and	to	enter	into	a	genuine	relationship	with	God	that
will	last	forever.
The	definition	emphasizes	
personal	trust	
in	Christ,	not	just	belief	in
facts	about	Christ.	Because	saving	faith	in	Scripture	involves	this
personal	trust,	the	word	“trust”	is	a	better	word	to	use	in
contemporary	culture	than	the	word	“faith”	or	“belief.”	The	reason
is	that	we	can	“believe”	something	to	be	true	with	no	personal
commitment	or	dependence	involved	in	it.	I	can	
believe	
that
Canberra	is	the	capital	of	Australia,	or	that	7	times	6	is	42,	but	have
no	personal	commitment	or	dependence	on	anyone	when	I	simply
believe	those	facts.	The	word	
faith,	
on	the	other	hand,	is	sometimes
used	today	to	refer	to	an	almost	irrational	commitment	to	something
in	spite	of	strong	evidence	to	the	contrary,	a	sort	of	irrational
decision	to	believe	something	that	we	are	quite	sure	is	
not	
true!	(If
your	favorite	football	team	continues	to	lose	games,	someone	might
encourage	you	to	“have	faith”	even	though	all	the	facts	point	the
opposite	direction.)	In	these	two	popular	senses,	the	word	“belief”
and	the	word	“faith”	have	a	meaning	contrary	to	the	biblical	sense.
1
The	word	
trust	
is	closer	to	the	biblical	idea,	since	we	are	familiar
with	trusting	persons	in	everyday	life.	The	more	we	come	to	know
a	person,	and	the	more	we	see	in	that	person	a	pattern	of	life	that
warrants	trust,	the	more	we	find	ourselves	able	to	place	trust	in	that
person	to	do	what	he	or	she	promises,	or	to	act	in	ways	that	we	can
rely	on.	This	fuller	sense	of	personal	trust	is	indicated	in	several
passages	of	Scripture	in	which	initial	saving	faith	is	spoken	of	in
very	personal	terms,	often	using	analogies	drawn	from	personal
relationships.	John	says,	“To	all	who	
received	him,	
who	believed	in
his	name,	he	gave	power	to	become	children	of	God”	(John	1:12).
Much	as	we	would	receive	a	guest	into	our	homes,	John	speaks	of
receiving	Christ.
John	3:16	tells	us	that	“whoever	
believes	in	him	
should	not	perish
but	have	eternal	life.”	Here	John	uses	a	surprising	phrase	when	he
does	not	simply	say,	“whoever	
believes	him”	
(that	is,	believes	that
what	he	says	is	true	and	able	to	be	trusted),	but	rather,	“whoever
believes	in	him.”	
The	Greek	phrase	
pisteuō	eis	auton	
could	also	be
translated	“believe	
into	
him”	with	the	sense	of	trust	or	confidence
that	goes	
into	
and	rests	
in	
Jesus	as	a	person.	Leon	Morris	can	say,
“Faith,	for	John,	is	an	activity	which	takes	men	right	out	of
themselves	and	makes	them	one	with	Christ.”	He	understands	the
Greek	phrase	
pisteuō	eis	
to	be	a	significant	indication	that	New
Testament	faith	is	not	just	intellectual	assent	but	includes	a	“moral
element	of	personal	trust.”
	
2
	
Such	an	expression	was	rare	or	perhaps
nonexistent	in	the	secular	Greek	found	outside	the	New	Testament,
but	it	was	well	suited	to	express	the	personal	trust	in	Christ	that	is
involved	in	saving	faith.
Jesus	speaks	of	“coming	to	him”	in	several	places.	He	says,	“All
that	the	Father	gives	me	will	
come	to	me;	
and	him	who	comes	to
me	I	will	not	cast	out”	(John	6:37).	He	also	says,	“If	any	one	thirst,
let	him	
come	to	me	
and	drink”	(John	7:37).	In	a	similar	way,	he
says,	“
Come	to	me,	
all	who	labor	and	are	heavy	laden,	and	I	will
give	you	rest.	Take	my	yoke	upon	you,	and	learn	from	me;	for	I	am
gentle	and	lowly	in	heart,	and	you	will	find	rest	for	your	souls.	For
my	yoke	is	easy,	and	my	burden	is	light”	(Matt.	11:28–30).	In	these
passages	we	have	the	idea	of	coming	to	Christ	and	asking	for
acceptance,	for	living	water	to	drink,	and	for	rest	and	instruction.
All	of	these	give	an	intensely	personal	picture	of	what	is	involved
in	saving	faith.	The	author	of	Hebrews	also	asks	us	to	think	of	Jesus
as	now	alive	in	heaven,	ready	to	receive	us:	“He	is	able	for	all	time
to	save	those	who	draw	near	to	God	through	him,	since	
he	always
lives	
to	make	intercession	for	them”	(Heb.	7:25).	Jesus	is	pictured
here	(as	many	times	in	the	New	Testament)	as	one	who	is	now	alive
in	heaven,	always	able	to	help	those	who	come	to	him.
Reformed	theologian	J.	I.	Packer	quotes	the	following	paragraphs
from	the	British	Puritan	writer	John	Owen,	describing	the	invitation
of	Christ	to	respond	in	personal	faith:
This	is	somewhat	of	the	word	which	he	now	speaks	unto	you:	Why	will
ye	die?	why	will	ye	perish?	why	will	ye	not	have	compassion	on	your
own	souls?	Can	your	hearts	endure,	or	can	your	hands	be	strong,	in	the
day	of	wrath	that	is	approaching?	
.	.	.	Look	unto	me,	and	be	saved;
come	unto	me,	and	I	will	ease	you	of	all	sins,	sorrows,	fears,	burdens,
and	give	rest	to	your	souls.	Come,	I	entreat	you;	lay	aside	all
procrastinations,	all	delays;	put	me	off	no	more;	eternity	lies	at	the	door
.	.	.	do	not	so	hate	me	as	that	you	will	rather	perish	than	accept	of
deliverance	by	me.
These	and	the	like	things	doth	the	Lord	Christ	continually	declare,
proclaim,	plead	and	urge	upon	the	souls	of	sinners.	.	.	.	He	doth	it	in
the	preaching	of	the	word,	as	if	he	were	present	with	you,	stood
amongst	you,	and	spake	personally	to	every	one	of	you.	.	.	.	He	hath
appointed	the	ministers	of	the	gospel	to	appear	before	you,	and	to	deal
with	you	in	his	stead,	avowing	as	his	own	the	invitations	which	are
given	you	in	his	name.	(2	Cor.	5:19–20)
	
3
With	this	understanding	of	true	New	Testament	faith,	we	may	now
appreciate	that	when	a	person	comes	to	trust	in	Christ,	all	three
elements	must	be	present.	There	must	be	some	basic	knowledge	or
understanding	
of	the	facts	of	the	gospel.	There	must	also	be
approval	
of,	or	agreement	with,	these	facts.	Such	agreement
includes	a	conviction	that	the	facts	spoken	of	the	gospel	are	true,
especially	the	fact	that	I	am	a	sinner	in	need	of	salvation	and	that
Christ	alone	has	paid	the	penalty	for	my	sin	and	offers	salvation	to
me.	It	also	includes	an	awareness	that	I	need	to	trust	in	Christ	for
salvation	and	that	he	is	the	only	way	to	God,	and	the	only	means
provided	for	my	salvation.	This	approval	of	the	facts	of	the	gospel
will	also	involve	a	desire	to	be	saved	through	Christ.	But	all	this
still	does	not	add	up	to	true	saving	faith.	That	comes	only	when	I
make	a	decision	of	my	will	to	depend	on,	or	put	my	
trust	
in,	Christ
as	
my	
Savior.	This	personal	decision	to	place	my	trust	in	Christ	is
something	done	with	my	heart,	the	central	faculty	of	my	entire
being	that	makes	commitments	for	me	as	a	whole	person.
4.	Faith	Should	Increase	as	Our	Knowledge	Increases.
	Contrary	to	the
current	secular	understanding	of	“faith,”	true	New	Testament	faith	is	not
something	that	is	made	stronger	by	ignorance	or	by	believing	against	the
evidence.	Rather,	saving	faith	is	consistent	with	knowledge	and	true
understanding	of	facts.	Paul	says,	“Faith	comes	from	hearing,	and	hearing	by
the	word	of	Christ”	(Rom.	10:17	NASB).	When	people	have	true	information
about	Christ,	they	are	better	able	to	put	their	trust	in	him.	Moreover,	the	more
we	know	about	him	and	about	the	character	of	God	that	is	completely
revealed	in	him,	the	more	fully	we	are	able	to	put	our	trust	in	him.	Thus	faith
is	not	weakened	by	knowledge	but	should	increase	with	more	true	knowledge.
In	the	case	of	saving	faith	in	Christ,	our	knowledge	of	him	comes
by	believing	a	reliable	testimony	about	him.	Here,	the	reliable
testimony	that	we	believe	is	the	words	of	Scripture.	Since	they	are
God’s	very	words,	they	are	completely	reliable,	and	we	gain	true
knowledge	of	Christ	through	them.	This	is	why	“Faith	comes	from
hearing,	and	hearing	by	the	word	of	Christ”	(Rom.	10:17	NASB).
In	everyday	life,	we	come	to	believe	many	things	when	we	hear
testimony	from	a	person	we	consider	to	be	reliable	or	trustworthy.
This	kind	of	decision	is	even	more	justified	here,	when	the	actual
words	of	God	provide	that	testimony	and	we	believe	it.
B.	Faith	and	Repentance	Must	Come	Together
We	may	define	repentance	as	follows:	
Repentance	is	a	heartfelt
sorrow	for	sin,	a	renouncing	of	it,	and	a	sincere	commitment	to
forsake	it	and	walk	in	obedience	to	Christ.
This	definition	indicates	that	repentance	is	something	that	can	occur
at	a	specific	point	in	time,	and	is	not	equivalent	to	a	demonstration
of	change	in	a	person’s	pattern	of	life.	Repentance,	like	faith,	is	an
intellectual	
understanding	
(that	sin	is	wrong),	an	emotional
approval	
of	the	teachings	of	Scripture	regarding	sin	(a	sorrow	for
sin	and	a	hatred	of	it),	and	a	
personal	decision	
to	turn	from	it	(a
renouncing	of	sin	and	a	decision	of	the	will	to	forsake	it	and	lead	a
life	of	obedience	to	Christ	instead).	We	cannot	say	that	someone
has	to	actually	
live	
that	changed	life	over	a	period	of	time	before
repentance	can	be	genuine,	or	else	repentance	would	be	turned	into
a	kind	of	obedience	that	we	could	
do	
to	merit	salvation	for
ourselves.	Of	course,	genuine	repentance	will	result	in	a	changed
life.	In	fact,	a	truly	repentant	person	will	begin	at	once	to	live	a
changed	life,	and	we	can	call	that	changed	life	the	fruit	of
repentance.	But	we	should	never	attempt	to	require	that	there	be	a
period	of	time	in	which	a	person	actually	lives	a	changed	life	before
we	give	assurance	of	forgiveness.	Repentance	is	something	that
occurs	in	the	heart	and	involves	the	whole	person	in	a	decision	to
turn	from	sin.
It	is	important	to	realize	that	mere	sorrow	for	one’s	actions,	or	even
deep	remorse	over	one’s	actions,	does	not	constitute	genuine
repentance	unless	it	is	accompanied	by	a	sincere	decision	to	forsake
sin	that	is	being	committed	against	God.	Paul	preached	about
“repentance	
to	God	
and	of	faith	in	our	Lord	Jesus	Christ”	(Acts
20:21).	He	says	that	he	rejoiced	over	the	Corinthians,	“not	because
you	were	grieved,	but	because	you	were	
grieved	into	repenting.	.	.	.
For	godly	grief	produces	a	repentance	that	leads	to	salvation	and
brings	no	regret,	but	worldly	grief	produces	death”	
(2	Cor.	7:9–10).
A	worldly	sort	of	grief	may	involve	great	sorrow	for	one’s	actions
and	probably	also	fear	of	punishment	but	no	genuine	renouncing	of
sin	or	commitment	to	forsake	it	in	one’s	life.	Hebrews	12:17	tells	us
that	Esau	wept	over	the	consequences	of	his	actions	but	did	not
truly	repent.	Moreover,	as	2	Corinthians	7:9–10	indicates,	even	true
godly	grief	is	just	one	factor	that	leads	to	genuine	repentance,	but
such	grief	is	not	itself	the	sincere	decision	of	the	heart	in	the
presence	of	God	that	makes	genuine	repentance.
Scripture	puts	repentance	and	faith	together	as	different	aspects	of
the	one	act	of	coming	to	Christ	for	salvation.	It	is	not	that	a	person
first	turns	from	sin	and	next	trusts	in	Christ,	or	first	trusts	in	Christ
and	then	turns	from	sin,	but	rather	that	both	occur	at	the	same	time.
When	we	turn	to	Christ	
for	
salvation	from	our	sins,	we	are
simultaneously	turning	
away	
from	the	sins	that	we	are	asking	Christ
to	save	us	from.	If	that	were	not	true	our	turning	to	Christ	for
salvation	from	sin	could	hardly	be	a	genuine	turning	to	him	or
trusting	in	him.
The	fact	that	repentance	and	faith	are	simply	two	different	sides	of
the	same	coin,	or	two	different	aspects	of	the	one	event	of
conversion,	may	be	seen	in	figure	35.1.
In	this	diagram,	the	person	who	genuinely	turns	to	Christ	for
salvation	must	at	the	same	time	release	the	sin	to	which	he	or	she
has	been	clinging	and	turn	away	from	that	sin	in	order	to	turn	to
Christ.	Thus,	neither	repentance	nor	faith	comes	first;	they	must
come	together.	John	Murray	speaks	of	“penitent	faith”	and
“believing	repentance.”
	
4
CONVERSION	IS	A	SIMPLE	ACTION	OF	TURNING	FROM	SIN	IN	REPENTANCE	AND
TURNING	TO	CHRIST	IN	FAITH
Figure	35.1
Therefore,	it	is	clearly	contrary	to	the	New	Testament	evidence	to
speak	about	the	possibility	of	having	true	saving	faith	without
having	any	repentance	for	sin.	It	is	also	contrary	to	the	New
Testament	to	speak	about	the	possibility	of	someone	accepting
Christ	“as	Savior”	but	not	“as	Lord,”	if	that	means	simply
depending	on	him	for	salvation	but	not	committing	oneself	to
forsake	sin	and	to	be	obedient	to	Christ	from	that	point	on.
Some	prominent	voices	within	evangelicalism	have	differed	with
this	point,	arguing	that	a	gospel	presentation	that	requires
repentance	
as	well	as	faith	is	really	preaching	salvation	by	works.
They	argue	that	the	view	advocated	in	this	chapter,	that	repentance
and	faith	must	go	together,	is	a	false	gospel	of	“lordship	salvation.”
They	would	say	that	saving	faith	
only	
involves	trusting	Christ	as
Savior,	and	that	submitting	to	him	as	Lord	is	an	optional	later	step
that	is	unnecessary	for	salvation.	For	many	who	teach	this	view,
saving	faith	only	requires	an	intellectual	agreement	with	the	facts	of
the	gospel.
	
5
When	Jesus	invites	sinners,	“Come	to	me,	all	who	labor	and	are
heavy	laden,	and	I	will	give	you	rest,”	he	immediately	adds,	“
Take
my	yoke	upon	you,	
and	
learn	from	me”	
(Matt.	11:28–29).	To	come
to	him	includes	taking	his	yoke	upon	us,	being	subject	to	his
direction	and	guidance,	learning	from	him	and	being	obedient	to
him.	If	we	are	unwilling	to	make	such	a	commitment,	then	we	have
not	truly	placed	our	trust	in	him.
When	Scripture	speaks	of	trusting	in	God	or	in	Christ,	it	frequently
connects	such	trust	with	genuine	repentance.	For	example,	Isaiah
gives	an	eloquent	testimony	that	is	typical	of	the	message	of	many
of	the	Old	Testament	prophets:
Seek	the	L
ORD
	while	he	may	be	found,
call	upon	him	while	he	is	near;
let	the	wicked	
forsake	his	way,
and	the	unrighteous	man	his	thoughts;
let	him	
return	to	the	L
ORD
,	
that	he	may	have	mercy	on	him,
and	to	our	God,	for	he	will	abundantly	pardon.	(Isa.	55:6–7)
Here	both	repentance	from	sin	and	coming	to	God	for	pardon	are	mentioned.
In	the	New	Testament,	Paul	summarizes	his	gospel	ministry	as	one	of
“testifying	both	to	Jews	and	to	Greeks	of	
repentance	
to	God	and	of	
faith	
in
our	Lord	Jesus	Christ”	(Acts	20:21).	The	author	of	Hebrews	includes	as	the
first	two	elements	in	a	list	of	elementary	doctrines	“
repentance	
from	dead
works”	and	“
faith	
toward	God”	(Heb.	6:1).
Of	course	sometimes	faith	alone	is	named	as	the	thing	necessary	for
coming	to	Christ	for	salvation	(see	John	3:16;	Acts	16:31;	Rom.
10:9;	Eph.	2:8–9,	et	al.).	These	are	familiar	passages	and	we
emphasize	them	often	when	explaining	the	gospel	to	others.	But
what	we	do	not	often	realize	is	the	fact	that	there	are	many	other
passages	where	
only	repentance	
is	named,	for	it	is	simply	assumed
that	true	repentance	will	also	involve	faith	in	Christ	for	forgiveness
of	sins.	The	New	Testament	authors	understood	so	well	that
genuine	repentance	and	genuine	faith	had	to	go	together	that	they
often	simply	mentioned	repentance	alone	with	the	understanding
that	faith	would	also	be	included,	because	turning	
from	
sins	in	a
genuine	way	is	impossible	apart	from	a	genuine	turning	
to	
God.
Therefore,	just	before	Jesus	ascended	into	heaven,	he	told	his
disciples,	“Thus	it	is	written,	that	the	Christ	should	suffer	and	on
the	third	day	rise	from	the	dead,	and	that	
repentance	
and
forgiveness	of	sins	should	be	preached	in	his	name	to	all	nations”
(Luke	24:46–47).	Saving	faith	is	implied	in	the	phrase	“forgiveness
of	sins,”	but	it	is	not	explicitly	named.
The	preaching	recorded	in	the	book	of	Acts	shows	the	same	pattern.
After	Peter’s	sermon	at	Pentecost,	the	crowd	asked,	“Brethren,	what
shall	we	do?”	Peter	replied,	“
Repent,	
and	be	baptized	every	one	of
you	in	the	name	of	Jesus	Christ	for	the	forgiveness	of	your	sins”
(Acts	2:37–38).
	
6
	
In	his	second	sermon	Peter	spoke	to	his	hearers	in
a	similar	way,	saying,	“
Repent	
therefore,	and	turn	again,	that	your
sins	may	be	blotted	out,	that	times	of	refreshing	may	come	from	the
presence	of	the	Lord”	(Acts	3:19).	Later,	when	the	apostles	were	on
trial	before	the	Sanhedrin,	Peter	spoke	of	Christ,	saying,	“God
exalted	him	at	his	right	hand	as	Leader	and	Savior,	to	give
repentance	
to	Israel	and	forgiveness	of	sins”	(Acts	5:31).	And	when
Paul	was	preaching	on	the	Areopagus	in	Athens	to	an	assembly	of
Greek	philosophers,	he	said,	“The	times	of	ignorance	God
overlooked,	but	now	
he	commands	all	men	everywhere	to	repent”
(Acts	17:30).	He	also	says	in	his	epistles,	“Do	you	not	know	that
God’s	kindness	is	meant	to	lead	you	to	repentance?”	(Rom.	2:4),
and	he	speaks	of	“a	
repentance	
that	leads	to	salvation”	(2	Cor.
7:10).
We	also	see	that	when	Jesus	encounters	people	personally	he
requires	them	to	turn	from	their	sin	before	they	come	to	follow	him.
Whether	it	be	speaking	to	the	rich	young	ruler	and	asking	that	he
give	up	his	possessions	(Luke	18:18–30),	coming	to	the	house	of
Zacchaeus	and	declaring	that	salvation	had	come	to	him	that	day
because	he	had	given	half	his	goods	to	the	poor	and	had	repaid
fourfold	anything	that	he	had	stolen	(Luke	19:1–10),	speaking	to
the	woman	at	the	well	and	asking	her	to	call	her	husband	(John
4:16),	or	speaking	to	Nicodemus	and	rebuking	his	rabbinic	unbelief
and	pride	in	his	own	knowledge	(John	3:1–21),	Jesus	consistently
puts	his	finger	on	the	area	of	sin	most	influential	in	that	person’s
life.	In	fact,	we	may	ask	whether	anyone	in	the	gospels	ever	came
to	sincere	faith	in	Christ	without	repenting	of	his	or	her	sins.
When	we	realize	that	genuine	saving	faith	must	be	accompanied	by
genuine	repentance	for	sin,	it	helps	us	to	understand	why	some
preaching	of	the	gospel	has	such	inadequate	results	today.	If	there	is
no	mention	of	the	need	for	repentance,	sometimes	the	gospel
message	becomes	only,	“Believe	in	Jesus	Christ	and	be	saved”
without	any	mention	of	repentance	at	all.
	
7
	
But	this	watered-down
version	of	the	gospel	does	not	ask	for	a	wholehearted	commitment
to	Christ—commitment	
to	
Christ,	if	genuine,	must	include	a
commitment	to	turn	
from	
sin.	Preaching	the	need	for	faith	without
repentance	is	preaching	only	half	of	the	gospel.	It	will	result	in
many	people	being	deceived,	thinking	that	they	have	heard	the
Christian	gospel	and	tried	it,	but	nothing	has	happened.	They	might
even	say	something	like,	“I	accepted	Christ	as	Savior	over	and	over
again	and	it	never	worked.”	Yet	they	never	really	did	receive	Christ
as	their	Savior,	for	he	comes	to	us	in	his	majesty	and	invites	us	to
receive	him	as	he	is—the	one	who	deserves	to	be,	and	demands	to
be,	absolute	Lord	of	our	lives	as	well.
Finally,	what	shall	we	say	about	the	common	practice	of	asking
people	to	
pray	
to	receive	Christ	as	their	personal	Savior	and	Lord?
Since	personal	faith	in	Christ	must	involve	an	actual	decision	of	the
will,	it	is	often	very	helpful	to	
express	
that	decision	in	spoken
words,	and	this	could	very	naturally	take	the	form	of	a	prayer	to
Christ	in	which	we	tell	him	of	our	sorrow	for	sin,	our	commitment
to	forsake	it,	and	our	decision	actually	to	put	our	trust	in	him.	Such
a	spoken	prayer	does	not	in	itself	save	us,	but	the	attitude	of	heart
that	it	represents	does	constitute	true	conversion,	and	the	decision
to	speak	that	prayer	can	often	be	the	point	at	which	a	person	truly
comes	to	faith	in	Christ.
C.	Both	Faith	and	Repentance	Continue	Throughout	Life
Although	we	have	been	considering	initial	faith	and	repentance	as
the	two	aspects	of	conversion	at	the	beginning	of	the	Christian	life,
it	is	important	to	realize	that	faith	and	repentance	are	not	confined
to	the	beginning	of	the	Christian	life.	They	are	rather	attitudes	of
heart	that	continue	throughout	our	lives	as	Christians.	Jesus	tells	his
disciples	to	pray	daily,	“And	forgive	us	our	sins	as	we	also	have
forgiven	those	who	sin	against	us”	(Matt.	6:12,	author’s
translation),	a	prayer	that,	if	genuine,	will	certainly	involve	daily
sorrow	for	sin	and	genuine	repentance.	And	the	risen	Christ	says	to
the	church	in	Laodicea,	“Those	whom	I	love,	I	reprove	and	chasten;
so	be	zealous	
and	repent”	
(Rev.	3:19;	cf.	2	Cor.	7:10).
With	regard	to	faith,	Paul	tells	us,	“So	faith,	hope,	love	abide,	these
three;	but	the	greatest	of	these	is	love”	(1	Cor.	13:13).	He	certainly
means	that	these	three	abide	throughout	the	course	of	this	life,	but
he	probably	also	means	that	they	abide	for	all	eternity:	if	faith	is
trusting	God	to	provide	all	our	needs,	then	this	attitude	will	never
cease,	not	even	in	the	age	to	come.	But	in	any	case,	the	point	is
clearly	made	that	faith	continues	throughout	this	life.	Paul	also
says,	“The	life	I	now	live	in	the	flesh	I	live	
by	faith	in	the	Son	of
God,	
who	loved	me	and	gave	himself	for	me”	(Gal.	2:20).
Therefore,	although	it	is	true	that	
initial	
saving	faith	and	
initial
repentance	occur	only	once	in	our	lives,	and	when	they	occur	they
constitute	true	conversion,	nonetheless,	the	heart	attitudes	of
repentance	and	faith	only	begin	at	conversion.	These	same	attitudes
should	continue	throughout	the	course	of	our	Christian	lives.	Each
day	there	should	be	heartfelt	repentance	for	sins	that	we	have
committed,	and	faith	in	Christ	to	provide	for	our	needs	and	to
empower	us	to	live	the	Christian	life.
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
Have	you	come	to	trust	in	Christ	personally,	or	are	you	still	at	the	point
of	intellectual	knowledge	and	emotional	approval	of	the	facts	of
salvation	without	having	personally	put	your	trust	in	Christ?	If	you	have
not	put	your	trust	in	Christ	yet,	what	do	you	think	it	is	that	is	making	you
hesitate?
2
.	
Did	this	chapter	help	you	think	of	faith	in	Christ	in	more	personal	terms?
If	so,	how	might	that	increase	your	own	level	of	faith?	Do	you	think	that
it	might	be	easier	for	young	children	than	for	adults	to	think	of	trust	in
Christ	as	trust	in	a	real	
person	
who	is	alive	today?	Why	or	why	not?
What	does	this	tell	you	about	the	way	Christian	parents	should	teach
their	children	about	Jesus?
3
.	
If	your	knowledge	about	God	has	increased	through	reading	this	book,
has	your	faith	in	God	increased	along	with	that	knowledge?	Why	or	why
not?	If	your	faith	has	not	increased	along	with	your	knowledge,	what	can
you	do	to	encourage	your	faith	to	grow	more	than	it	has?
4
.	
In	terms	of	human	relationships,	do	you	trust	a	person	more	when	you	do
not	know	that	person	very	well	or	after	you	have	come	to	know	him	or
her	quite	well	(assuming	that	the	person	is	essentially	a	trustworthy	and
reliable	person)?	What	does	that	fact	tell	you	about	how	your	trust	in
God	might	increase?	What	things	might	you	do	during	the	day	to	come
to	know	God	better,	and	to	come	to	know	Jesus	and	the	Holy	Spirit
better?
5
.	
Did	you	feel	a	sincere	sorrow	for	sin	when	you	first	came	to	Christ?	Can
you	describe	what	it	felt	like?	Did	it	lead	you	to	a	genuine	commitment
to	forsake	sin?	How	long	was	it	before	you	noticed	a	change	in	your
pattern	of	life?
6
.	
Have	you	ever	truly	repented	of	sin,	or	do	you	think	you	have	been
taught	a	watered-down	gospel	that	did	not	include	repentance?	Do	you
think	it	is	possible	for	someone	genuinely	to	trust	in	Christ	for
forgiveness	of	sins	without	also	sincerely	repenting	for	sins?	Do	you
think	that	genuine	repentance	usually	involves	only	a	sincere	feeling	of
sorrow	for	sin	in	general,	or	does	it	involve	genuine	sorrow	for	specific
sins,	and	turning	from	those	specific	sins?
7
.	
Have	faith	and	repentance	remained	a	continuing	part	of	your	Christian
life,	or	have	those	attitudes	of	heart	grown	somewhat	weak	in	your	life?
What	has	been	the	result	in	your	Christian	life?
SPECIAL	TERMS
faith
	
repentance
	
trust
	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the
bibliography	to	chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be
found	in	
Appendix	4
.)
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92			Litton,	288–300
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1847			Finney,	364–82
1875–76			Pope,	2:367–85
1940			Wiley,	2:357–78
1983			Carter,	1:496–99
3.			Baptist
1767			Gill,	2:131–41
1887			Boyce,	373–94
1907			Strong,	829–49
1917			Mullins,	368–85
1983–85			Erickson,	933–42
4.			Dispensational
1947			Chafer,	3:371–93
1949			Thiessen,	264–70
1986			Ryrie,	324–27
5.			Lutheran
1917–24			Pieper,	2:422–503
1934			Mueller,	319–66
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1559			Calvin,	1:340–67,	423–28	(2.6–7,	9;	3.2–5),
542–684
1724–58			Edwards,	2:578–96
1861			Heppe,	526–42
1871–73			Hodge,	3:41–113
1878			Dabney,	600–612,	651–60
1887–1921			Warfield,	
BTS,	
375–403;	
SSW,	
1:267–82;
SSW,	
2:655–59;	
BD,	
467–510
1889			Shedd,	2b:529–37
1937–66			Murray,	
CW,	
2:235–74;	
RAA,	
106–16
1938			Berkhof,	480–509
1962			Buswell,	2:175–86
67.			Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988–92			Williams,	2:28–31
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955			Ott,	252–54
2.			Roman	Catholic:	Post-Vatican	II
1980			McBrien,	1:31–46
Other	Works
Berkouwer,	G.	C.	
Faith	and	Justification.	
Trans.	by	Lewis	B.	Smedes.
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1954.
Boice,	James	Montgomery.	
Christ’s	Call	to	Discipleship.	
Chicago:
Moody,	1986.
Chantry,	Walter.	
Today’s	Gospel:	Authentic	or	Synthetic?	
Carlisle,	Pa.:
Banner	of	Truth,	1970.
Hodges,	Zane	C.	
Absolutely	Free!	A	Biblical	Reply	to	Lordship
Salvation.	
Dallas:	Redención	Viva,	and	Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1989.
_____.	
The	Gospel	Under	Siege:	A	Study	on	Faith	and	Works.	
Dallas:
Redención	Viva,	1981.
Hoekema,	Anthony	A.	
Saved	by	Grace.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	and
Exeter:	Paternoster,	1989,	pp.	113–51.
Kromminga,	C.	G.	“Repentance.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	936–37.
MacArthur,	John	F.,	Jr.	
The	Gospel	According	to	Jesus.	
Grand	Rapids:
Zondervan,	1988.
Machen,	J.	Gresham.	
What	Is	Faith?	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1925.
Morris,	Leon.	“Faith.”	In	
IBD.	
Vol.	1,	pp.	496–98.
Murray,	John.	“Faith	and	Repentance.”	In	
Redemption	Accomplished	and
Applied.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1955,	pp.	106–16.
_____.	“Repentance.”	In	
The	New	Bible	Dictionary.	
Ed.	by	J.	D.
Douglas.	London:	Tyndale	Press,	and	Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1962,
pp.	1083–84.
Packer,	J.	I.	“Evangelicals	and	the	Way	of	Salvation:	New	Challenges	to
the	Gospel–Universalism	and	Justification	by	Faith.”	In	
Evangelical
Affirmations.	
Ed.	by	Kenneth	S.	Kantzer	and	Carl	F.	H.	Henry.	Grand
Rapids:	Zondervan,	1990,	pp.	107–36.
_____.	
Evangelism	and	the	Sovereignty	of	God.	
London:	Inter-Varsity
Press,	1961.
_____.	“Faith.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	399–402.
Ryrie,	Charles	C.	
So	Great	Salvation:	What	It	Means	to	Believe	in	Jesus
Christ.	
Wheaton,	Ill.:	Scripture	Press,	1989.
Watson,	Thomas.	
The	Doctrine	of	Repentance.	
Carlisle,	Pa.:	Banner	of
Truth,	1987.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
John	3:16:	
For	God	so	loved	the	world	that	he	gave	his	only	Son,	that
whoever	believes	in	him	should	not	perish	but	have	eternal	life.
HYMN
“Just	As	I	Am”
Just	as	I	am,	without	one	plea
But	that	thy	blood	was	shed	for	me,
And	that	thou	bidd’st	me	come	to	thee,
O	Lamb	of	God,	I	come,	I	come.
Just	as	I	am,	and	waiting	not
To	rid	my	soul	of	one	dark	blot,
To	thee,	whose	blood	can	cleanse	each	spot,
O	Lamb	of	God,	I	come,	I	come.
Just	as	I	am,	though	tossed	about
With	many	a	conflict,	many	a	doubt,
Fightings	and	fears	within,	without,
O	Lamb	of	God,	I	come,	I	come.
Just	as	I	am,	poor,	wretched,	blind;
Sight,	riches,	healing	of	the	mind,
Yea,	all	I	need,	in	thee	to	find,
O	Lamb	of	God,	I	come,	I	come.
Just	as	I	am!	Thou	wilt	receive,
Wilt	welcome,	pardon,	cleanse,	relieve;
Because	thy	promise	I	believe,
O	Lamb	of	God,	I	come,	I	come.
Just	as	I	am!	Thy	love	unknown
Has	broken	ev’ry	barrier	down;
Now,	to	be	thine,	yea,	thine	alone,
O	Lamb	of	God,	I	come,	I	come.
AUTHOR:	CHARLOTTE	ELLIOT,	1836
NOTES
1
Of	course,	the	words	
believe/belief	
and	
faith	
occur	frequently	in	the	Bible,	and	we	should	not	completely	give	up	using	them	in	a
proper	biblical	sense	just	because	our	culture	sometimes	gives	them	an	incorrect	sense.	My	point	is	simply	that	when	explaining
the	gospel	to	an	unbeliever,	the	word	
trust	
seems	to	be	most	likely	to	convey	the	biblical	sense	today.
2
Leon	Morris,	
The	Gospel	According	to	John,	
p.	336,	with	reference	to	the	longer	discussion	by	C.	H.	Dodd,	
The	Interpretation	of
the	Fourth	Gospel	
(Cambridge:	Cambridge	University	Press,	1953),	pp.	179–86,	and	a	note	that	Dodd	finds	no	parallel	to	the	use
of	
pisteuō	
followed	by	the	preposition	
eis,	
to	refer	to	trust	in	a	person,	in	secular	Greek.	The	expression	rather	is	a	literal
translation	of	the	expression	“to	believe	in”	from	the	Hebrew	Old	Testament.
3
J.	I.	Packer,	
Evangelism	and	the	Sovereignty	of	God,	
p.	104.
4
John	Murray,	
Redemption	Accomplished	and	Applied,	
p.	113.
5
The	source	of	this	view	of	the	gospel	is	apparently	Lewis	Sperry	Chafer,	especially	in	his	
Systematic	Theology,	
vol.	3,	where	he
says,	“The	New	Testament	does	not	impose	repentance	upon	the	unsaved	as	a	condition	of	salvation”	(p.	376).	Chafer	recognizes
that	many	verses	call	upon	people	to	repent,	but	he	simply	defines	repentance	away	as	a	“change	of	mind”	that	does	not	include
sorrow	for	sin	or	turning	from	sin	(pp.	372–75).	Thus	he	can	say,	“Repentance,	which	is	a	change	of	mind,	is	included	in
believing”	(p.	375).	He	argues	that	“the	added	demand	that	the	unsaved	must	dedicate	themselves	to	do	God’s	will	in	their	daily
life,	as	well	as	to	believe	upon	Christ”	is	a	“confusing	intrusion	into	the	doctrine	that	salvation	is	conditioned	alone	upon
believing”	(p.	384).	Chafer	provides	a	basis	for	the	view	that	people	must	first	accept	Christ	as	Savior,	and	later	as	Lord,	when	he
says	that	the	preacher	has	the	obligation	“of	preaching	the	Lordship	of	Christ	to	Christians	exclusively,	and	the	Saviorhood	of
Christ	to	those	who	are	unsaved”	(p.	387).	The	most	vocal	contemporary	proponent	of	this	view	has	been	Dallas	Seminary
professor	Zane	C.	Hodges:	see	his	book	
The	Gospel	Under	Siege	
(Dallas:	Redención	Viva,	1981).
But	not	all	at	Dallas	Seminary	or	all	within	Dispensational	theology	would	hold	this	view.	A	controversy	over	this	point	erupted	in
American	evangelicalism	when	John	MacArthur,	himself	a	Dispensationalist,	published	
The	Gospel	According	to	Jesus	
(Grand
Rapids:	Zondervan,	1988,	rev.	ed.	1994).	This	excellent	book	(with	enthusiastic	forewords	by	J.	I.	Packer	and	James	Montgomery
Boice)	strongly	criticized	the	views	of	writers	like	Chafer	and	Hodges	on	evangelism	and	the	nature	of	saving	faith.	MacArthur
argued	very	convincingly	from	many	New	Testament	passages	that	one	cannot	truly	accept	Christ	as	Savior	without	also	accepting
him	as	Lord,	or,	in	other	words,	that	there	can	be	no	true	saving	faith	without	genuine	repentance	as	well.	He	said	that	any	other
view	preaches	a	cheap	gospel	that	offers	unconverted	people	false	security,	telling	them	they	are	saved	simply	because	they	agreed
that	the	facts	of	the	gospel	were	true	or	prayed	a	prayer,	but	they	had	no	true	repentance	and	no	real	change	of	life.	MacArthur
argued	that	such	unbiblical	evangelism	has	never	been	the	teaching	of	the	church	through	history,	and	that	the	weakened	gospel
heard	so	often	today	has	resulted	in	a	whole	generation	of	professing	Christians	whose	lives	are	no	different	from	the	surrounding
culture	and	who	are	really	not	saved	at	all.	Hodges	quickly	responded	to	MacArthur	with	another	book,	
Absolutely	Free!	A
Biblical	Reply	to	Lordship	Salvation	
(Dallas:	Redención	Viva,	and	Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1989).
As	I	have	argued	in	this	chapter,	it	seems	to	me	clear	that	MacArthur	is	certainly	right	to	maintain	that	true	saving	faith	in	New
Testament	terms	is	more	than	mere	intellectual	assent	to	facts;	it	must	include	a	heartfelt	coming	to	Christ	in	personal	dependence
on	him	for	salvation,	combined	with	a	heartfelt	repentance	from	sin.	It	is	misleading	to	brand	this	teaching	“Lordship	salvation”	as
if	it	were	some	new	doctrine,	or	as	if	there	were	any	other	kind	of	salvation—MacArthur	is	teaching	what	has	been	the	historic
position	of	Christian	orthodoxy	on	this	matter,	as	he	demonstrates	in	an	appendix	to	his	book	(pp.	221–37).	This	position	is	not
salvation	by	works,	but	simply	states	the	gospel	of	
free	
grace,	and	salvation	by	grace	through	faith	in	all	its	biblical	fullness.	The
change	of	life	that	will	result	from	genuine	conversion	does	not	save	us,	but	it	will	certainly	result	if	our	faith	is	genuine,	for	“faith
by	itself,	if	it	has	no	works,	is	dead”	(James	2:17).
The	Sandemanians	were	a	small	group	of	evangelical	churches	who	taught	a	view	similar	to	Zane	Hodges	in	England	and	the
United	States	from	1725	until	they	died	out	around	1900;	see	R.	E.	D.	Clark,	“Sandemanians,”	in	
NIDCC,	
p.	877.
6
See	
chapter	49
,	on	the	question	of	whether	baptism	is	necessary	for	salvation.
7
It	is	true	that	Paul	tells	the	Philippian	jailer	in	Acts	16:31,	“Believe	in	the	Lord	Jesus,	and	you	will	be	saved,	you	and	your
household.”	However,	even	that	sentence	includes	an	acknowledgment	that	Jesus	is	“Lord,”	and,	moreover,	the	next	sentence
makes	it	clear	that	Paul	said	much	more	to	the	man	than	this	brief	sentence,	for	we	read,	“And	they	spoke	the	word	of	the	Lord	to
him	and	to	all	that	were	in	his	house”	(Acts	16:32).
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	36
Justification	(Right	Legal	Standing	Before
God)
How	and	when	do	we	gain	right	legal	standing	before	God?
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
In	the	previous	chapters	we	talked	about	the	gospel	call	(in	which
God	calls	us	to	trust	in	Christ	for	salvation),	regeneration	(in	which
God	imparts	new	spiritual	life	to	us),	and	conversion	(in	which	we
respond	to	the	gospel	call	in	repentance	for	sin	and	faith	in	Christ
for	salvation).	But	
what	about	the	guilt	of	our	sin?	
The	gospel	call
invited	us	to	trust	in	Christ	for	forgiveness	of	sins.	Regeneration
made	it	possible	for	us	to	respond	to	that	invitation.	In	conversion
we	did	respond,	trusting	in	Christ	for	forgiveness	of	sins.	Now	the
next	step	in	the	process	of	applying	redemption	to	us	is	that	God
must	respond	to	our	faith	and	do	what	he	promised,	that	is,	actually
declare	our	sins	to	be	forgiven.	This	must	be	a	
legal	declaration
concerning	our	relationship	to	God’s	laws,	stating	that	we	are
completely	forgiven	and	no	longer	liable	to	punishment.
A	right	understanding	of	justification	is	absolutely	crucial	to	the
whole	Christian	faith.	Once	Martin	Luther	realized	the	truth	of
justification	by	faith	alone,	he	became	a	Christian	and	overflowed
with	the	new-found	joy	of	the	gospel.	The	primary	issue	in	the
Protestant	Reformation	was	a	dispute	with	the	Roman	Catholic
Church	over	justification.	If	we	are	to	safeguard	the	truth	of	the
gospel	for	future	generations,	we	must	understand	the	truth	of
justification.	Even	today,	a	true	view	of	justification	is	the	dividing
line	between	the	biblical	gospel	of	salvation	by	faith	alone	and	all
false	gospels	of	salvation	based	on	good	works.
When	Paul	gives	an	overview	of	the	process	by	which	God	applies
salvation	to	us,	he	mentions	justification	explicitly:	“Those	whom
he	predestined	he	also	called;	and	those	whom	he	called	he	also
justified;	
and	those	whom	he	justified	he	also	glorified”	(Rom.
8:30).	As	we	explained	in	a	previous	chapter,	the	word	
called	
here
refers	to	the	effective	calling	of	the	gospel,	which	includes
regeneration	and	brings	forth	the	response	of	repentance	and	faith
(or	conversion)	on	our	part.	After	effective	calling	and	the	response
that	it	initiates	on	our	part,	the	next	step	in	the	application	of
redemption	is	“justification.”	Here	Paul	mentions	that	this	is
something	that	God	himself	does:	“Those	whom	he	called	
he	also
justified.”
Moreover,	Paul	quite	clearly	teaches	that	this	justification	comes
after	
our	faith	and	
as	God’s	response	to	
our	faith.	He	says	that	God
“justifies	him	who	
has	faith	
in	Jesus”	(Rom.	3:26),	and	that	“a	man
is	justified	
by	faith	
apart	from	works	of	law”	(Rom.	3:28).	He	says,
“Since	we	are	justified	
by	faith,	
we	have	peace	with	God	through
our	Lord	Jesus	Christ”	(Rom.	5:1).	Moreover,	“a	man	is	not
justified	by	works	of	the	law	but	
through	faith	
in	Jesus	Christ”	(Gal.
2:16).
Just	what	is	justification?	We	may	define	it	as	follows:	
Justification
is	an	instantaneous	legal	act	of	God	in	which	he	(1)	thinks	of	our
sins	as	forgiven	and	Christ’s	righteousness	as	belonging	to	us,	and
(2)	declares	us	to	be	righteous	in	his	sight.
In	explaining	the	elements	of	this	definition,	we	will	look	first	at
the	second	half	of	it,	the	aspect	of	justification	in	which	God
“declares	us	to	be	righteous	in	his	sight.”	The	reason	for	treating
these	items	in	reverse	order	is	that	the	emphasis	of	the	New
Testament	in	the	use	of	the	word	
justification	
and	related	terms	is
on	the	second	half	of	the	definition,	the	legal	declaration	by	God.
But	there	are	also	passages	that	show	that	this	declaration	is	based
on	the	fact	that	God	first	thinks	of	righteousness	as	belonging	to	us.
So	both	aspects	must	be	treated,	even	though	the	New	Testament
terms	for	justification	focus	on	the	legal	declaration	by	God.
A.	Justification	Includes	a	Legal	Declaration	By	God
The	use	of	the	word	
justify	
in	the	Bible	indicates	that	justification	is
a	legal	declaration	by	God.	The	verb	
justify	
in	the	New	Testament
(Gk.	
dikaioō
)	has	a	range	of	meanings,	but	a	very	common	sense	is
“to	declare	righteous.”	For	example,	we	read,	“When	they	heard
this	all	the	people	and	the	tax	collectors	
justified	
God,	having	been
baptized	with	the	baptism	of	John”	(Luke	7:29).	Of	course	the
people	and	the	tax	collectors	did	not	
make	
God	to	be	righteous—
that	would	be	impossible	for	anyone	to	do.	Rather	they	
declared
God	to	be	righteous.	This	is	also	the	sense	of	the	term	in	passages
where	the	New	Testament	talks	about	us	being	declared	righteous
by	God	(Rom.	3:20,	26,	28;	5:1;	8:30;	10:4,	10;	Gal.	2:16;	3:24).
This	sense	is	particularly	evident,	for	example,	in	Romans	4:5:
“And	to	one	who	does	not	work	but	trusts	him	who	
justifies	the
ungodly,	
his	faith	is	reckoned	as	righteousness.”	Here	Paul	cannot
mean	that	God	“makes	the	ungodly	to	be	righteous”	(by	changing
them	internally	and	making	them	morally	perfect),	for	then	they
would	have	merit	or	works	of	their	own	to	depend	on.	Rather,	he
means	that	God	declares	the	ungodly	to	be	righteous	in	his	sight,
not	on	the	basis	of	their	good	works,	but	in	response	to	their	faith.
The	idea	that	justification	is	a	legal	declaration	is	quite	evident	also
when	justification	is	contrasted	with	condemnation.	Paul	says,
“Who	shall	bring	any	charge	against	God’s	elect?	It	is	God	who
justifies;	
who	is	to	condemn?”	(Rom.	8:33–34).	To	“condemn”
someone	is	to	declare	that	person	guilty.	The	opposite	of
condemnation	is	justification,	which,	in	this	context,	must	mean	“to
declare	someone	not	guilty.”	This	is	also	evident	from	the	fact	that
God’s	act	of	justifying	is	given	as	Paul’s	answer	to	the	possibility	of
someone	bringing	an	accusation	or	“charge”	against	God’s	people:
such	a	declaration	of	guilt	cannot	stand	in	the	face	of	God’s
declaration	of	righteousness.
Some	Old	Testament	examples	of	the	word	
justify	
(Gk.	
dikaioō	
in
the	Septuagint,	when	translating	the	hiphil	of	
tsādak,	
“to	justify”)
add	support	to	this	understanding.	For	example,	we	read	of	judges
who	“
justify	the	righteous	
and	condemn	the	wicked”	(Deut.	25:1
NASB).	Now	in	this	case	“justify”	must	mean	“declare	to	be
righteous	or	not	guilty,”	just	as	“condemn”	means	“declare	to	be
guilty.”	It	would	make	no	sense	to	say	that	“justify”	here	means	“to
make	someone	to	be	good	internally,”	for	judges	simply	do	not	and
cannot	make	people	to	be	good	on	the	inside.	Nor	does	a	judge’s	act
of	condemning	the	wicked	make	that	person	to	be	evil	on	the
inside;	it	simply	declares	that	the	person	is	guilty	with	respect	to	the
particular	crime	that	has	been	brought	before	the	court	(cf.	Ex.
23:7;	1	Kings	8:32;	2	Chron.	6:23).	Similarly,	Job	refuses	to	say
that	his	comforters	were	right	in	what	they	said:	“Far	be	it	from	me
that	I	should	
declare	you	right”	
(Job	27:5	NASB,	using	the	same
Hebrew	and	Greek	terms	for	“justify”).	The	same	idea	is	found	in
Proverbs:	“He	who	
justifies	
the	wicked	and	he	who	condemns	the
righteous	are	both	alike	an	abomination	to	the	L
ORD
”	(Prov.	17:15).
Here	the	idea	of	legal	declaration	is	especially	strong.	Certainly	it
would	not	be	an	abomination	to	the	Lord	if	“justify”	meant	“to
make	
someone	good	or	righteous	inside.”	In	that	case,	to	“justify
the	wicked”	would	be	a	very	good	thing	in	God’s	sight.	But	if
“justify”	means	“declare	to	be	righteous,”	then	it	is	perfectly	clear
why	“he	who	justifies	the	wicked”	is	“an	abomination	to	the	L
ORD
.”
Similarly,	Isaiah	condemns	those	“who	
justify	
the	wicked	for	a
bribe”	(Isa.	5:23	NASB);	again,	“justify”	must	mean	“declare	to	be
righteous”	(here	used	in	the	context	of	a	legal	declaration).
In	this	sense	of	“
declare	
to	be	righteous”	or	“
declare	
to	be	not
guilty”	Paul	frequently	uses	the	word	to	speak	of	God’s	justification
of	us,	his	declaration	that	we,	though	guilty	sinners,	are	nonetheless
righteous	in	his	sight.	It	is	important	to	emphasize	that	this	legal
declaration	in	itself	does	not	change	our	internal	nature	or	character
at	all.	In	this	sense	of	“justify,”	God	issues	a	legal	declaration	about
us.	This	is	why	theologians	have	also	said	that	justification	is
forensic,	
where	the	word	
forensic	
means	“having	to	do	with	legal
proceedings.”
John	Murray	makes	an	important	distinction	between	regeneration
and	justification:
Regeneration	is	an	act	of	God	in	us;	justification	is	a	judgment	of	God
with	respect	to	us.	The	distinction	is	like	that	of	the	distinction	between
the	act	of	a	surgeon	and	the	act	of	a	judge.	The	surgeon,	when	he
removes	an	inward	cancer,	does	something	in	us.	That	is	not	what	a
judge	does—he	gives	a	verdict	regarding	our	judicial	status.	If	we	are
innocent	he	declares	accordingly.
The	purity	of	the	gospel	is	bound	up	with	the	recognition	of	this
distinction.	If	justification	is	confused	with	regeneration	or
sanctification,	then	the	door	is	opened	for	the	perversion	of	the	gospel
at	its	center.	Justification	is	still	the	article	of	the	standing	or	falling	of
the	Church.
	
1
B.	God	Declares	Us	to	Be	Just	in	His	Sight
In	God’s	legal	declaration	of	justification,	he	specifically	declares
that	we	are	just	
in	his	sight.	
This	declaration	involves	two	aspects.
First,	it	means	that	he	declares	that	we	have	no	penalty	to	pay	for
sin,	including	past,	present,	and	future	sins.	After	a	long	discussion
of	justification	by	faith	alone	(Rom.	4:1–5:21),	and	a	parenthetical
discussion	on	remaining	sin	in	the	Christian	life,	Paul	returns	to	his
main	argument	in	the	book	of	Romans	and	tells	what	is	true	of
those	who	have	been	justified	by	faith:	“There	is	therefore	now	
no
condemnation	
for	those	who	are	in	Christ	Jesus”	(Rom.	8:1).	In	this
sense	those	who	are	justified	have	no	penalty	to	pay	for	sin.	This
means	that	we	are	not	subject	to	any	charge	of	guilt	or
condemnation:	“Who	shall	bring	any	charge	against	God’s	elect?	It
is	God	who	
justifies;	
who	is	to	condemn?”	(Rom.	8:33–34).
The	idea	of	full	forgiveness	of	sins	is	prominent	when	Paul
discusses	justification	by	faith	alone	in	Romans	4.	Paul	quotes
David	as	pronouncing	a	blessing	on	one	“to	whom	God	reckons
righteousness	apart	from	works.”	He	then	recalls	how	David	said,
“Blessed	are	those	
whose	iniquities	are	forgiven,	
and	whose	sins	are
covered;	blessed	is	the	man	against	whom	the	Lord	will	not	reckon
his	sin”	(Rom.	4:6–8).	This	justification	therefore	clearly	involves
the	forgiveness	of	sins.	David	spoke	similarly	in	Psalm	103:12,	“As
far	as	the	east	is	from	the	west,	so	far	does	he	remove	our
transgressions	from	us”	(cf.	v.	
3).
But	if	God	merely	declared	us	to	be	
forgiven	from	our	past	sins,
that	would	not	solve	our	problems	entirely,	for	it	would	only	make
us	morally	neutral	before	God.	We	would	be	in	the	state	that	Adam
was	in	before	he	had	done	anything	right	or	wrong	in	God’s	sight—
he	was	not	guilty	before	God,	but	neither	had	he	earned	a	record	of
righteousness	before	God.	This	first	aspect	of	justification,	in	which
God	declares	that	our	sins	are	forgiven,	may	be	represented	as	in
figure	36.1,	in	which	the	minus	signs	represent	sins	on	our	account
that	are	completely	forgiven	in	justification.

FORGIVENESS	OF	PAST	SINS	IS	ONE	PART	OF	JUSTIFICATION	
Figure	36.1
However,	such	a	movement	is	not	enough	to	earn	us	favor	with
God.	We	must	rather	move	from	a	point	of	moral	neutrality	to	a
point	of	having	positive	righteousness	before	God,	the
righteousness	of	a	life	of	perfect	obedience	to	him.	Our	need	may
therefore	be	represented	as	in	figure	36.2,	in	which	the	plus	signs
indicate	a	record	of	righteousness	before	God.
IMPUTATION	OF	CHRIST’S	RIGHTEOUSNESS	TO	US	IS	THE	OTHER	PART	OF
JUSTIFICATION
Figure	36.2
Therefore	the	second	aspect	of	justification	is	that	God	must	declare
us	not	to	be	merely	
neutral	
in	his	sight	but	actually	to	be	
righteous
in	his	sight.	In	fact,	he	must	declare	us	to	have	the	merits	of	perfect
righteousness	before	him.	The	Old	Testament	sometimes	spoke	of
God	as	giving	such	righteousness	to	his	people	even	though	they
had	not	earned	it	themselves.	Isaiah	says,	“He	has	clothed	me	with
the	garments	of	salvation,	
he	has	covered	me	with	the	robe	of
righteousness”	
(Isa.	61:10).	But	Paul	speaks	more	specifically
about	this	in	the	New	Testament.	As	a	solution	to	our	need	for
righteousness,	Paul	tells	us	that	“the	righteousness	of	God	has	been
manifested	apart	from	law,	although	the	law	and	the	prophets	bear
witness	to	it,	
the	righteousness	of	God	through	faith	in	Jesus	Christ
for	all	who	believe”	(Rom.	3:21–22).	He	says,	“Abraham	believed
God,	and	
it	was	reckoned	to	him	as	righteousness”	
(Rom.	4:3;
quoting	Gen.	15:6).	This	came	about	through	the	obedience	of
Christ,	for	Paul	says	at	the	end	of	this	extensive	discussion	of
justification	by	faith	that	“by	one	man’s	obedience	many	will	be
made	righteous”	
(Rom.	5:19).	The	second	aspect	of	God’s
declaration	in	justification,	then,	is	that	we	have	the	merits	of
perfect	righteousness	before	him.
But	questions	arise:	How	can	God	declare	that	we	have	no	penalty
to	pay	for	sin,	and	that	we	have	the	merits	of	perfect	righteousness,
if	we	are	in	fact	guilty	sinners?	How	can	God	declare	us	to	be	not
guilty	but	righteous	when	in	fact	
we	are	unrighteous?	
These
questions	lead	to	our	next	point.
C.	God	Can	Declare	Us	to	Be	Just	Because	He	Imputes	
Christ’s	Righteousness	to	Us
When	we	say	that	God	
imputes	
Christ’s	righteousness	to	us	it
means	that	God	
thinks	of	
Christ’s	righteousness	as	belonging	to	us,
or	regards	it	
as	belonging	to	
us.	He	“reckons”	it	to	our	account.	We
read,	“Abraham	believed	God,	and	
it	was	reckoned	to	him	as
righteousness”	
(Rom.	4:3,	quoting	Gen.	15:6).	Paul	explains,	“To
one	who	does	not	work	but	trusts	him	who	justifies	the	ungodly,	his
faith	
is	reckoned	
as	righteousness.	So	also	David	pronounces	a
blessing	upon	the	man	to	whom	
God	reckons	righteousness	
apart
from	works”	(Rom.	4:6).	In	this	way,	Christ’s	righteousness	became
ours.	Paul	says	that	we	are	those	who	received	“the	free	gift	of
righteousness”	(Rom.	5:17).
This	is	the	third	time	in	studying	the	doctrines	of	Scripture	that	we
have	encountered	the	idea	of	
imputing	
guilt	or	righteousness	to
someone	else.	First,	when	Adam	sinned,	his	guilt	was	imputed	to
us;	God	the	Father	viewed	it	as	belonging	to	us,	and	therefore	it	did.
2
	
Second,	when	Christ	suffered	and	died	for	our	sins,	our	sin	was
imputed	
to	Christ;	God	thought	of	it	as	belonging	to	him,	and	he
paid	the	penalty	for	it.
	
3
	
Now	in	the	doctrine	of	justification	we	see
imputation	for	the	third	time.	Christ’s	righteousness	is	
imputed	
to
us,	and	therefore	God	
thinks	of	it	
as	belonging	to	us.	It	is	not	our
own	righteousness	but	Christ’s	righteousness	that	is	freely	given	to
us.	So	Paul	can	say	that	God	made	Christ	to	be	“our	wisdom,	
our
righteousness	
and	sanctification	and	redemption”	(1	Cor.	1:30).
And	Paul	says	that	his	goal	is	to	be	found	in	Christ,	“not	having	a
righteousness	of	my	own,	based	on	law,	but	that	which	is	through
faith	in	Christ,	
the	righteousness	from	God	
that	depends	on	faith”
(Phil.	3:9).	Paul	knows	that	the	righteousness	he	has	before	God	is
not	anything	of	his	own	doing;	it	is	the	righteousness	of	God	that
comes	through	Jesus	Christ	(cf.	Rom.	3:21–22).
	
4
It	is	essential	to	the	heart	of	the	gospel	to	insist	that	God	declares	us
to	be	just	or	righteous	not	on	the	basis	of	our	actual	condition	of
righteousness	or	holiness,	but	rather	on	the	basis	of	Christ’s	perfect
righteousness,	which	he	thinks	of	as	belonging	to	us.	This	was	the
heart	of	the	difference	between	Protestantism	and	Roman
Catholicism	at	the	Reformation.	Protestantism	since	the	time	of
Martin	Luther	has	insisted	that	justification	does	
not	
change	us
internally	and	it	is	
not	
a	declaration	based	in	any	way	on	any
goodness	that	we	have	in	ourselves.	If	justification	changed	us
internally	and	then	declared	us	to	be	righteous	based	on	how	good
we	actually	were,	then	(1)	we	could	never	be	declared	perfectly
righteous	in	this	life,	because	there	is	always	sin	that	remains	in	our
lives,	and	(2)	there	would	be	no	provision	for	forgiveness	of	past
sins	(committed	before	we	were	changed	internally),	and	therefore
we	could	never	have	confidence	that	we	are	right	before	God.	We
would	lose	the	confidence	that	Paul	has	when	he	says,	“Therefore,
since	we	are	justified	by	faith,	
we	have	peace	with	God	through	our
Lord	Jesus	Christ”	(Rom.	5:1).
	
5
	
If	we	thought	of	justification	as
based	on	something	that	we	are	internally	we	would	never	have	the
confidence	to	say	with	Paul,	“There	is	therefore	now	
no
condemnation	
for	those	who	are	in	Christ	Jesus”	(Rom.	8:1).	We
would	have	no	assurance	of	forgiveness	with	God,	no	confidence	to
draw	near	to	him	“with	a	true	heart	in	full	assurance	of	faith”	(Heb.
10:22).	We	would	not	be	able	to	speak	of	“the	
free	gift	
of
righteousness”	(Rom.	5:17),	or	say	that	“the	
free	gift	
of	God	is
eternal	life	in	Christ	Jesus	our	Lord”	(Rom.	6:23).
The	traditional	Roman	Catholic	understanding	of	justification	is
very	different	from	this.	The	Roman	Catholic	Church	understands
justification	as	something	that	changes	us	internally	and	makes	us
more	holy	within.	“According	to	the	teaching	of	the	Council	of
Trent,	justification	is	‘sanctifying	and	renewing	of	the	inner	man.’	”
6
	
In	order	for	justification	to	begin,	one	must	first	be	baptized	and
then	(as	an	adult)	continue	to	have	faith:	“The	instrumental	cause
.	.	.	of	the	first	justification	is	the	Sacrament	of	Baptism.”
	
7
	
But	“the
justification	of	an	adult	is	not	possible	without	Faith.	.	.	.	As	far	as
the	content	of	justifying	faith	is	concerned,	the	so-called	fiducial
faith	does	not	suffice.	What	is	demanded	is	theological	or	dogmatic
faith	(confessional	faith)	which	consists	in	the	firm	acceptance	of
the	Divine	truths	of	Revelation.”
	
8
	
Thus	baptism	is	the	means	by
which	justification	is	first	obtained,	and	then	faith	is	necessary	if	an
adult	is	to	receive	justification	or	to	continue	in	the	state	of
justification.	Ott	explains	that	“the	so-called	fiduciary	faith”	is	not
enough—meaning	that	the	faith	that	simply	trusts	in	Christ	for
forgiveness	of	sins	is	not	enough.	It	must	be	a	faith	that	accepts	the
content	of	the	teaching	of	the	Catholic	Church,	“theological	or
dogmatic	faith.”
The	Roman	Catholic	view	may	be	said	to	understand	justification
as	based	not	on	
imputed	
righteousness	but	on	
infused	
righteousness
—that	is,	righteousness	that	God	actually	
puts	into	us	
and	that
changes	us	internally	and	in	terms	of	our	actual	moral	character.
Then	he	gives	us	varying	measures	of	justification	according	to	the
measure	of	righteousness	that	has	been	infused	or	placed	within	us.
The	result	of	this	Roman	Catholic	view	of	justification	is	that
people	cannot	be	sure	if	they	are	in	a	“state	of	grace”	where	they
experience	God’s	complete	acceptance	and	favor.	The	Catholic
Church	teaches	that	people	cannot	be	certain	that	they	are	in	this
“state	of	grace”	unless	they	receive	a	special	revelation	from	God	to
this	effect.	The	Council	of	Trent	declared,
If	one	considers	his	own	weakness	and	his	defective	disposition,	he
may	well	be	fearful	and	anxious	as	to	the	state	of	grace,	as	nobody
knows	with	the	certainty	of	faith,	which	permits	of	no	error,	that	he
has	achieved	the	grace	of	God.
To	this	statement	Ott	adds	the	comment,
The	reason	for	the	uncertainty	of	the	state	of	grace	lies	in	this,	that
without	a	special	revelation	nobody	can	with	certainty	of	faith	know
whether	or	not	he	has	fulfilled	all	the	conditions	which	are	necessary
for	the	achieving	of	justification.	The	impossibility	of	the	certainty	of
faith,	however,	by	no	means	excludes	a	high	moral	certainty
supported	by	the	testimony	of	conscience.
	
9
Moreover,	since	the	Roman	Catholic	Church	views	justification	as
including	something	that	God	does	within	us,	it	follows	that	people
can	experience	varying	degrees	of	justification.	We	read,	“The
degree	of	justifying	grace	is	not	identical	in	all	the	just”	and	“grace
can	be	increased	by	good	works.”
	
10
	
Ott	explains	how	this	Catholic
view	differs	from	that	of	the	Protestant	Reformers:	“As	the
Reformers	wrongly	regarded	justification	as	a	merely	external
imputation	of	Christ’s	justice,	they	were	obliged	also	to	hold	that
justification	is	identical	in	all	men.	The	Council	of	Trent,	however,
declared	that	the	measure	of	the	grace	of	justification	received
varies	in	the	individual	person	who	is	justified,	according	to	the
measure	of	God’s	free	distribution	and	to	the	disposition	and	the	co-
operation	of	the	recipient	himself.”
	
11
Finally,	the	logical	consequence	of	this	view	of	justification	is	that
our	eternal	life	with	God	is	not	based	on	God’s	grace	alone,	but
partially	on	our	merit	as	well:	“For	the	justified	eternal	life	is	both	a
gift	of	grace	promised	by	God	and	a	reward	for	his	own	good	works
and	merits.	.	.	.	Salutary	works	are,	at	the	same	time,	gifts	of	God
and	meritorious	acts	of	man.”
	
12
To	support	this	view	of	justification	from	Scripture,	Ott	repeatedly
mingles	passages	from	the	New	Testament	that	talk	not	only	of
justification,	but	also	of	many	other	aspects	of	the	Christian	life,
such	as	regeneration	(which	God	works	in	us),	sanctification	(which
is	a	process	in	the	Christian	life	and	which	of	course	does	vary	from
individual	to	individual),	the	possession	and	use	of	various	spiritual
gifts	in	the	Christian	life	(which	differ	from	individual	to
individual)	and	eternal	reward	(which	also	varies	according	to	the
individual).	To	classify	all	of	these	passages	under	the	category	of
“justification”	only	blurs	the	issue	and	ultimately	makes
forgiveness	of	sins	and	right	legal	standing	before	God	a	matter	of
our	own	merit,	not	a	free	gift	from	God.	Therefore,	this	blurring	of
distinctions	ultimately	destroys	the	heart	of	the	gospel.
That	is	what	Martin	Luther	so	clearly	saw	and	that	is	what	gave
such	motivation	to	the	Reformation.	When	the	good	news	of	the
gospel	truly	became	the	good	news	of	totally	free	salvation	in	Jesus
Christ,	then	it	spread	like	wildfire	throughout	the	civilized	world.
But	this	was	simply	a	recovery	of	the	original	gospel,	which
declares,	“The	wages	of	sin	is	death,	but	the	
free	gift	of	God	
is
eternal	life	in	Christ	Jesus	our	Lord”	(Rom.	6:23),	and	insists	that
“There	is	therefore	now	
no	condemnation	
for	those	who	are	in
Christ	Jesus”	(Rom.	8:1).
D.	Justification	Comes	to	Us	Entirely	by	God’s	Grace,	
Not	on	Account	of	Any	Merit	in	Ourselves
After	Paul	explains	in	Romans	1:18–3:20	that	no	one	will	ever	be
able	to	make	himself	righteous	before	God	(“For	no	human	being
will	be	justified	in	his	sight	by	works	of	the	law,”	Rom.	3:20),	then
Paul	goes	on	to	explain	that	“since	all	have	sinned	and	fall	short	of
the	glory	of	God,	they	are	justified	
by	his	grace	as	a	gift,	
through
the	redemption	which	is	in	Christ	Jesus”	(Rom.	3:23–24).	God’s
“grace”	means	his	“unmerited	favor.”	Because	we	are	completely
unable	to	earn	favor	with	God,	the	only	way	we	could	be	declared
righteous	is	if	God	freely	provides	salvation	for	us	by	grace,	totally
apart	from	our	work.	Paul	explains,	“For	
by	grace	
you	have	been
saved	through	faith;	and	this	is	not	your	own	doing,	it	is	the	gift	of
God—not	because	of	works,	lest	any	man	should	boast”	(Eph.	2:8–
9;	cf.	Titus	3:7).	Grace	is	clearly	put	in	contrast	to	works	or	merit	as
the	reason	why	God	is	willing	to	justify	us.	God	did	not	have	any
obligation	to	impute	our	sin	to	Christ	or	to	impute	Christ’s
righteousness	to	us;	it	was	only	because	of	his	unmerited	favor	that
he	did	this.
In	distinction	from	the	Roman	Catholic	teaching	that	we	are
justified	by	God’s	grace	
plus	some	merit	of	our	own,	
as	we	make
ourselves	fit	to	receive	the	grace	of	justification	and	as	we	grow	in
this	state	of	grace	though	our	good	works,	Luther	and	the	other
Reformers	insisted	that	justification	comes	by	grace	
alone,	
not	by
grace	plus	some	merit	on	our	part.
E.	God	Justifies	Us	Through	Our	Faith	in	Christ
When	we	began	this	chapter	we	noted	that	justification	comes	after
saving	faith.	Paul	makes	this	sequence	clear	when	he	says,	“We
have	believed	in	Christ	Jesus,	
in	order	to	be	justified	
by	faith	in
Christ,	and	not	by	works	of	the	law,	because	by	works	of	the	law
shall	no	one	be	justified”	(Gal.	2:16).	Here	Paul	indicates	that	faith
comes	first	and	it	is	for	the	purpose	of	being	justified.	He	also	says
that	Christ	is	“to	be	received	by	faith”	and	that	God	“justifies	him
who	has	
faith	
in	Jesus”	(Rom.	3:25,	26).	The	entire	chapter	of
Romans	4	is	a	defense	of	the	fact	that	we	are	justified	by	faith,	not
by	works,	just	as	Abraham	and	David	themselves	were.	Paul	says,
“We	are	justified	
by	faith”	
(Rom.	5:1).
Scripture	never	says	that	we	are	justified	because	of	the	inherent
goodness	of	our	faith,	as	if	our	faith	has	merit	before	God.	It	never
allows	us	to	think	that	our	faith	in	itself	earns	favor	with	God.
Rather,	Scripture	says	that	we	are	justified	“by	means	of”	our	faith,
understanding	faith	to	be	the	instrument	through	which	justification
is	given	to	us,	but	not	at	all	an	activity	that	earns	us	merit	or	favor
with	God.	Rather,	we	are	justified	solely	because	of	the	merits	of
Christ’s	work	(Rom.	5:17–19).
	
13
But	we	may	ask	why	God	chose	
faith	
to	be	the	attitude	of	heart	by
which	we	would	obtain	justification.	Why	could	God	not	have
decided	to	give	justification	to	all	those	who	sincerely	show	love?
Or	who	show	joy?	Or	contentment?	Or	humility?	Or	wisdom?	Why
did	God	choose	
faith	
as	the	means	by	which	we	receive
justification?
It	is	apparently	because	
faith	
is	the	one	attitude	of	heart	that	is	the
exact	opposite	of	depending	on	ourselves.	When	we	come	to	Christ
in	faith	we	essentially	say,	“I	give	up!	I	will	not	depend	on	myself
or	my	own	good	works	any	longer.	I	know	that	I	can	never	make
myself	righteous	before	God.	Therefore,	Jesus,	I	trust	you	and
depend	on	you	completely	to	give	me	a	righteous	standing	before
God.”	In	this	way,	faith	is	the	exact	opposite	of	trusting	in
ourselves,	and	therefore	it	is	the	attitude	that	perfectly	fits	salvation
that	depends	not	at	all	on	our	own	merit	but	entirely	on	God’s	free
gift	of	grace.	Paul	explains	this	when	he	says,	“That	is	why	it
depends	
on	faith,	in	order	that	the	promise	may	rest	on	grace	
and
be	guaranteed	to	all	his	descendants”	(Rom.	4:16).	This	is	why	the
Reformers	from	Martin	Luther	on	were	so	firm	in	their	insistence
that	justification	comes	not	through	faith	plus	some	merit	or	good
work	on	our	part,	but	only	
through	faith	alone.	
“For	by	grace	you
have	been	saved	
through	faith;	
and	this
	
14
	
is	not	your	own	doing,	it
is	the	gift	of	God—not	because	of	works,	lest	any	man	should
boast”	(Eph.	2:8–9).	Paul	repeatedly	says	that	“no	human	being	will
be	justified	in	his	sight	by	works	of	law”	(Rom.	3:20);	the	same
idea	is	repeated	in	Galatians	2:16;	3:11;	5:4.
But	is	this	consistent	with	the	epistle	of	James?	What	can	James
mean	when	he	says,	“You	see	that	a	man	is	
justified	by	works	
and
not	by	faith	alone”	(James	2:24).	Here	we	must	realize	that	James	is
using	the	word	
justified	
in	a	different	sense	from	the	way	Paul	uses
it.	In	the	beginning	of	this	chapter	we	noted	that	the	word	
justify	
has
a	range	of	meanings,	and	that	one	significant	sense	was	“declare	to
be	righteous,”	but	we	should	also	notice	that	the	Greek	word
dikaioō	
can	also	mean	“demonstrate	or	show	to	be	righteous.”	For
instance,	Jesus	said	to	the	Pharisees,	“You	are	those	who	
justify
yourselves	before	men,	but	God	knows	your	hearts”	(Luke	16:15).
The	point	here	was	not	that	the	Pharisees	went	around	making	legal
declarations	that	they	were	“not	guilty”	before	God,	but	rather	that
they	were	always	attempting	to	
show	others	
that	they	were
righteous	by	their	outward	deeds.	Jesus	knew	that	the	truth	was
otherwise:	“But	God	knows	your	hearts”	(Luke	16:15).	Similarly,
the	lawyer	who	put	Jesus	to	a	test	by	asking	what	he	should	do	to
inherit	eternal	life	answered	Jesus’	first	question	well.	But	when
Jesus	told	him,	“Do	this,	and	you	will	live,”	he	was	not	satisfied.
Luke	tells	us,	“But	he,	
desiring	to	justify	himself,	
said	to	Jesus,
‘And	who	is	my	neighbor?’	”	(Luke	10:28–29).	Now	he	was	not
desiring	to	give	a	legal	pronouncement	about	himself	that	he	was
not	guilty	in	God’s	sight;	rather,	he	was	desiring	to	“show	himself
righteous”	before	others	who	were	listening.	Other	examples	of	the
word	
justify	
meaning	“show	to	be	righteous”	can	be	found	in
Matthew	11:19;	Luke	7:35;	Romans	3:4.
Our	interpretation	of	James	2	depends	not	only	on	the	fact	that
“show	to	be	righteous”	is	an	acceptable	sense	for	the	word	
justified,
but	also	on	the	consideration	that	this	sense	fits	well	in	the	context
of	James	2.	When	James	says,	“Was	not	Abraham	our	father
justified	by	works,	
when	he	offered	his	son	Isaac	upon	the	altar?”
(v.	
21)	he	is	referring	to	something	later	in	Abraham’s	life,	the	story
of	the	sacrifice	of	Isaac,	which	occurred	in	Genesis	22.	This	is	long
after	the	time	recorded	in	Genesis	15:6	where	Abraham	believed
God	“and	he	reckoned	it	to	him	as	righteousness.”	Yet	this	earlier
incident	at	the	beginning	of	Abraham’s	covenantal	relationship	with
God	is	the	one	that	Paul	quotes	and	repeatedly	refers	to	in	Romans
4.	Paul	is	talking	about	the	time	God	justified	Abraham	once	for	all,
reckoning	righteousness	to	him	as	a	result	of	his	faith	in	God.	But
James	is	talking	about	something	far	later,	after	Abraham	had
waited	many	years	for	the	birth	of	Isaac,	and	then	after	Isaac	had
grown	old	enough	to	carry	wood	up	the	mountain	for	a	sacrifice.	At
that	point	Abraham	was	“shown	to	be	righteous”	by	his	works,	and
in	that	sense	James	says	that	Abraham	was	“justified	by	works,
when	he	offered	his	son	Isaac	upon	the	altar”	(James	2:21).
	
15
The	larger	concern	of	James	in	this	section	also	fits	this
understanding.	James	is	concerned	to	show	that	mere	intellectual
agreement	with	the	gospel	is	a	“faith”	that	is	really	no	faith	at	all.
He	is	concerned	to	argue	against	those	who	say	they	have	faith	but
show	no	change	in	their	lives.	He	says,	“Show	me	your	faith	apart
from	your	works,	and	I	by	my	works	will	show	you	my	faith”
(James	2:18).	“For	as	the	body	apart	from	the	spirit	is	dead,	so	faith
apart	from	works	is	dead”	(James	2:26).	James	is	simply	saying
here	that	“faith”	that	has	no	results	or	“works”	is	not	real	faith	at
all;	it	is	“dead”	faith.	He	is	not	denying	Paul’s	clear	teaching	that
justification	(in	the	sense	of	a	declaration	of	right	legal	standing
before	God)	is	by	faith	alone	apart	from	works	of	the	law;	he	is
simply	affirming	a	different	truth,	namely,	that	“justification”	in	the
sense	of	an	outward	showing	that	one	is	righteous	only	occurs	as
we	see	evidence	in	a	person’s	life.	To	paraphrase,	James	is	saying
that	a	person	is	“
shown	to	be	righteous	
by	his	works,	and	not	by	his
faith	alone.”	This	is	something	with	which	Paul	also	would
certainly	agree	(2	Cor.	13:5;	Gal.	5:19–24).
The	practical	implications	of	the	doctrine	of	justification	by	faith
alone	are	very	significant.	First,	this	doctrine	enables	us	to	offer
genuine	
hope	
to	unbelievers	who	know	they	could	never	make
themselves	righteous	before	God:	if	salvation	is	a	free	gift	to	be
received	through	faith	
alone,	
then	anyone	who	hears	the	gospel
may	hope	that	eternal	life	is	freely	offered	and	may	be	obtained.
Second,	this	doctrine	gives	us	confidence	that	God	will	never	make
us	pay	the	penalty	for	sins	that	have	been	forgiven	on	Christ’s
merits.	Of	course,	we	may	continue	to	suffer	the	ordinary
consequences	
of	sin	(an	alcoholic	who	quits	drinking	may	still	have
physical	weakness	for	the	rest	of	his	or	her	life,	and	a	thief	who	is
justified	may	still	have	to	go	to	jail	to	pay	the	penalty	for	his	or	her
crime).	Moreover,	God	may	
discipline	
us	if	we	continue	to	act	in
ways	that	are	disobedient	to	him	(see	Heb.	12:5–11),	doing	this	out
of	love	and	for	our	own	good.	But	God	can	never	nor	will	ever	
take
vengeance	
on	us	for	past	sins	or	
make	us	pay	the	penalty	
that	is	due
for	them	or	
punish	us	out	of	wrath	
and	
for	the	purpose	of	doing	us
harm.	
“There	is	therefore	now	no	condemnation	for	those	that	are
in	Christ	Jesus”	(Rom	8:1).	This	fact	should	give	us	a	great	sense	of
joy	and	confidence	before	God	that	we	are	accepted	by	him	and	that
we	stand	before	him	as	“not	guilty”	and	“righteous”	forever.
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
Are	you	confident	that	God	has	declared	you	“not	guilty”	forever	in	his
sight?	Do	you	know	when	that	happened	in	your	own	life?	Did	you	do	or
think	anything	that	resulted	in	God’s	justifying	of	you?	Did	you	do
anything	to	deserve	justification?	If	you	are	not	sure	that	God	has
justified	you	fully	and	for	all	time,	is	there	something	you	need	to	do
before	that	will	happen?	What	would	persuade	you	that	God	has
certainly	justified	you?
2
.	
If	you	think	of	yourself	standing	before	God	on	the	day	of	judgment,
would	you	think	that	it	is	enough	simply	to	have	your	sins	all	forgiven,
or	would	you	also	feel	a	need	to	have	the	righteousness	of	Christ
reckoned	to	your	account?
3
.	
Do	you	think	the	difference	between	the	Roman	Catholic	and	Protestant
understanding	of	justification	is	an	important	one?	Describe	how	you
would	feel	about	your	relationship	to	God	if	you	held	the	Roman
Catholic	view	of	justification.	Do	modern	Roman	Catholics	you	know
seem	to	hold	to	this	traditional	Roman	Catholic	view	of	justification,	or
do	they	have	another	view?
4
.	
Have	you	ever	wondered	if	God	is	still	continuing	to	punish	you	from
time	to	time	for	sins	you	have	done	in	the	past,	even	long	ago?	How	does
the	doctrine	of	justification	help	you	deal	with	those	feelings?
SPECIAL	TERMS
forensic
	
	
	
	
infused	righteousness
impute
	
	
	
	
justification
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the
bibliography	to	chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be
found	in	
Appendix	4
.)
Sections	In	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92			Litton,	265–320
1930			Thomas,	184–98,	210–20
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1847			Finney,	382–402
1875–76			Pope,	2:358–62,	402–51
1892–94			Miley,	2:309–26
1940			Wiley,	2:379–401
1960			Purkiser,	287–92
3.			Baptist
1767			Gill,	1:291–300;	2:68–93
1887			Boyce,	394–404
1907			Strong,	846–68
1917			Mullins,	389–401
1983–85			Erickson,	954–61
4.			Dispensational
1947			Chafer,	3:238–46
1949			Thiessen,	271–76
1986			Ryrie,	298–300
5.			Lutheran
1917–24			Pieper,	2:3–54,	503–57
1934			Mueller,	242–54,	367–83
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1559			Calvin,	I,	725–833	(3.11–18)
1861			Heppe,	543–64
1871–73			Hodge,	3:114–212
1878			Dabney,	618–50
1887–1921			Warfield,	
BTS,	
262–68
1889			Shedd,	2b:538–52
1937–66			Murray,	
CW,	
2:202–22;	
RAA,	
117–31
1938			Berkhof,	510–26
1962			Buswell,	2:187–96
7.			Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988–92			Williams,	2:61–82
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955			Ott,	250–69
Other	Works
Berkouwer,	G.	C.	
Faith	and	Justification.	
Trans.	by	Lewis	B.	Smedes.
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1954.
Carson,	D.	A.,	ed.	
Right	With	God:	Justification	in	the	Bible	and	the
World.	
Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1992.
Hoekema,	Anthony	A.	“Justification.”	In	
Saved	by	Grace.	
Grand	Rapids:
Eerdmans,	and	Exeter:	Paternoster,	1989,	pp.	152–91.
McGrath,	Alister	E.	
Iustitia	Dei:	A	History	of	the	Christian	Doctrine	of
Justification.	
2	vols.	Cambridge:	Cambridge	University	Press,	1986.
_____.	
Justification	by	Faith:	An	Introduction.	
Grand	Rapids:
Zondervan,	1988.
Morris,	Leon.	
The	Apostolic	Preaching	of	the	Cross.	
3d	ed.	Grand
Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1965,	pp.	251–98.
Murray,	John.	“Justification.”	In	
Redemption	Accomplished	and	Applied.
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1955,	pp.	117–31.
Packer,	J.	I.	et	al.	
Here	We	Stand:	Justification	by	Faith	Today.	
London:
Hodder	and	Stoughton,	1986.
_____.	“Justification.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	593–97.
Pink,	A.	W.	
The	Doctrines	of	Election	and	Justification.	
Grand	Rapids:
Baker,	1974.
Wright,	N.	T.	“Justification.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	359–61.
Ziesler,	J.A.	
The	Meaning	of	Righteous	in	Paul.	
Cambridge:	Cambridge
University,	1972.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
Romans	3:27–28:	
Then	what	becomes	of	our	boasting?	It	is	excluded.	On
what	principle?	On	the	principle	of	works?	No,	but	on	the	principle	of	faith.
For	we	hold	that	a	man	is	justified	by	faith	apart	from	works	of	law.
HYMN
“Jesus,	Thy	Blood	and	Righteousness”
Jesus,	thy	blood	and	righteousness
My	beauty	are,	my	glorious	dress;
’Midst	flaming	worlds,	in	these	arrayed,
With	joy	shall	I	lift	up	my	head.
Bold	shall	I	stand	in	thy	great	day;
For	who	aught	to	my	charge	shall	lay?
Fully	absolved	through	these	I	am
From	sin	and	fear,	from	guilt	and	shame.
When	from	the	dust	of	death	I	rise
To	claim	my	mansion	in	the	skies,
Ev’n	then	this	shall	be	all	my	plea,
Jesus	hath	lived,	hath	died,	for	me.
Jesus,	be	endless	praise	to	thee,
Whose	boundless	mercy	hath	for	me—
For	me	a	full	atonement	made,
An	everlasting	ransom	paid.
O	let	the	dead	now	hear	thy	voice;
Now	bid	thy	banished	ones	rejoice;
Their	beauty	this,	their	glorious	dress,
Jesus,	thy	blood	and	righteousness.
AUTHOR:	COUNT	NIKOLAUS	LUDWIG	VON	ZINZENDORF,	1739	
(TRANS.	JOHN	WESLEY,	1740,	ALT.)
NOTES
1
John	Murray,	
Redemption	Accomplished	and	Applied,	
p.	121.
2
See	
chapter	24
,	on	the	idea	of	Adam’s	sin	being	imputed	to	us.
3
See	
chapter	27
,	on	the	fact	that	our	guilt	was	imputed	to	Christ.	Paul	says,	“God	made	him	who	had	no	sin	to	be	sin	for	us,	so
that	in	him	we	might	become	the	righteousness	of	God”	(2	Cor.	5:21	NIV).
4
One	sometimes	hears	the	popular	explanation	that	
justified	
means	“just-as-if-I’d-never-sinned.”	The	definition	is	a	clever	play	on
words	and	contains	an	element	of	truth	(for	the	justified	person,	like	the	person	who	has	never	sinned,	has	no	penalty	to	pay	for
sin).	But	the	definition	is	misleading	in	two	other	ways	because	(1)	it	mentions	nothing	about	the	fact	that	Christ’s	righteousness	is
reckoned	to	my	account	when	I	am	justified;	to	do	this	it	would	have	to	say	also	“just-as-if-I’d-lived-a-life-of-perfect-
righteousness.”	(2)	But	more	significantly,	it	cannot	adequately	represent	the	fact	that	I	will	
never	
be	in	a	state	that	is	“just-as-if-
I’d-never-sinned,”	because	I	will	
always	
be	conscious	of	the	fact	that	I	
have	
sinned	and	that	I	am	not	an	innocent	person	but	a
guilty	person	who	has	been	forgiven.	This	is	very	different	from	“just	as	if	I	had	never	sinned”!	Moreover,	it	is	different	from	“just
as	if	I	had	lived	a	life	of	perfect	righteousness,”	because	I	will	forever	know	that	I	
have	not	
lived	a	life	of	perfect	righteousness,
but	that	Christ’s	righteousness	is	given	to	me	by	God’s	grace.
Therefore	both	in	the	forgiveness	of	sins	and	in	the	imputation	of	Christ’s	righteousness,	my	situation	is	far	different	from	what	it
would	be	if	I	had	never	sinned	and	had	lived	a	perfectly	righteous	life.	For	all	eternity	I	will	remember	that	I	am	a	forgiven	
sinner,
and	that	my	righteousness	is	not	based	on	my	own	merit,	but	on	the	grace	of	God	in	the	saving	work	of	Jesus	Christ.	None	of	that
rich	teaching	at	the	heart	of	the	gospel	will	be	understood	by	those	who	are	encouraged	to	go	through	their	lives	thinking
“justified”	means	“just-as-if-I’d-never-sinned.”
5
The	aorist	passive	participle	
dikaōthentes	
placed	before	the	main	verb	conveys	the	sense	of	a	completed	event	prior	to	the	present
tense	main	verb,	“We	have	peace,”	giving	the	sense,	“Since	we	
have	been	justified	
by	faith,	we	have	peace.”
6
Ludwig	Ott,	
Fundamentals	of	Catholic	Dogma,	
p.	257;	also	quoted	with	approval	on	p.	
250.	It	should	be	noted	that	Ott
represents	more	traditional,	pre-Vatican	II	Roman	Catholicism,	and	that	many	contemporary	Roman	Catholics	have	sought	an
understanding	of	justification	that	is	closer	to	a	Protestant	view.
7
Ibid.,	p.	
251.
8
Ibid.,	pp.	252–53.
9
Ibid.,	pp.	261–62.
10
Ibid.,	p.	
262.
11
Ibid.,	p.	
262.
12
Ibid.,	p.	
264.
13
One	example	from	ordinary	life	might	be	seen	in	receiving	a	paycheck	for	work	that	has	been	done	for	an	employer.	The
“means”	or	“instrument”	that	I	use	to	get	this	paycheck	is	the	act	of	reaching	out	my	hand	and	taking	an	envelope	from	my	mail
box,	then	opening	it	and	pulling	out	the	check.	But	my	employer	does	not	pay	me	for	doing	any	of	those	actions.	The	pay	is
entirely	for	work	that	I	did	prior	to	that.	Actually	taking	the	check	did	not	earn	me	one	cent	of	the	money	I	received—it	was
simply	the	
instrument	
or	
means	
I	used	to	take	the	payment	into	my	possession.	Similarly,	faith	is	the	
instrument	
we	use	to	receive
justification	from	God,	but	it	in	itself	gains	us	no	merit	with	God.	(The	analogy	is	helpful	but	it	is	not	perfect,	because	I	had
previously	worked	to	earn	the	money,	whereas	justification	is	based	on	the	work	of	Christ.	The	analogy	would	be	closer	if	I	had
worked	and	then	died,	and	my	wife	then	picked	up	the	paycheck	from	my	mail	box.)
14
The	word	translated	“this”	is	the	neuter	pronoun	
touto,	
which	refers	not	to	“faith”	or	to	“grace”	specifically	in	the	previous
clause	(for	they	are	both	feminine	nouns	in	Greek,	and	would	require	feminine	pronouns),	but	to	the	entire	idea	expressed	in	the
preceding	phrase,	the	idea	that	you	have	been	saved	by	grace	through	faith.
15
James	does	quote	the	text,	“Abraham	believed	God,	and	it	was	reckoned	to	him	as	righteousness”	in	v.	
23,	but	he	says	that
Scripture	“was	fulfilled”	when	Abraham	offered	his	son,	apparently	meaning	that	the	earlier	declaration	of	righteousness	was	then
worked	out	and	its	results	were	seen	to	be	true	in	Abraham’s	life	when	he	offered	Isaac	on	the	altar.
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	37
Adoption	
(Membership	in	God’s	Family)
What	are	benefits	of	being	a	member	of	God’s	family?
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
In	regeneration	God	gives	us	new	spiritual	life	within.	In
justification	God	gives	us	right	legal	standing	before	him.	But	in
adoption	God	makes	us	members	of	his	family.	Therefore,	the
biblical	teaching	on	adoption	focuses	much	more	on	the	personal
relationships	that	salvation	gives	us	with	God	and	with	his	people.
A.	Scriptural	Evidence	for	Adoption
We	may	define	adoption	as	follows:	
Adoption	is	an	act	of	God
whereby	he	makes	us	members	of	his	family.
John	mentions	adoption	at	the	beginning	of	his	gospel,	where	he
says,	“But	to	all	who	received	him,	who	believed	in	his	name,	he
gave	power	
to	become	children	of	God”	
(John	1:12).	By	contrast,
those	who	do	not	believe	in	Christ	are	not	children	of	God	or
adopted	into	his	family,	but	are	“children	of	wrath”	(Eph.	2:3)	and
“sons	of	disobedience”	(Eph.	2:2;	5:6).	Although	those	Jews	who
rejected	Christ	tried	to	claim	that	God	was	their	father	(John	8:41),
Jesus	told	them,	“If	God	were	your	Father,	you	would	love	me.	.	.	.
You	are	of	your	father	the	devil,	and	your	will	is	to	do	your	father’s
desires”	(John	8:42–44).
The	New	Testament	epistles	bear	repeated	testimony	to	the	fact	that
we	are	now	God’s	children	in	a	special	sense,	members	of	his
family.	Paul	says:
For	all	who	are	led	by	the	Spirit	of	God	are	
sons	of	God.	
For	you	did
not	receive	the	spirit	of	slavery	to	fall	back	into	fear,	but	you	have
received	the	
spirit	of	sonship.	
When	we	cry,	“Abba!	Father!”	it	is	the
Spirit	himself	bearing	witness	with	our	spirit	that	we	are	
children	of
God,	
and	if	children,	then	heirs,	heirs	of	God	and	fellow	heirs	with
Christ,	provided	we	suffer	with	him	in	order	that	we	may	also	be
glorified	with	him.	(Rom.	8:14–17)
But	if	we	are	God’s	children,	are	we	then	related	to	one	another	as
family	members?	Certainly	so.	In	fact,	this	adoption	into	God’s
family	makes	us	partakers	together	in	
one	family	
even	with	the
believing	Jews	of	the	Old	Testament,	for	Paul	says	that	we	are
Abraham’s	children	as	well:	“Not	all	are	children	of	Abraham
because	they	are	his	descendants;	but	‘Through	Isaac	shall	your
descendants	be	named.’	This	means	that	it	is	not	the	children	of	the
flesh	who	are	the	children	of	God,	but	the	children	of	the	promise
are	reckoned	as	descendants”	(Rom.	9:7–8).	He	further	explains	in
Galatians,	“Now	we,	brethren,	like	Isaac,	are	children	of	promise
.	.	.	we	are	not	children	of	the	slave	but	of	the	free	woman”	(Gal.
4:28,	31;	cf.	1	Peter	3:6,	where	Peter	sees	believing	women	as
daughters	of	Sarah	in	the	new	covenant).
Paul	explains	that	this	status	of	adoption	as	God’s	children	was	not
fully	realized	in	the	old	covenant.	He	says	that	“before	faith	came,
we	were	confined	under	the	law	.	.	.	the	law	was	our	custodian	until
Christ	came,	that	we	might	be	justified	by	faith.	But	now	that	faith
has	come,	we	are	no	longer	under	a	custodian;	for	
in	Christ	Jesus
you	are	all	sons	of	God,	through	faith”	
(Gal.	3:23–26).	This	is	not
to	say	that	the	Old	Testament	completely	omitted	talk	of	God	as	our
Father,	for	God	did	call	himself	the	Father	of	the	children	of	Israel
and	called	them	his	children	in	several	places	(Ps.	103:13;	Isa.
43:6–7;	Mal.	1:6;	2:10).	But	even	though	there	was	a	consciousness
of	God	as	Father	to	the	people	of	Israel,	the	full	benefits	and
privileges	of	membership	in	God’s	family,	and	the	full	realization
of	that	membership,	did	not	come	until	Christ	came	and	the	Spirit
of	the	Son	of	God	was	poured	into	our	hearts,	bearing	witness	with
our	spirit	that	we	were	God’s	children.
What	evidence	do	we	see	in	our	lives	that	we	are	God’s	children?
Paul	sees	clear	evidence	in	the	fact	that	the	Holy	Spirit	bears
witness	in	our	hearts	that	we	are	God’s	children:	“But	when	the
time	had	fully	come,	God	sent	forth	his	Son,	born	of	woman,	born
under	the	law,	to	redeem	those	who	were	under	the	law,	so	that	we
might	receive	
adoption	as	sons.	
And	because	
you	are	sons,	
God	has
sent	the	Spirit	of	his	Son	into	our	hearts,	crying,	‘Abba!	Father!’	So
through	God	you	are	no	longer	a	slave	
but	a	son,	
and	
if	a	son	then
an	heir”	
(Gal.	4:4–7).
John’s	first	epistle	places	much	emphasis	on	our	status	as	children
of	God:	“See	what	love	the	Father	has	given	us,	that	we	should	be
called	
children	of	God;	
and	so	we	are.	.	.	.	Beloved,	we	are	God’s
children	now”	(1	John	3:1–2;	John	frequently	calls	his	readers
“children”	or	“little	children”).
	
1
Although	Jesus	does	call	us	his	“brothers”	(Heb.	2:12	NIV)	and	he
is	therefore	in	one	sense	our	older	brother	in	God’s	family	(cf.	Heb.
2:14),	and	can	be	called	“the	firstborn	among	many	brethren”
(Rom.	8:29),	he	is	nevertheless	careful	to	make	a	clear	distinction
between	the	way	in	which	God	is	our	heavenly	Father	and	the	way
in	which	he	relates	to	God	the	Father.	He	says	to	Mary	Magdalene,
“I	am	ascending	
to	my	Father	and	your	Father,	
to	my	God	and	your
God”	(John	20:17),	thus	making	a	clear	distinction	between	the	far
greater	and	eternal	sense	in	which	God	is	his	Father,	and	the	sense
in	which	God	is	our	Father.
Although	the	New	Testament	says	that	we	are	
now	
God’s	children
(1	John	3:2),	we	should	also	note	that	there	is	another	sense	in
which	our	adoption	is	still	future	because	we	will	not	receive	the
full	benefits	and	privileges	of	adoption	until	Christ	returns	and	we
have	new	resurrection	bodies.	Paul	speaks	of	this	later,	fuller	sense
of	adoption	when	he	says,	“Not	only	the	creation,	but	we	ourselves,
who	have	the	first	fruits	of	the	Spirit,	groan	inwardly	as	we	wait	for
adoption	as	sons,	
the	redemption	of	our	bodies”	
(Rom.	8:23).	Here
Paul	sees	the	receiving	of	new	resurrection	bodies	as	the	fulfillment
of	our	privileges	of	adoption,	so	much	so	that	he	can	refer	to	it	as
our	“adoption	as	sons.”
B.	Adoption	Follows	Conversion	and	Is	an	Outcome	of	Saving	Faith
We	might	initially	think	that	we	would	become	God’s	children	by
regeneration,	since	the	imagery	of	being	“born	again”	in
regeneration	makes	us	think	of	children	being	born	into	a	human
family.	But	the	New	Testament	never	connects	adoption	with
regeneration:	indeed,	the	idea	of	
adoption	
is	opposite	to	the	idea	of
being	born	into	a	family!
Rather,	the	New	Testament	connects	adoption	with	saving	faith,	and
says	that	in	response	to	our	trusting	in	Christ,	God	has	adopted	us
into	his	family.	Paul	says,	“In	Christ	Jesus	you	are	all	
sons	of	God,
through	faith”	
(Gal.	3:23–26).	And	John	writes,	“But	to	all	who
received	him,	who	
believed	in	his	name,	
he	gave	power	
to	become
children	of	God”	
(John	1:12).
	
2
	
These	two	verses	make	it	clear	that
adoption	follows	conversion	and	is	God’s	response	to	our	faith.
One	objection	to	this	might	be	brought	from	Paul’s	statement,
“
Because	you	are	sons,	
God	has	sent	the	Spirit	of	his	Son	into	our
hearts,	crying,	‘Abba!	Father!’	”	(Gal.	4:6).	Someone	might
understand	this	verse	to	mean	that	first	God	adopted	us	as	sons	and
second	he	gave	us	the	Holy	Spirit	to	bring	regeneration	to	our
hearts.	But	a	few	verses	earlier	Paul	had	said	that	we	have	become
sons	of	God	“through	faith”	(Gal.	3:26).	Therefore	Paul’s	statement
in	Galatians	4:6	is	best	understood	not	to	refer	to	the	giving	of	the
Holy	Spirit	in	regeneration,	but	rather	to	an	additional	activity	of
the	Holy	Spirit	in	which	he	begins	to	bear	witness	with	our	spirit
and	to	assure	us	that	we	are	members	of	God’s	family.	This	work	of
the	Holy	Spirit	gives	us	
assurance	
of	our	adoption,	and	it	is	in	this
sense	that	Paul	says	that,	after	we	have	become	sons,	God	causes
his	Holy	Spirit	within	our	hearts	to	cry,	“Abba!	Father!”	(cf.	Rom
8:15–16).
C.	Adoption	Is	Distinct	From	Justification
Although	adoption	is	a	privilege	that	comes	to	us	at	the	time	we
become	Christians	(John	1:12;	Gal	3:26;	1	John	3:1–2),
nevertheless,	it	is	a	privilege	that	is	distinct	from	justification	and
distinct	from	regeneration.	In	regeneration	we	are	made	spiritually
alive,	able	to	relate	to	God	in	prayer	and	worship	and	able	to	hear
his	Word	with	receptive	hearts.	But	it	is	possible	that	God	could
have	creatures	who	are	spiritually	alive	and	yet	are	not	members	of
his	family	and	do	not	share	the	special	privileges	of	family
members—angels,	for	example,	apparently	fall	into	that	category.
	
3
Therefore,	it	would	have	been	possible	for	God	to	decide	to	give	us
regeneration	without	the	great	privileges	of	adoption	into	his
family.
Moreover,	God	could	have	given	us	justification	without	the
privileges	of	adoption	into	his	family,	for	he	could	have	forgiven
our	sins	and	given	us	right	legal	standing	before	him	without
making	us	his	children.	It	is	important	to	realize	this	because	it
helps	us	to	recognize	how	great	are	our	privileges	in	adoption.
Regeneration	has	to	do	with	our	spiritual	life	within.	Justification
has	to	do	with	our	standing	before	God’s	law.	But	adoption	has	to
do	with	our	
relationship	
with	God	as	our	Father,	and	in	adoption	we
are	given	many	of	the	greatest	blessings	that	we	will	know	for	all
eternity.	When	we	begin	to	realize	the	excellence	of	these	blessings,
and	when	we	appreciate	that	God	has	no	obligation	to	give	us	any
of	them,	then	we	will	be	able	to	exclaim	with	the	apostle	John,	“See
what	love	
the	Father	has	given	us,	that	we	should	be	called	children
of	God;	and	so	we	are”	(1	John	3:1).
D.	The	Privileges	of	Adoption
The	benefits	or	privileges	that	accompany	adoption	are	seen,	first,
in	the	way	God	relates	to	us,	and	then	also	in	the	way	we	relate	to
one	another	as	brothers	and	sisters	in	God’s	family.
One	of	the	greatest	privileges	of	our	adoption	is	being	able	to	speak
to	God	and	
relate	to	him	as	a	
good	and	loving	
Father.	
We	are	to
pray,	“Our	Father	who	art	in	heaven”	(Matt.	6:9),	and	we	are	to
realize	that	we	are	“no	longer	slaves,	but	sons”	(Gal.	4:7).
Therefore,	we	now	relate	to	God	not	as	a	slave	relates	to	a	slave
master,	but	as	a	child	relates	to	his	or	her	father.	In	fact,	God	gives
us	an	
internal	witness	from	the	Holy	Spirit	
that	causes	us
instinctively	to	call	God	our	Father.	“When	we	cry,	‘Abba!	Father!’
it	is	the	Spirit	himself	bearing	witness	with	our	spirit	that	we	are
children	of	God”	(Rom.	8:15–16).	This	relationship	to	God	as	our
Father	is	the	foundation	of	many	other	blessings	of	the	Christian
life,	and	it	becomes	the	primary	way	in	which	we	relate	to	God.
Certainly	it	is	true	that	God	is	our	Creator,	our	judge,	our	Lord	and
Master,	our	teacher,	our	provider	and	protector,	and	the	one	who	by
his	providential	care	sustains	our	existence.	But	the	role	that	is	most
intimate,	and	the	role	that	conveys	the	highest	privileges	of
fellowship	with	God	for	eternity,	is	his	role	as	our	heavenly	Father.
The	fact	that	God	relates	to	us	as	Father	shows	very	clearly	that	he
loves	us	
(1	John	3:1),	that	he	
understands	us	
(“As	a	father	has
compassion	on	his	children,	so	the	L
ORD
	has	compassion	on	those
who	fear	him;	for	he	knows	how	we	are	formed,	he	remembers	that
we	are	dust”	[Ps.	103:13–14	NIV]),	and	that	he	
takes	care	of	our
needs	
(“For	the	Gentiles	seek	all	these	things;	and	your	heavenly
Father	knows	that	you	need	them	all,”	Matt.	6:32).	Moreover,	in	his
role	as	our	Father,	God	
gives	us	many	good	gifts:	
“If	you	then,	who
are	evil,	know	how	to	give	good	gifts	to	your	children,	how	much
more	will	your	Father	who	is	in	heaven	give	good	things	to	those
who	ask	him!”	(Matt.	7:11).	He	especially	
gives	us	
the	gift	of	
the
Holy	Spirit	
to	comfort	us	and	to	empower	us	for	ministry	and	for
living	the	Christian	life	(Luke	11:13).
	
4
	
In	fact,	it	is	not	only	gifts	in
this	life	that	God	gives	to	us,	but	he	also	gives	us	a	great
inheritance	in	heaven,	
because	we	have	become	joint	heirs	with
Christ.	Paul	says,	“You	are	no	longer	a	slave,	but	a	son,	and	if	a	son
then	an	heir”	(Gal.	4:7);	we	are	in	fact	“heirs	of	God	and	fellow
heirs	with	Christ”	(Rom.	8:17).	As	heirs	we	have	the	rights	to	a
great	eternal	“inheritance	which	is	imperishable,	undefiled,	and
unfading,	kept	in	heaven	for	you”	(1	Peter	1:4).	All	the	great
privileges	and	blessings	of	heaven	are	laid	up	for	us	and	put	at	our
disposal	because	we	are	children	of	the	King,	members	of	the	royal
family,	princes	and	princesses	who	will	reign	with	Christ	over	the
new	heavens	and	new	earth	(Rev.	2:26–27;	3:21).	As	a	foretaste	of
this	great	privilege,	angels	are	even	now	sent	to	minister	to	us	and
serve	us	(Heb.	1:14).
It	is	in	the	context	of	this	relationship	with	God	as	our	heavenly
Father	that	we	are	to	understand	the	prayer	that	Jesus	told	his
disciples	to	pray	daily,	“
Our	Father	
who	art	in	heaven	.	.	.	
forgive
us	our	sins,	
as	we	also	have	forgiven	those	who	sin	against	us”
(Matt.	6:9–12,	author’s	translation).	This	daily	prayer	for
forgiveness	of	sins	is	not	a	prayer	that	God	would	give	us
justification	again	and	again	throughout	our	lives,	for	justification	is
a	one-time	event	that	occurs	immediately	after	we	trust	in	Christ
with	saving	faith.	Rather,	the	prayer	for	forgiveness	of	sins	each
day	is	a	prayer	that	God’s	fatherly	relationship	with	us,	which	has
been	disrupted	by	sin	that	displeased	him,	be	restored,	and	that	he
relate	to	us	once	again	as	a	Father	who	delights	in	his	children
whom	he	loves.	The	prayer,	“Forgive	us	our	sins,”	therefore,	is	one
in	which	we	are	relating	not	to	God	as	eternal	judge	of	the	universe,
but	to	God	as	a	Father.	It	is	a	prayer	in	which	we	wish	to	restore	the
open	fellowship	with	our	Father	that	has	been	broken	because	of	sin
(see	also	1	John	1:9;	3:19–22).
The	privilege	of	being	
led	by	the	Holy	Spirit	
is	also	a	benefit	of
adoption.	Paul	indicates	that	this	is	a	moral	benefit	whereby	the
Holy	Spirit	puts	in	us	desires	to	obey	God	and	live	according	to	his
will.	He	says,	“All	who	are	
led	by	the	Spirit	of	God	
are	
sons	of
God”	
(Rom.	8:14),	and	he	gives	this	as	the	
reason	
Christians
should	“put	to	death	the	deeds	of	the	body”	by	means	of	the	Holy
Spirit	working	within	them	(v.	
13;	note	“for”	at	the	beginning	of	v.
14).	He	sees	the	Holy	Spirit	as	leading	and	guiding	God’s	children
in	paths	of	obedience	to	God.
Another	privilege	of	adoption	into	God’s	family,	though	we	do	not
always	recognize	it	as	a	privilege,	is	the	fact	that	God	
disciplines	us
as	his	children.	“My	son,	do	not	regard	lightly	the	discipline	of	the
Lord,	nor	lose	courage	when	you	are	punished	by	him.	For	the	Lord
disciplines	him	whom	he	loves,	and	chastises	every	son	whom	he
receives”	(Heb.	12:5–6,	quoting	Prov.	3:11–12).	The	author	of
Hebrews	explains,	“God	is	treating	you	as	sons;	for	what	son	is
there	whom	his	father	does	not	discipline?	
.	.	.	he	disciplines	us	for
our	good,	that	we	may	share	his	holiness”	(Heb.	12:7,	10).	Just	as
earthly	children	grow	in	obedience	and	righteousness	when	they	are
disciplined	properly	by	their	earthly	fathers,	so	we	grow	in
righteousness	and	holiness	when	we	are	disciplined	by	our
heavenly	Father.
Related	to	the	fatherly	discipline	of	God	is	the	fact	that,	as	children
of	God	and	joint	heirs	with	Christ,	we	have	the	
privilege	of	sharing
both	in	his	sufferings	and	in	his	subsequent	glory.	
Just	as	it	was
“necessary	that	the	Christ	should	suffer	these	things	and	enter	into
his	glory”	(Luke	24:26),	so	God	gives	us	the	privilege	of	walking
the	same	path	that	Christ	walked,	enduring	sufferings	in	this	life
that	we	may	also	receive	great	glory	in	the	life	to	come:	“if
children,	then	heirs,	heirs	of	God	and	fellow	heirs	with	Christ,
provided	we	suffer	with	him	
in	order	that	we	may	also	be	
glorified
with	him”	
(Rom.	8:17).
In	addition	to	these	great	privileges	that	concern	our	relationship	to
God	and	fellowship	with	him,	we	also	have	privileges	of	adoption
that	affect	the	way	that	we	relate	to	each	other	and	affect	our	own
personal	conduct.	Because	we	are	God’s	children,	our	relationship
with	each	other	is	far	deeper	and	more	intimate	than	the
relationship	that	angels,	for	example,	have	to	one	another,	for	we
are	all	
members	of	one	family.	
Many	times	the	New	Testament
refers	to	Christians	as	“brothers”	and	“sisters”	in	Christ	(Rom.	1:13;
8:12;	1	Cor.	1:10;	6:8;	James	1:2;	Matt.	12:50;	Rom.	16:1;	1	Cor.
7:15;	Philem.	1:2;	James	2:15).	In	addition	to	this,	the	many	verses
in	which	entire	churches	are	referred	to	as	“brothers”	should	not	be
understood	to	refer	to	the	men	in	the	congregation	only,	but	are
rather	generic	references	to	the	whole	church,	and,	except	where	the
context	explicitly	indicates	otherwise,	should	be	taken	to	mean
“brothers	and	sisters	in	the	Lord.”	The	designation	“brother”	is	so
common	in	the	epistles	that	it	seems	to	be	the	predominant	way	in
which	the	New	Testament	authors	refer	to	the	other	Christians	to
whom	they	are	writing.	This	indicates	the	strong	consciousness	they
had	of	the	nature	of	the	church	as	the	family	of	God.	In	fact,	Paul
tells	Timothy	to	relate	to	the	church	at	Ephesus,	and	to	the
individuals	within	the	church,	as	he	would	relate	to	members	of	a
large	family:	“Do	not	rebuke	an	older	man	but	exhort	him	as	you
would	a	
father;	
treat	younger	men	like	
brothers,	
older	women	like
mothers,	
younger	women	like	
sisters,	
in	all	purity”	(1	Tim.	5:1–2).
5
This	concept	of	the	church	as	God’s	family	should	give	us	a	new
perspective	on	the	work	of	the	church;	it	is	“family	work,”	and	the
various	members	of	the	family	never	should	compete	with	each
other	or	hinder	one	another	in	their	efforts,	but	should	encourage
one	another	and	be	thankful	for	whatever	good	or	whatever
progress	comes	to	any	member	of	the	family,	for	all	are
contributing	to	the	good	of	the	family	and	the	honor	of	God	our
Father.	In	fact,	just	as	members	of	an	earthly	family	often	have
times	of	joy	and	fellowship	when	they	work	together	on	a	single
project,	so	our	times	of	working	together	in	building	up	the	church
ought	to	be	times	of	great	joy	and	fellowship	with	one	another.
Moreover,	just	as	members	of	an	earthly	family	honor	their	parents
and	fulfill	the	purpose	of	a	family	most	when	they	eagerly	welcome
any	brothers	or	sisters	who	are	newly	adopted	into	that	family,	so
we	ought	to	welcome	new	members	of	the	family	of	Christ	eagerly
and	with	love.
Another	aspect	of	our	membership	in	God’s	family	is	that	we,	as
God’s	children,	are	to	
imitate	our	Father	
in	heaven	in	all	our
conduct.	Paul	says,	“be	imitators	of	God,	as	beloved	children”
(Eph.	5:1).	Peter	echoes	this	theme	when	he	says,	“As	obedient
children,	do	not	be	conformed	to	the	passions	of	your	former
ignorance,	but	as	he	who	called	you	is	holy,	be	holy	yourselves	in
all	your	conduct;	since	it	is	written,	‘You	shall	be	holy,	for	I	am
holy’	”	(1	Peter	1:14–16).	Both	Peter	and	Paul	realize	that	it	is
natural	for	children	to	imitate	their	earthly	fathers.	They	appeal	to
this	natural	sense	that	children	have	in	order	to	remind	us	that	we
are	to	imitate	our	heavenly	Father—indeed,	this	should	be
something	we	naturally	want	to	do	and	delight	in.	If	God	our	Father
in	heaven	is	holy,	we	should	be	holy	as	obedient	children.
When	we	walk	in	paths	of	righteous	conduct	we	
honor	our
heavenly	Father	
and	bring	glory	to	him.	When	we	act	in	a	way	that
is	pleasing	to	God,	we	are	to	do	so	that	others	“may	see	your	good
works	and	give	glory	to	your	Father	who	is	in	heaven”	(Matt.	5:16).
Paul	encourages	the	Philippians	to	maintain	pure	conduct	before
unbelievers	“that	you	may	be	blameless	and	innocent,	
children	of
God	
without	blemish	in	the	midst	of	a	crooked	and	perverse
generation,	among	whom	you	shine	as	lights	in	the	world”	(Phil.
2:15).	Indeed,	a	consistent	pattern	of	moral	conduct	is	also	evidence
that	we	are	truly	children	of	God.	John	says,	“By	this	it	may	be	seen
who	are	the	children	of	God,	and	who	are	the	children	of	the	devil:
whoever	does	not	do	right	is	not	of	God,	nor	he	who	does	not	love
his	brother”	(1	John	3:10).
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
Look	back	over	the	list	of	privileges	that	come	with	our	adoption	as
God’s	children.	Had	you	previously	thought	of	these	as	automatically
yours	because	you	had	been	born	again?	Can	you	describe	what	our
eternal	life	would	be	like	if	we	had	regeneration	and	justification	and
many	of	the	other	privileges	that	come	with	salvation,	but	no	adoption
into	God’s	family?	Now	how	do	you	feel	about	the	fact	that	God	has
adopted	you	into	his	family	compared	with	the	way	you	felt	before
reading	this	chapter?
2
.	
Has	your	relationship	with	your	own	human	family	become	better	or
more	difficult	as	a	result	of	your	becoming	a	Christian?	If	your
relationship	with	your	earthly	family	has	become	more	difficult,	how
have	you	found	Mark	10:29–30	to	be	true	in	your	life	as	a	Christian?
3
.	
Sometimes	people	who	have	had	unloving	or	cruel	earthly	fathers	have
found	that	their	background	creates	difficulty	in	their	thinking	about	God
and	relating	to	him	as	a	heavenly	Father.	How	can	Hebrews	12:10,
Matthew	7:11,	and	Luke	11:13,	which	contrast	sinful	earthly	fathers	with
our	perfect	Father	in	heaven,	be	of	help	in	that	situation?	Might	1	Peter
1:18	be	helpful	in	this	situation	as	well?	What	can	a	person	who	has	had
a	cruel	and	unloving	earthly	father	do	to	gain	a	better	and	better
appreciation	of	who	God	is	and	what	kind	of	Father	he	is?	Do	you	think
that	any	of	the	people	who	became	Christians	in	the	first	century	had
cruel	and	unloving	fathers,	or	no	living	fathers	at	all?	What	teachings	of
the	Old	Testament	would	have	helped	them	at	this	point?	Do	you	think
that	people	who	have	had	evil	earthly	fathers	have	a	God-given	inward
sense	of	what	a	good	father	would	be	like?
4
.	
Think	of	the	people	who	are	members	of	your	church.	Has	this	chapter
helped	you	to	think	of	them	more	as	your	brothers	and	sisters	(or	if	they
are	older,	as	those	who	are	like	“fathers”	and	“mothers”	to	you)?	How	do
you	think	an	added	appreciation	of	this	idea	of	the	church	as	a	family
would	be	helpful	to	your	church?	How	could	you	encourage	a	greater
appreciation	of	this	idea?
5
.	
Does	your	church	have	any	sense	of	competition	with	other	churches	that
might	be	overcome	by	greater	appreciation	of	the	doctrine	of	adoption?
6
.	
In	the	human	family,	when	one	of	the	children	commits	a	crime	and	is
publicly	punished	for	it,	the	entire	family	suffers	shame.	On	the	other
hand,	when	a	family	member	is	honored	for	an	outstanding	achievement,
the	entire	family	is	proud	and	rejoices.	How	does	this	analogy	of	events
in	a	human	family	make	you	feel	about	your	own	personal	level	of
holiness	in	life,	and	the	way	it	reflects	on	the	other	members	of	your
spiritual	family?	How	does	it	make	you	feel	about	the	need	for	personal
holiness	among	your	brothers	and	sisters	in	the	church?	Do	you
personally	have	a	strong	inward	desire	to	imitate	your	heavenly	Father	in
your	conduct	(Eph.	5:1;	1	Peter	1:14–16)?
7
.	
Do	you	sense	the	Holy	Spirit	within	you	bearing	witness	with	your	spirit
that	your	are	a	child	of	God	(Rom.	8:15–16;	Gal.	4:6)?	Can	you	describe
what	that	sense	is	like?
8
.	
Do	you	sense	any	discrimination	against	Christians	of	other	races	or
other	social	or	economic	positions?	Can	you	understand	how	the
doctrine	of	adoption	should	obliterate	such	distinctions	in	the	church	(see
Gal.	3:26–28)?	Can	you	also	see	how	the	doctrine	of	adoption	means	that
neither	men	nor	women	should	think	of	the	other	sex	as	more	important
or	less	important	in	the	church	(see	Gal.	3:28)?
SPECIAL	TERM
adoption
	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the
bibliography	to	chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be
found	in	
Appendix	4
.)
Note:	Many	systematic	theologies	do	not	treat	adoption	as	a
separate	topic,	but	include	a	discussion	of	the	privileges	of	adoption
in	a	discussion	of	justification	and	its	results.)
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92			Litton	(no	explicit	treatment)
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1875–76			Pope,	3:1–27
1892–94			Miley,	2:337–38
1940			Wiley,	2:402–39
1960			Purkiser,	297–98
3.			Baptist
1767			Gill,	1:288–91;	2:93–107
1887			Boyce,	404–9
1917			Mullins,	401–9
1983–85			Erickson,	961–66
4.			Dispensational
1947			Chafer,	3:241–43
1949			Thiessen,	278–82
1986			Ryrie,	301–2,	306–7
5.			Lutheran
1917–24			Pieper,	2:408–9
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1937–66			Murray,	
CW,	
2:223–34;	
RAA,	
132–40
1962			Buswell,	2:212–13
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955			Ott	(no	explicit	treatment)
2.			Roman	Catholic:	Post-Vatican	II
1980			McBrien	(no	explicit	treatment)
Other	Works
Davids,	P.	H.	“Adoption.”	In	
EDT,	
p.	13.
Murray,	John.	“Adoption.”	In	
Redemption	Accomplished	and	Applied.
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1955,	pp.	132–40.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
Romans	8:
1
4–17:	
For	all	who	are	led	by	the	Spirit	of	God	are	sons	of	God.
For	you	did	not	receive	the	spirit	of	slavery	to	fall	back	into	fear,	but	you	have
received	the	spirit	of	sonship.	When	we	cry,	“Abba!	Father!”	it	is	the	Spirit
himself	bearing	witness	with	our	spirit	that	we	are	children	of	God,	and	if
children,	then	heirs,	heirs	of	God	and	fellow	heirs	with	Christ,	provided	we
suffer	with	him	in	order	that	we	may	also	be	glorified	with	him.
HYMN
“Children	of	the	Heavenly	Father”
Children	of	the	heav’nly	Father
Safely	in	his	bosom	gather;
Nestling	bird	nor	star	in	heaven
Such	a	refuge	e’er	was	given.
God	his	own	doth	tend	and	nourish,
In	his	holy	courts	they	flourish;
From	all	evil	things	he	spares	them,
In	his	mighty	arms	he	bears	them.
Neither	life	nor	death	shall	ever
From	the	Lord	his	children	sever;
Unto	them	his	grace	he	showeth,
And	their	sorrows	all	he	knoweth.
Praise	the	Lord	in	joyful	numbers,
Your	Protector	never	slumbers;
At	the	will	of	your	Defender
Every	foeman	must	surrender.
Though	he	giveth	or	he	taketh,
God	his	children	ne’er	forsaketh;
His	the	loving	purpose	solely
To	preserve	them	pure	and	holy.
AUTHOR:	CAROLINE	V.	SANDELL	BERG,	C.	1855	
(TRANS.	ERNST	W.	OLSON,	1925)
Text	©	Board	of	Publication,	Lutheran	Church	in	America.	Reprinted	by	permission	of	Augsburg	Fortress.
NOTES
1
There	are	several	other	passages	that	speak	about	our	status	as	God’s	children	or	our	membership	in	his	family	(see	Matt.	5:48;
7:11;	2	Cor.	6:18;	Eph.	5:1;	Phil.	2:15;	Heb.	2:13–14;	12:5–11;	1	Peter	1:14;	1	John	3:10).
2
It	is	true	that	in	John	1:13	he	specifies	that	these	were	people	who	were	born	“of	God,”	but	this	is	simply	giving	additional
information	about	them	(namely,	that	they	had	been	regenerated	by	God).	That	does	not	negate	the	fact	that	it	was	to	those	who
“believed	in	his	name”	that	Christ	gave	power	to	become	children	of	God.
3
Although	both	good	and	evil	angels	are	in	one	place	in	Scripture	called	“the	sons	of	God”	(Job	1:6),	this	is	apparently	a	reference
to	the	status	of	sonship	that	comes	by	the	fact	that	God	created	them.	It	does	not	seem	to	indicate	that	angels	generally	(especially
evil	angels)	share	in	any	of	the	family	privileges	that	we	receive	as	God’s	children.	In	fact,	Heb.	2:14–16	makes	a	clear	distinction
between	our	status	as	God’s	children	and	the	status	of	angels.	Moreover,	angels	are	nowhere	else	referred	to	as	members	of	God’s
familyor	said	to	have	the	family	privileges	that	belong	to	us	as	God’s	children.	(It	is	unlikely	that	Gen.	6:2–4	refers	to	angels;	see
Wayne	Grudem,	
The	First	Epistle	of	Peter,	
pp.	211–15.)
4
In	this	verse	Jesus	says,	“If	you	then,	who	are	evil,	know	how	to	give	good	gifts	to	your	children,	how	much	more	will	the
heavenly	Father	give	the	Holy	Spirit	to	those	who	ask	him!”	Here	he	seems	to	mean	not	the	gift	of	the	Holy	Spirit	dwelling	within
as	he	comes	at	regeneration,	but	the	gift	of	further	empowering	for	ministry,	for	gifts	to	be	used	in	ministry,	or	for	Christian	living.
5
An	extensive	analysis	of	the	New	Testament	teaching	on	the	church	as	a	family	is	found	in	Vern	S.	Poythress,	“The	Church	as	a
Family:	Why	Male	Leadership	in	the	Family	Requires	Male	Leadership	in	the	Church	as	Well,”	in	W.	Grudem	and	J.	Piper,	eds.,
Recovering	Biblical	Manhood	and	Womanhood,	
pp.	233–47.
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	38
Sanctification	
(Growth	in	Likeness	to	Christ)
How	do	we	grow	in	Christian	maturity?	
What	are	the	blessings	of	Christian	growth?
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
The	previous	chapters	have	discussed	several	acts	of	God	that	occur
at	the	beginning	of	our	Christian	lives:	the	gospel	call	(which	God
addresses	to	us),	regeneration	(by	which	God	imparts	new	life	to
us),	justification	(by	which	God	gives	us	right	legal	standing	before
him),	and	adoption	(in	which	God	makes	us	members	of	his
family).	We	have	also	discussed	conversion	(in	which	we	repent	of
sins	and	trust	in	Christ	for	salvation).	These	events	all	occur	at	the
beginning	of	our	Christian	lives.
	
1
But	now	we	come	to	a	part	of	the	application	of	redemption	that	is	a
progressive	
work	that	continues	throughout	our	earthly	lives.	It	is
also	a	work	in	which	
God	and	man	cooperate,	
each	playing	distinct
roles.	This	part	of	the	application	of	redemption	is	called
sanctification:	
Sanctification	is	a	progressive	work	of	God	and	man
that	makes	us	more	and	more	free	from	sin	and	like	Christ	in	our
actual	lives.
A.	Differences	Between	Justification	and	Sanctification
The	following	table	specifies	several	differences	between
justification	and	sanctification:
	
	
	
Justification
	
Sanctification
Legal	standing
	
Internal	condition
Once	for	all	time
	
Continuous	throughout	life
Entirely	God’s	work
	
We	cooperate
Perfect	in	this	life
	
Not	perfect	in	this	life
The	same	in	all	Christians
	
Greater	in	some	than	in	others
As	this	chart	indicates,	sanctification	is	something	that	continues	throughout
our	Christian	life.	The	ordinary	course	of	a	Christian’s	life	will	involve
continual	growth	in	sanctification,	and	it	is	something	that	the	New	Testament
encourages	us	to	give	effort	and	attention	to.
B.	Three	Stages	of	Sanctification
1.
	Sanctification	Has	a	Definite	Beginning	at	Regeneration.
	A	definite
moral	change	occurs	in	our	lives	at	the	point	of	regeneration,	for	Paul	talks
about	the	“washing	of	regeneration	and	renewal	in	the	Holy	Spirit”	(Titus
3:5).	Once	we	have	been	born	again	we	cannot	continue	to	sin	as	a	habit	or	a
pattern	of	life	(1	John	3:9),	because	the	power	of	new	spiritual	life	within	us
keeps	us	from	yielding	to	a	life	of	sin.
This	initial	moral	change	is	the	first	stage	in	sanctification.	In	this
sense,	there	is	some	overlap	between	regeneration	and
sanctification,	for	this	moral	change	is	actually	a	part	of
regeneration.	But	when	we	view	it	from	the	standpoint	of	moral
change	within	us,	we	can	also	see	it	as	the	first	stage	in
sanctification.	Paul	looks	back	on	a	completed	event	when	he	says
to	the	Corinthians,	“But	you	were	washed,	
you	were	sanctified,	
you
were	justified	in	the	name	of	the	Lord	Jesus	Christ	and	in	the	Spirit
of	our	God”	(1	Cor.	6:11).	Similarly,	in	Acts	20:32	Paul	can	refer	to
Christians	as	“all	those	who	are	sanctified.”
	
2
This	initial	step	in	sanctification	involves	a	definite	break	from	the
ruling	power	and	love	of	sin,	so	that	the	believer	is	no	longer	ruled
or	dominated	by	sin	and	no	longer	loves	to	sin.	Paul	says,	“So	you
also	must	
consider	yourselves	dead	to	sin	
and	alive	to	God	in	Christ
Jesus.	.	.	.	For	
sin	will	have	no	dominion	over	you”	
(Rom.	6:11,	14).
Paul	says	that	Christians	have	been	“set	free	from	sin”	(Rom.	6:18).
In	this	context,	to	be	dead	to	sin	or	to	be	set	free	from	sin	involves
the	power	to	overcome	acts	or	patterns	of	sinful	behavior	in	one’s
life.	Paul	tells	the	Romans	not	to	let	sin	“reign	in	your	mortal
bodies,”	and	he	also	says,	“Do	not	yield	your	members	to	sin	as
instruments	of	wickedness,	but	yield	yourselves	to	God”	(Rom.
6:12–13).	To	be	dead	to	the	ruling	power	of	sin	means	that	we	as
Christians,	by	virtue	of	the	power	of	the	Holy	Spirit	and	the
resurrection	life	of	Christ	working	within	us,	have	power	to
overcome	the	temptations	and	enticements	of	sin.	Sin	will	no	longer
be	our	master,	as	once	it	was	before	we	became	Christians.
In	practical	terms,	this	means	that	we	must	affirm	two	things	to	be
true.	On	the	one	hand,	we	will	never	be	able	to	say,	“I	am
completely	free	from	sin,”	because	our	sanctification	will	never	be
completed	(see	below).	But	on	the	other	hand,	a	Christian	should
never	say	(for	example),	“This	sin	has	defeated	me.	I	give	up.	I
have	had	a	bad	temper	for	thirty-seven	years,	and	I	will	have	one
until	the	day	I	die,	and	people	are	just	going	to	have	to	put	up	with
me	the	way	I	am!”	To	say	this	is	to	say	that	sin	has	gained
dominion.	It	is	to	allow	sin	to	reign	in	our	bodies.	It	is	to	admit
defeat.	It	is	to	deny	the	truth	of	Scripture,	which	tells	us,	“You	also
must	consider	yourselves	dead	to	sin	and	alive	to	God	in	Christ
Jesus”	(Rom.	6:11).	It	is	to	deny	the	truth	of	Scripture	that	tells	us
that	“sin	will	have	no	dominion	over	you”	(Rom.	6:14).
This	initial	break	with	sin,	then,	involves	a	reorientation	of	our
desires	so	that	we	no	longer	have	a	dominant	love	for	sin	in	our
lives.	Paul	knows	that	his	readers	were	formerly	slaves	to	sin	(as	all
unbelievers	are),	but	he	says	that	they	are	enslaved	no	longer.	“You
who	were	once	slaves	of	sin	have	become	obedient	from	the	heart
to	the	standard	of	teaching	to	which	you	were	committed,	and,
having	been	set	free	from	sin,	have	become	slaves	of
righteousness”	(Rom.	6:17–18).	This	change	of	one’s	primary	love
and	primary	desires	occurs	at	the	beginning	of	sanctification.
	
3
2.	Sanctification	Increases	Throughout	Life.
	Even	though	the	New
Testament	speaks	about	a	definite	beginning	to	sanctification,	it	also	sees	it	as
a	process	that	continues	throughout	our	Christian	lives.	This	is	the	primary
sense	in	which	sanctification	is	used	in	systematic	theology	and	in	Christian
conversation	generally	today.
	
4
	
Although	Paul	says	that	his	readers	have	been
set	free	from	sin	(Rom.	6:18)	and	that	they	are	“dead	to	sin	and	alive	to	God”
(Rom.	6:11),	he	nonetheless	recognizes	that	sin	remains	in	their	lives,	so	he
tells	them	not	to	let	it	reign	and	not	to	yield	to	it	(Rom.	6:12–13).	Their	task,
therefore,	as	Christians	is	to	grow	more	and	more	in	sanctification,	just	as
they	previously	grew	more	and	more	in	sin:	“Just	as	you	once	yielded	your
members	to	impurity	and	to	greater	and	greater	iniquity,	so	now	yield	your
members	to	righteousness	for	sanctification”	(Rom.	6:19;	the	words	“just	as
.	.	.	so	now”	[Gk.	
hōsper	.	.	.	houtōs
]	indicate	that	Paul	wants	them	to	do	this
in	the	same	way:	“just	as”	they	previously	yielded	to	more	and	more	sin,	“in
just	the	same	way”	they	are	now	to	yield	themselves	to	more	and	more
righteousness	for	sanctification).
Paul	says	that	throughout	the	Christian	life	“we	all	.	.	.	are	being
changed	into	his	likeness	from	one	degree	of	glory	to	another”	(2
Cor.	3:18).	We	are	progressively	becoming	more	and	more	like
Christ	as	we	go	on	in	the	Christian	life.	Therefore	he	says,
“Forgetting	what	lies	behind	and	straining	forward	to	what	lies
ahead,	
I	press	on	
toward	the	goal	for	the	prize	of	the	upward	call	of
God	in	Christ	Jesus”	(Phil.	3:13–14)—this	is	in	the	context	of
saying	that	he	is	not	already	perfect	but	he	presses	on	to	achieve	all
of	the	purposes	for	which	Christ	has	saved	him	(vv.	9–12).
Paul	tells	the	Colossians	that	they	should	not	lie	to	one	another,
since	they	have	“put	on	the	new	nature,	which	is	
being	renewed	
in
knowledge	after	the	image	of	its	creator”	(Col.	3:10),	thus	showing
that	sanctification	even	involves	increasing	likeness	to	God	in	our
thoughts	as	well	as	our	words	and	deeds.	The	author	of	Hebrews
tells	his	readers	to	“lay	aside	every	weight,	and	sin	which	clings	so
closely”	(Heb.	12:1),	and	to	
“strive	for	.	.	.	the	holiness	
without
which	no	one	will	see	the	Lord”	(Heb.	12:14).	James	encourages
his	hearers,	“Be	doers	of	the	word,	and	not	hearers	only”	(James
1:22),	and	Peter	tells	his	readers,	“Be	holy	yourselves	in	all	your
conduct”	(1	Peter	1:15).
It	is	not	necessary	to	list	multiple	additional	quotations,	because
much	of	the	New	Testament	is	taken	up	with	instructing	believers	in
various	churches	on	how	they	should	grow	in	likeness	to	Christ.	All
of	the	moral	exhortations	and	commands	in	the	New	Testament
epistles	apply	here,	because	they	all	exhort	believers	to	one	aspect
or	another	of	greater	sanctification	in	their	lives.	It	is	the
expectation	of	all	the	New	Testament	authors	that	our	sanctification
will	increase	throughout	our	Christian	lives.
3.	Sanctification	Is	Completed	at	Death	(for	Our	Souls)	and	When	the
Lord	Returns	(for	Our	Bodies).
	Because	there	is	sin	that	still	remains	in	our
hearts	even	though	we	have	become	Christians	(Rom.	6:12–13;	1	John	1:8),
our	sanctification	will	never	be	completed	in	this	life	(see	below).	But	once
we	die	and	go	to	be	with	the	Lord,	then	our	sanctification	is	completed	in	one
sense,	for	our	souls	are	set	free	from	indwelling	sin	and	are	made	perfect.	The
author	of	Hebrews	says	that	when	we	come	into	the	presence	of	God	to
worship	we	come	“to	the	spirits	of	just	men	
made	perfect”	
(Heb.	12:23).	This
is	only	appropriate	because	it	is	in	anticipation	of	the	fact	that	“nothing
unclean	shall	enter”	into	the	presence	of	God,	the	heavenly	city	(Rev.	21:27).
However,	when	we	appreciate	that	sanctification	involves	the	whole
person,	including	our	bodies	(see	2	Cor.	7:1;	1	Thess.	5:23),	then
we	realize	that	sanctification	will	not	be	entirely	completed	until	the
Lord	returns	and	we	receive	new	resurrection	bodies.	We	await	the
coming	of	our	Lord	Jesus	Christ	from	heaven,	and	he	“will	change
our	lowly	body	to	be	like	his	glorious	body”	(Phil.	3:21).	It	is	“at
his	coming”	(1	Cor.	15:23)	that	we	will	be	made	alive	with	a
resurrection	body	and	then	we	shall	fully	“bear	the	image	of	the
Man	of	heaven”	(1	Cor.	15:49).
	
5
We	may	diagram	the	process	of	sanctification	as	in	figure	38.1,
showing	that	we	are	slaves	to	sin	prior	to	conversion,	(1)	that	there
is	a	definite	beginning	to	sanctification	at	the	point	of	conversion,
(2)	that	sanctification	should	increase	throughout	the	Christian	life,
and	(3)	that	sanctification	is	made	perfect	at	death.	(The	completion
of	sanctification	when	we	receive	resurrection	bodies	is	omitted
from	this	chart	for	the	sake	of	simplicity.)
THE	PROCESS	OF	SANCTIFICATION
Figure	38.1
I	have	shown	the	progress	of	sanctification	as	a	jagged	line	on	this
chart,	indicating	that	growth	in	sanctification	is	not	always	one-
directional	in	this	life,	but	that	progress	in	sanctification	occurs	at
some	times,	while	at	other	times	we	realize	that	we	are	regressing
somewhat.	In	the	extreme	case,	a	believer	who	makes	very	little	use
of	the	means	of	sanctification,	but	rather	has	bad	teaching,	lacks
good	Christian	fellowship,	and	pays	little	attention	to	God’s	Word
and	prayer,	may	actually	go	for	many	years	with	very	little	progress
in	sanctification	at	all—but	this	is	certainly	not	the	normal	or
expected	pattern	of	the	Christian	life.	It	is	in	fact	highly	abnormal.
4.	Sanctification	Is	Never	Completed	in	This	Life.
	There	have	always	been
some	in	the	history	of	the	church	who	have	taken	commands	such	as	Matthew
5:48	(“You,	therefore,	
must	be	perfect,	
as	your	heavenly	Father	is	perfect”)	or
2	Corinthians	7:1	(“let	us	cleanse	ourselves	from	every	defilement	of	body
and	spirit,	and	
make	holiness	perfect	
in	the	fear	of	God”)	and	reasoned	that
since	God	gives	us	these	commands,	he	must	also	give	us	the	ability	to	obey
them	perfectly.	Therefore,	they	have	concluded,	it	is	possible	for	us	to	attain	a
state	of	sinless	perfection	in	this	life.	Moreover,	they	point	to	Paul’s	prayer	for
the	Thessalonians,	“May	the	God	of	peace	himself	sanctify	you	wholly”	(1
Thess.	5:23),	and	infer	that	Paul’s	prayer	may	well	have	been	fulfilled	for
some	of	the	Thessalonian	Christians.	In	fact,	John	even	says,	“No	one	who
abides	in	him	sins”	(1	John	3:6)!	Do	these	verses	not	point	to	the	possibility
of	sinless	perfection	in	the	life	of	some	Christians?	In	this	discussion,	I	will
use	the	term	
perfectionism	
to	refer	to	this	view	that	sinless	perfection	is
possible	in	this	life.
On	closer	inspection,	these	passages	do	not	support	the	perfectionist
position.	First,	it	is	simply	not	taught	in	Scripture	that	when	God
gives	a	command,	he	also	gives	the	ability	to	obey	it	in	every	case.
6
	
God	commands	all	people	everywhere	to	obey	all	of	his	moral
laws	and	holds	them	accountable	for	failing	to	obey	them,	even
though	unredeemed	people	are	sinners	and,	as	such,	dead	in
trespasses	and	sins,	and	thus	unable	to	obey	God’s	commands.
When	Jesus	commands	us	to	be	perfect	as	our	Father	in	heaven	is
perfect	(Matt.	5:48),	this	simply	shows	that	God’s	own	absolute
moral	purity	is	the	standard	toward	which	we	are	to	aim	and	the
standard	for	which	God	holds	us	accountable.	The	fact	that	we	are
unable	to	attain	that	standard	does	not	mean	that	it	will	be	lowered;
rather,	it	means	that	we	need	God’s	grace	and	forgiveness	to
overcome	our	remaining	sin.	Similarly,	when	Paul	commands	the
Corinthians	to	make	holiness	perfect	in	the	fear	of	the	Lord	(2	Cor.
7:1),	or	prays	that	God	would	sanctify	the	Thessalonians	wholly	(1
Thess.	5:23),	he	is	pointing	to	the	goal	that	he	desires	them	to	reach.
He	does	not	imply	that	any	reach	it,	but	only	that	this	is	the	high
moral	standard	toward	which	God	wants	all	believers	to	aspire.
John’s	statement	that	“No	one	who	abides	in	him	sins”	(1	John	3:6)
does	not	teach	that	some	of	us	attain	perfection,	because	the
present-tense	Greek	verbs	are	better	translated	as	indicating
continual	or	habitual	activity:	“No	one	who	lives	in	him	
keeps	on
sinning.	
No	one	who	
continues	to	sin	
has	either	seen	him	or	known
him”	(1	John	3:6	NIV).	This	is	similar	to	John’s	statement	a	few
verses	later,	“No	one	who	is	born	of	God	will	continue	to	sin,
because	God’s	seed	remains	in	him;	he	cannot	go	on	sinning,
because	he	has	been	born	of	God”	(1	John	3:9	NIV).	If	these	verses
were	taken	to	prove	sinless	perfection,	they	would	have	to	prove	it
for	all	Christians,	because	they	talk	about	what	is	true	of	everyone
born	of	God,	and	everyone	who	has	seen	Christ	and	known	him.
	
7
Therefore,	there	do	not	seem	to	be	any	convincing	verses	in
Scripture	that	teach	that	it	is	possible	for	anyone	to	be	completely
free	of	sin	in	this	life.	On	the	other	hand,	there	are	passages	in	both
the	Old	and	New	Testaments	that	clearly	teach	that	we	cannot	be
morally	perfect	in	this	life.	In	Solomon’s	prayer	at	the	dedication	of
the	temple,	he	says,	“If	they	sin	against	you—for	
there	is	no	man
who	does	not	sin”	
(1	Kings	8:46).	Similarly,	we	read	a	rhetorical
question	with	an	implied	negative	answer	in	Proverbs	20:9:	“Who
can	say,	‘I	have	made	my	heart	clean;	I	am	pure	from	my	sin’?”
And	we	read	the	explicit	statement	in	Ecclesiastes	7:20,	
“Surely
there	is	not	a	righteous	man	on	earth	who	does	good	and	never
sins.”
In	the	New	Testament,	we	find	Jesus	commanding	his	disciples	to
pray,	“Give	us	this	day	our	daily	bread;	and	
forgive	us	our	sins,	
as
we	also	have	forgiven	those	who	sin	against	us”	(Matt.	6:11–12,
author’s	translation).	Just	as	the	prayer	for	daily	bread	provides	a
model	for	a	prayer	that	should	be	repeated	each	day,	so	the	prayer
for	the	forgiveness	of	sins	is	included	in	the	type	of	prayer	that
should	be	made	each	day	in	a	believer’s	life.
As	we	noted	above,	when	Paul	talks	about	the	new	power	over	sin
that	is	given	to	a	Christian,	he	does	not	say	that	there	will	be	no	sin
in	the	Christian’s	life,	but	simply	tells	the	believers	not	to	let	sin
“reign”	in	their	bodies	nor	to	“yield”	their	members	to	sin	(Rom.
6:12–13).	He	does	not	say	that	they	will	not	sin,	but	says	that	sin
will	not	dominate	or	“have	.	.	.	dominion”	over	them	(Rom.	6:14).
The	very	fact	that	he	issues	these	directions	shows	his	realization
that	sin	will	continue	to	be	present	in	the	lives	of	believers
throughout	their	time	on	earth.	Even	James	the	brother	of	our	Lord
could	say,	
“We	all	make	many	mistakes”	
(James	3:2),	and	if	James
himself	can	say	this,	then	we	certainly	should	be	willing	to	say	it	as
well.	Finally,	in	the	same	letter	in	which	John	declares	so	frequently
that	a	child	of	God	will	not	continue	in	a	pattern	of	sinful	behavior,
he	also	says	clearly,	“If	we	say	we	have	no	sin,	we	deceive
ourselves,	and	the	truth	is	not	in	us”	(1	John	1:8).	Here	John
explicitly	excludes	the	possibility	of	being	completely	free	from	sin
in	our	lives.	In	fact,	he	says	that	anyone	who	claims	to	be	free	from
sin	is	simply	deceiving	himself,	and	the	truth	is	not	in	him.
	
8
But	once	we	have	concluded	that	sanctification	will	never	be
completed	in	this	life,	we	must	exercise	pastoral	wisdom	and
caution	in	the	way	we	use	this	truth.	Some	may	take	this	fact	and
use	it	as	an	excuse	not	to	strive	for	holiness	or	grow	in
sanctification—a	procedure	exactly	contrary	to	dozens	of	New
Testament	commands.	Others	may	think	about	the	fact	that	we
cannot	be	perfect	in	this	life	and	lose	hope	of	making	any	progress
in	the	Christian	life—an	attitude	that	is	also	contrary	to	the	clear
teaching	of	Romans	6	and	other	passages	about	the	resurrection
power	of	Christ	in	our	lives	enabling	us	to	overcome	sin.	Therefore,
although	sanctification	will	never	be	completed	in	this	life,	we	must
also	emphasize	that	it	should	never	stop	increasing	in	this	life.
Moreover,	as	Christians	grow	in	maturity,	the	kinds	of	sin	that
remain	in	their	lives	are	often	not	so	much	sins	of	words	or	deeds
that	are	outwardly	noticeable	to	others,	but	inward	sins	of	attitudes
and	motives	of	the	heart—desires	such	as	pride	and	selfishness,
lack	of	courage	or	faith,	lack	of	zeal	in	loving	God	with	our	whole
hearts	and	our	neighbors	as	ourselves,	and	failure	to	fully	trust	God
for	all	that	he	promises	in	every	situation.	These	are	real	sins!	They
show	how	far	short	we	fall	of	the	moral	perfection	of	Christ.
However,	recognizing	the	nature	of	these	sins	that	will	persist	even
in	more	mature	Christians	also	helps	to	guard	against
misunderstanding	when	we	say	that	no	one	will	be	perfect	and	free
from	sin	in	this	life.	It	is	certainly	possible	that	many	mature
Christians	at	many	times	during	the	day	are	free	from	conscious	or
willful	acts	of	disobedience	to	God	in	their	words	or	their	deeds.	In
fact,	if	Christian	leaders	are	to	“set	the	believers	an	
example	
in
speech	and	conduct,	in	love,	in	faith,	in	purity”	(1	Tim.	4:12),	then
it	will	frequently	be	true	that	their	lives	will	be	free	from	words	or
deeds	that	others	will	count	as	blameworthy.	But	this	is	far	removed
from	attaining	total	freedom	from	sin	in	our	motives	and	in	the
thoughts	and	intents	of	our	hearts.
John	Murray	notes	that	when	Isaiah	the	prophet	came	into	the
presence	of	God	he	could	only	cry	out,	“Woe	is	me!	For	I	am	lost;
for	I	am	a	man	of	unclean	lips,	and	I	dwell	in	the	midst	of	a	people
of	unclean	lips;	for	my	eyes	have	seen	the	King,	the	L
ORD
	of
hosts!”	(Isa.	6:5).	And	when	Job,	whose	righteousness	was	earlier
commended	in	the	story	about	his	life,	came	into	the	presence	of
almighty	God,	he	could	only	say,	“I	had	heard	of	you	by	the	hearing
of	the	ear,	but	now	my	eye	sees	you;	therefore	I	despise	myself,	and
repent	in	dust	and	ashes”	(Job	42:5–6).	Murray	concludes	from
these	examples	and	from	the	testimony	of	other	saints	through	the
history	of	the	church:
Indeed,	the	more	sanctified	the	person	is,	the	more	conformed	he	is	to
the	image	of	his	Savior,	the	more	he	must	recoil	against	every	lack	of
conformity	to	the	holiness	of	God.	The	deeper	his	apprehension	of	the
majesty	of	God,	the	greater	the	intensity	of	his	love	to	God,	the	more
persistent	his	yearning	for	the	attainment	of	the	prize	of	the	high	calling
of	God	in	Christ	Jesus,	the	more	conscious	will	he	be	of	the	gravity	of
the	sin	that	remains	and	the	more	poignant	will	be	his	detestation	of
it.	.	.	.	Was	this	not	the	effect	in	all	the	people	of	God	as	they	came	into
closer	proximity	to	the	revelation	of	God’s	holiness?
	
9
C.	God	and	Man	Cooperate	in	Sanctification
Some	(such	as	John	Murray)
	
10
	
object	to	saying	that	God	and	man
“cooperate”	in	sanctification,	because	they	want	to	insist	that	God’s
work	is	primary	and	our	work	in	sanctification	is	only	a	secondary
one	(see	Phil.	2:12–13).	However,	if	we	explain	the	nature	of	God’s
role	and	our	role	in	sanctification	clearly,	it	does	not	seem
inappropriate	to	say	that	God	and	man	cooperate	in	sanctification.
God	works	in	our	sanctification	and	we	work	as	well,	and	we	work
for	the	same	purpose.	We	are	not	saying	that	we	have	equal	roles	in
sanctification	or	that	we	both	work	in	the	same	way,	but	simply	that
we	cooperate	with	God	in	ways	that	are	appropriate	to	our	status	as
God’s	creatures.	And	the	fact	that	Scripture	emphasizes	the	role	that
we	play	in	sanctification	(with	all	the	moral	commands	of	the	New
Testament),	makes	it	appropriate	to	teach	that	God	calls	us	to
cooperate	with	him	in	this	activity.
	
11
1.
	God’s	Role	in	Sanctification.
	Since	sanctification	is	primarily	a	work	of
God,	it	is	appropriate	that	Paul	prays,	“May	the	God	of	peace	himself	sanctify
you	wholly”	(1	Thess.	5:23).	One	specific	role	of	God	the	Father	in	this
sanctification	is	his	process	of	disciplining	us	as	his	children	(see	Heb.	12:5–
11).	Paul	tells	the	Philippians,	
“God	is	at	work	in	you,	
both	to	will	and	to
work	for	his	good	pleasure”	(Phil.	2:13),	thus	indicating	something	of	the	way
in	which	God	sanctifies	them—both	by	causing	them	to	want	his	will	and	by
giving	them	power	to	do	it.	The	author	of	Hebrews	speaks	of	the	role	of	the
Father	and	the	role	of	the	Son	in	a	familiar	benediction:	“Now	may	the	God	of
peace	.	.	.	equip	you	with	everything	good	that	you	may	do	his	will,	working
in	you	that	which	is	pleasing	in	his	sight,	through	Jesus	Christ;	to	whom	be
glory	for	ever	and	ever”	(Heb.	13:20–21).
The	role	of	God	the	Son,	Jesus	Christ,	in	sanctification	is,	first,	that
he	
earned	
our	sanctification	for	us.	Therefore	Paul	could	say	that
God	made	Christ	to	be	“our	wisdom,	our	righteousness	and
sanctification	and	redemption”	(1	Cor.	1:30).	Moreover,	in	the
process	of	sanctification,	Jesus	is	also	our	
example,	
for	we	are	to
run	the	race	of	life	“looking	to	Jesus	the	pioneer	and	perfecter	of
our	faith”	(Heb.	12:2).	Peter	tells	his	readers,	“Christ	also	suffered
for	you,	leaving	you	an	example,	that	you	should	follow	in	his
steps”	(1	Peter	2:21).	And	John	says,	“He	who	says	he	abides	in
him	ought	to	walk	in	the	same	way	in	which	he	walked”	(1	John
2:6).
But	it	is	specifically	God	the	Holy	Spirit	who	works	within	us	to
change	us	and	sanctify	us,	giving	us	greater	holiness	of	life.	Peter
speaks	of	the	“sanctification	of	the	Spirit”	(1	Peter	1:2,	author’s
translation),	and	Paul	speaks	of	“sanctification	by	the	Spirit”	(2
Thess.	2:13).	It	is	the	Holy	Spirit	who	produces	in	us	the	“fruit	of
the	Spirit”	(Gal.	5:22–23),	those	character	traits	that	are	part	of
greater	and	greater	sanctification.	If	we	grow	in	sanctification	we
“walk	by	the	Spirit”	and	are	“led	by	the	Spirit”	(Gal.	5:16–18;	cf.
Rom.	8:14),	that	is,	we	are	more	and	more	responsive	to	the	desires
and	promptings	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in	our	life	and	character.	The
Holy	Spirit	is	the	spirit	of	holiness,	and	he	produces	holiness	within
us.
	
12
2.	Our	Role	in	Sanctification.
	The	role	that	we	play	in	sanctification	is	both
a	
passive	
one	in	which	we	depend	on	God	to	sanctify	us,	and	an	
active	
one	in
which	we	strive	to	obey	God	and	take	steps	that	will	increase	our
sanctification.	We	can	now	consider	both	of	these	aspects	of	our	role	in
sanctification.
First,	what	may	be	called	the	“passive”	role	that	we	play	in
sanctification	is	seen	in	texts	that	encourage	us	to	trust	God	or	to
pray	and	ask	that	he	sanctify	us.	Paul	tells	his	readers,	“
Yield
yourselves	to	God	
as	men	who	have	been	brought	from	death	to
life”	(Rom.	6:13;	cf.	v.	
19),	and	he	tells	the	Roman	Christians,
“Present	your	bodies	as	a	living	sacrifice,	holy	and	acceptable	to
God”	(Rom.	12:1).	Paul	realizes	that	we	are	dependent	on	the	Holy
Spirit’s	work	to	grow	in	sanctification,	because	he	says,	“If	
by	the
Spirit	
you	put	to	death	the	deeds	of	the	body	you	will	live”	(Rom.
8:13).
Unfortunately	today,	this	“passive”	role	in	sanctification,	this	idea
of	yielding	to	God	and	trusting	him	to	work	in	us	“to	will	and	to
work	for	his	good	pleasure”	(Phil.	2:13),	is	sometimes	so	strongly
emphasized	that	it	is	the	only	thing	people	are	told	about	the	path	of
sanctification.	Sometimes	the	popular	phrase	“let	go	and	let	God”	is
given	as	a	summary	of	how	to	live	the	Christian	life.	But	this	is	a
tragic	distortion	of	the	doctrine	of	sanctification,	for	it	only	speaks
of	one	half	of	the	part	we	must	play,	and,	by	itself,	will	lead
Christians	to	become	lazy	and	to	neglect	the	active	role	that
Scripture	commands	them	to	play	in	their	own	sanctification.
That	active	role	which	we	are	to	play	is	indicated	by	Romans	8:13,
where	Paul	says,	“If	by	the	Spirit	
you	
put	to	death	the	deeds	of	the
body	you	will	live.”	Here	Paul	acknowledges	that	it	is	“by	the
Spirit”	that	we	are	able	to	do	this.	But	he	also	says	we	must	do	it!	It
is	not	the	Holy	Spirit	who	is	commanded	to	put	to	death	the	deeds
of	the	flesh,	but	Christians!	Similarly,	Paul	tells	the	Philippians,
“Therefore,	my	beloved,	as	you	have	always	obeyed,	so	now,	not
only	as	in	my	presence	but	much	more	in	my	absence,	
work	out
your	own	salvation	
with	fear	and	trembling;	for	God	is	at	work	in
you,	both	to	will	and	to	work	for	his	good	pleasure”	(Phil.	2:12–
13).	Paul	encourages	them	to	obey	even	more	than	they	did	when
he	was	present.	He	says	that	obedience	is	the	way	in	which	they
“work	out	[their]	own	salvation,”	meaning	that	they	will	“work	out”
the	further	realization	of	the	benefits	of	salvation	in	their	Christian
life.
	
13
	
The	Philippians	are	to	work	at	this	growth	in	sanctification,
and	to	do	it	solemnly	and	with	reverence	(“with	fear	and
trembling”),	for	they	are	doing	it	in	the	presence	of	God	himself.
But	there	is	more:	the	reason	why	they	are	to	work	and	to	expect
that	their	work	will	yield	positive	results	is	that	“God	is	at	work	in
you”—the	prior	and	foundational	work	of	God	in	sanctification
means	that	their	own	work	is	empowered	by	God;	therefore	it	will
be	worthwhile	and	will	bear	positive	results.
There	are	many	aspects	to	this	active	role	that	we	are	to	play	in
sanctification.	We	are	to	“
Strive	.	.	.	for	
the	
holiness	
without	which
no	one	will	see	the	Lord”	(Heb.	12:14);	we	are	to	
“abstain	from
immorality”	
and	so	obey	the	will	of	God,	which	is	our
“sanctification”	(1	Thess.	4:3).	John	says	that	those	who	hope	to	be
like	Christ	when	he	appears	will	actively	work	at	purification	in	this
life:	“And	every	one	who	thus	hopes	in	him	
purifies	himself	
as	he	is
pure”	(1	John	3:3).	Paul	tells	the	Corinthians	to	
“shun	immorality”
(1	Cor.	6:18),	and	not	to	have	partnership	with	unbelievers	(2	Cor.
6:14).	He	then	says,	“Let	us	
cleanse	ourselves	
from	every
defilement	of	body	and	spirit,	and	make	holiness	perfect	in	the	fear
of	God”	(2	Cor.	7:1).	This	kind	of	striving	for	obedience	to	God	and
for	holiness	may	involve	great	effort	on	our	part,	for	Peter	tells	his
readers	to	
“make	every	effort”	
to	grow	in	character	traits	that
accord	with	godliness	(2	Peter	1:5).	Many	specific	passages	of	the
New	Testament	encourage	detailed	attention	to	various	aspects	of
holiness	and	godliness	in	life	(see	Rom.	12:1–13:14;	Eph.	4:17–
6:20;	Phil.	4:4–9;	Col.	3:5–4:6;	1	Peter	2:11–5:11;	et	al.).	We	are
continually	to	build	up	patterns	and	habits	of	holiness,	for	one
measure	of	maturity	is	that	mature	Christians	“have	their	faculties
trained	by	practice	to	distinguish	good	from	evil”	(Heb.	5:14).
The	New	Testament	does	not	suggest	any	short-cuts	by	which	we
can	grow	in	sanctification,	but	simply	encourages	us	repeatedly	to
give	ourselves	to	the	old-fashioned,	time-honored	means	of	Bible
reading	and	meditation	(Ps.	1:2;	Matt.	4:4;	17:17),	prayer	(Eph.
6:18;	Phil.	4:6),	worship	(Eph.	5:18–20),	witnessing	(Matt.	28:19–
20),	Christian	fellowship	(Heb.	10:24–25),	and	self-discipline	or
self-control	(Gal.	5:23;	Titus	1:8).
It	is	important	that	we	continue	to	grow	both	in	our	passive	trust	in
God	to	sanctify	us	and	in	our	active	striving	for	holiness	and	greater
obedience	in	our	lives.	If	we	neglect	active	striving	to	obey	God,
we	become	passive,	lazy	Christians.	If	we	neglect	the	passive	role
of	trusting	God	and	yielding	to	him,	we	become	proud	and	overly
confident	in	ourselves.	In	either	case,	our	sanctification	will	be
greatly	deficient.	We	must	maintain	faith	and	diligence	to	obey	at
the	same	time.	The	old	hymn	wisely	says,	“
Trust	and	obey,	
for
there’s	no	other	way,	to	be	happy	in	Jesus,	but	to	trust	and	obey.”
	
14
One	more	point	must	be	added	to	this	discussion	of	our	role	in
sanctification:	sanctification	is	usually	a	corporate	process	in	the
New	Testament.	It	is	something	that	happens	in	community.	We	are
admonished,	“Let	us	consider	how	to	
stir	up	one	another	to	love
and	good	works,	
not	neglecting	to	meet	together,	as	is	the	habit	of
some,	but	encouraging	one	another,	and	all	the	more	as	you	see	the
Day	drawing	near”	(Heb.	10:24–25).	Together	Christians	are	“built
into	a	spiritual	house,	to	be	a	holy	priesthood”	(1	Peter	2:5);
together	they	are	“a	holy	nation”	(1	Peter	2:9);	together	they	are	to
“encourage	one	another	and	build	one	another	up”	(1	Thess.	5:11).
Paul	says	that	“to	lead	a	life	worthy	of	the	calling	to	which	you
have	been	called”	(Eph.	4:1)	is	to	live	in	a	special	way	in
community—“with	all	lowliness	and	meekness,	with	patience,
forbearing	one	another	in	love,	eager	to	maintain	the	unity	of	the
Spirit	in	the	bond	of	peace”	(Eph.	4:2–3).	When	that	happens,	the
body	of	Christ	functions	as	a	unified	whole,	with	each	part
“working	properly,”	so	that	corporate	sanctification	occurs	as	it
“makes	bodily	growth	and	upbuilds	itself	in	love”	(Eph.	4:16;	cf.	1
Cor.	12:12–26;	Gal.	6:1–2).	It	is	significant	that	the	fruit	of	the
Spirit	includes	many	things	that	build	community	(“love,	joy,
peace,	patience,	kindness,	goodness,	faithfulness,	gentleness,	self-
control,”	Gal.	5:22–23),	whereas	“the	works	of	the	flesh”	destroy
community	(“fornication,	impurity,	licentiousness,	idolatry,	sorcery,
enmity,	strife,	jealousy,	anger,	selfishness,	dissension,	party	spirit,
envy,	drunkenness,	carousing,	and	the	like,”	Gal.	5:19–21).
D.	Sanctification	Affects	the	Whole	Person
We	see	that	sanctification	affects	our	
intellect	
and	our	knowledge
when	Paul	says	that	we	have	put	on	the	new	nature	“which	is	being
renewed	in	
knowledge	
after	the	image	of	its	creator”	(Col.	3:10).	He
prays	that	the	Philippians	may	see	their	love	“abound	more	and
more,	with	knowledge	and	all	discernment”	(Phil.	1:9).	And	he
urges	the	Roman	Christians	to	be	“transformed	by	the	renewal	of
your	mind”	(Rom.	12:2).	Although	our	knowledge	of	God	is	more
than	intellectual	knowledge,	there	is	certainly	an	intellectual
component	to	it,	and	Paul	says	that	this	knowledge	of	God	should
keep	increasing	throughout	our	lives:	a	life	“worthy	of	the	Lord,
fully	pleasing	to	him”	is	one	that	is	continually	“increasing	in	the
knowledge	of	God”	(Col.	1:10).	The	sanctification	of	our	intellects
will	involve	growth	in	wisdom	and	knowledge	as	we	increasingly
“take	every	thought	captive	to	obey	Christ”	(2	Cor.	10:5)	and	find
that	our	thoughts	are	more	and	more	the	thoughts	that	God	himself
imparts	to	us	in	his	Word.
Moreover,	growth	in	sanctification	will	affect	our	
emotions.	
We	will
see	increasingly	in	our	lives	emotions	such	as	“love,	joy,	peace,
patience”	(Gal.	5:22).	We	will	be	able	increasingly	to	obey	Peter’s
command	“to	abstain	from	the	passions	of	the	flesh	that	wage	war
against	your	soul”	(1	Peter	2:11).	We	will	find	it	increasingly	true
that	we	do	not	“love	the	world	or	things	in	the	world”	(1	John
2:15),	but	that	we,	like	our	Savior,	delight	to	do	God’s	will.	In	ever-
increasing	measure	we	will	become	“obedient	from	the	heart”
(Rom.	6:17),	and	we	will	“put	away”	the	negative	emotions
involved	in	“bitterness	and	wrath	and	anger	and	clamor	and
slander”	(Eph.	4:31).
Moreover,	sanctification	will	have	an	effect	on	our	
will,	
our
decision-making	faculty,	because	God	is	at	work	in	us,	“to	
will	
and
to	work	for	his	good	pleasure”	(Phil.	2:13).	As	we	grow	in
sanctification,	our	will	will	be	more	and	more	conformed	to	the	will
of	our	heavenly	Father.
Sanctification	will	also	affect	our	
spirit,	
the	nonphysical	part	of	our
beings.	We	are	to	“cleanse	ourselves	from	every	defilement	of	body
and	
spirit,	
and	make	holiness	perfect	in	the	fear	of	God”	(2	Cor.
7:1),	and	Paul	says	that	a	concern	about	the	affairs	of	the	Lord	will
mean	taking	thought	for	“how	to	be	holy	in	body	and	
spirit”	
(1	Cor.
7:34).
	
15
Finally,	sanctification	affects	our	
physical	bodies.	
Paul	says,	“May
the	God	of	peace	himself	sanctify	you	wholly;	and	may	your	spirit
and	soul	
and	body	
be	kept	sound	and	blameless	at	the	coming	of
our	Lord	Jesus	Christ”	(1	Thess.	5:23).	Moreover,	Paul	encourages
the	Corinthians,	“Let	us	cleanse	ourselves	from	every	defilement	of
body	
and	spirit,	and	make	holiness	perfect	in	the	fear	of	God”	(2
Cor.	7:1;	cf.	1	Cor.	7:34).	As	we	become	more	sanctified	in	our
bodies,	our	bodies	become	more	and	more	useful	servants	of	God,
more	and	more	responsive	to	the	will	of	God	and	the	desires	of	the
Holy	Spirit	(cf.	1	Cor.	9:27).
	
16
	
We	will	not	let	sin	reign	in	our
bodies	(Rom.	6:4)	nor	allow	our	bodies	to	participate	in	any	way	in
immorality	(1	Cor.	6:13),	but	will	treat	our	bodies	with	care	and
will	recognize	that	they	are	the	means	by	which	the	Holy	Spirit
works	through	us	in	this	life.	Therefore	they	are	not	to	be	recklessly
abused	or	mistreated,	but	are	to	be	made	useful	and	able	to	respond
to	God’s	will:	“Do	you	not	know	that	your	body	is	a	temple	of	the
Holy	Spirit	within	you,	which	you	have	from	God?	You	are	not
your	own;	you	were	bought	with	a	price.	So	glorify	God	in	your
body”	(1	Cor.	6:19–20).
E.	Motives	for	Obedience	to	God	in	the	Christian	Life
Christians	sometimes	fail	to	recognize	the	wide	range	of	motives
for	obedience	to	God	that	are	found	in	the	New	Testament.	(1)	It	is
true	that	a	desire	to	please	God	and	express	our	love	to	him	is	a
very	important	motive	for	obeying	him—Jesus	says,	“If	you	love
me,	you	will	keep	my	commandments”	(John	14:15),	and,	“He	who
has	my	commandments	and	keeps	them,	he	it	is	who	loves	me”
(John	14:21;	cf.	1	John	5:3).	But	many	other	motives	are	also	given
to	us:	(2)	the	need	to	keep	a	clear	conscience	before	God	(Rom.
13:5;	1	Tim.	1:5,	19;	2	Tim.	1:3;	1	Peter	3:16);	(3)	the	desire	to	be	a
“vessel	for	noble	use”	and	have	increased	effectiveness	in	the	work
of	the	kingdom	(2	Tim.	2:20–21);	(4)	the	desire	to	see	unbelievers
come	to	Christ	through	observing	our	lives	(1	Peter	3:1–2,	15–16);
(5)	the	desire	to	receive	present	blessings	from	God	on	our	lives
and	ministries	(1	Peter	3:9–12);	(6)	the	desire	to	avoid	God’s
displeasure	and	discipline	on	our	lives	(sometimes	called	“the	fear
of	God”)	(Acts	5:11;	9:31;	2	Cor.	5:11;	7:1;	Eph.	4:30;	Phil.	2:12;	1
Tim.	5:20;	Heb.	12:3–11;	1	Peter	1:17;	2:17;	cf.	the	state	of
unbelievers	in	Rom.	3:8);	(7)	the	desire	to	seek	greater	heavenly
reward	(Matt.	6:19–21;	Luke	19:17–19;	1	Cor.	3:12–15;	2	Cor.	5:9–
10);
	
17
	
(8)	the	desire	for	a	deeper	walk	with	God	(Matt.	5:8;	John
14:21;	1	John	1:6;	3:21–22;	and,	in	the	Old	Testament,	Ps.	66:18;
Isa.	59:2);	(9)	the	desire	that	angels	would	glorify	God	for	our
obedience	(1	Tim.	5:21;	1	Peter	1:12);	(10)	the	desire	for	peace
(Phil.	4:9)	and	joy	(Heb.	12:1–2)	in	our	lives;	and	(11)	the	desire	to
do	what	God	commands,	simply	because	his	commands	are	right,
and	we	delight	in	doing	what	is	right	(Phil.	4:8;	cf.	Ps.	40:8).
F.	The	Beauty	and	Joy	of	Sanctification
It	would	not	be	right	to	end	our	discussion	without	noting	that
sanctification	brings	great	joy	to	us.	The	more	we	grow	in	likeness
to	Christ,	the	more	we	will	personally	experience	the	“joy”	and
“peace”	that	are	part	of	the	fruit	of	the	Holy	Spirit	(Gal.	5:22),	and
the	more	we	will	draw	near	to	the	kind	of	life	that	we	will	have	in
heaven.	Paul	says	that	as	we	become	more	and	more	obedient	to
God,	“the	return	you	get	is	sanctification	and	its	end,	eternal	life”
(Rom.	6:22).	He	realizes	that	this	is	the	source	of	our	true	joy.	“For
the	kingdom	of	God	is	not	food	and	drink	but	righteousness	and
peace	and	joy	in	the	Holy	Spirit”	(Rom.	14:17).	As	we	grow	in
holiness	we	grow	in	conformity	to	the	image	of	Christ,	and	more
and	more	of	the	beauty	of	his	character	is	seen	in	our	own	lives.
This	is	the	goal	of	perfect	sanctification	which	we	hope	and	long
for,	and	which	will	be	ours	when	Christ	returns.	“And	every	one
who	thus	hopes	in	him	purifies	himself	as	he	is	pure”	(1	John	3:3).
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
Can	you	remember	in	your	own	experience	the	definite	beginning	to
sanctification	that	occurred	when	you	became	a	Christian?	Did	you	sense
a	clear	break	from	the	ruling	power	and	love	of	sin	in	your	life?	Do	you
really	believe	that	you	are	even	now	dead	to	the	ruling	power	and	love	of
sin	in	your	life?	How	can	this	truth	of	the	Christian	life	be	of	help	to	you
in	specific	areas	of	your	life	where	you	still	need	to	grow	in
sanctification?
2
.	
As	you	look	back	over	the	last	few	years	of	your	Christian	life,	can	you
see	a	pattern	of	definite	growth	in	sanctification?	What	are	some	things
that	you	used	to	delight	in	which	no	longer	interest	you?	What	are	some
things	that	you	used	to	have	no	interest	in	that	now	hold	great	interest	for
you?
3
.	
As	you	have	grown	to	greater	maturity	and	holiness	in	the	Christian	life,
have	you	become	more	conscious	of	the	weight	of	sin	that	remains	in
your	heart?	If	not,	why	has	this	not	been	so?	Do	you	think	that	it	would
be	helpful	if	you	had	a	greater	consciousness	of	the	sin	that	remains	in
your	own	life?	If	you	had	this,	what	difference	would	it	make	in	your
own	life?
4
.	
How	would	it	affect	your	life	if	you	thought	more	about	the	fact	that	the
Holy	Spirit	is	continually	at	work	in	you	to	increase	your	sanctification?
In	living	the	Christian	life,	have	you	maintained	a	balance	between	your
passive	role	and	your	active	role	in	sanctification,	or	have	you	tended	to
emphasize	one	aspect	over	the	other,	and	why?	What	might	you	do	to
correct	this	imbalance,	if	there	is	one	in	your	life?
5
.	
Have	you	thought	previously	that	sanctification	affects	your	intellect	and
the	way	you	think?	What	areas	of	your	intellect	still	need	quite	a	bit	of
growth	in	sanctification?	With	regard	to	your	emotions,	in	what	areas	do
you	know	that	God	still	needs	to	work	to	bring	about	greater
sanctification?	Are	there	areas	or	aspects	of	sanctification	that	need	to	be
improved	with	respect	to	your	physical	body	and	its	obedience	to	God’s
purposes?
6
.	
Are	there	areas	where	you	have	struggled	for	years	to	grow	in
sanctification,	but	with	no	progress	at	all	in	your	life?	Has	this	chapter
helped	you	regain	hope	for	progress	in	those	areas?	(For	Christians	who
have	serious	discouragement	over	lack	of	progress	in	sanctification,	it	is
very	important	to	talk	personally	to	a	pastor	or	other	mature	Christian
about	this	situation,	rather	than	letting	it	go	on	for	a	long	period	of	time.)
7
.	
Overall,	has	this	chapter	been	an	encouragement	or	discouragement	to
you	in	your	Christian	life?
SPECIAL	TERMS
perfectionism
	
sanctification
	
sinless	perfection
	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the
bibliography	to	chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be
found	in	
Appendix	4
.)
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92			Litton,	330–45
1930			Thomas,	199–209,	223–35
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1847			Finney,	423–81
1875–76			Pope,	3:27–100
1892–94			Miley,	2:355–84
1940			Wiley,	2:440–517;	3:7–102
1960			Purkiser,	305–92,	428–41
1983			Carter,	1:521–69
3.			Baptist
1767			Gill,	2:93–107,	141–51,	364–557
1887			Boyce,	409–25
1907			Strong,	869–81
1917			Mullins,	417–32
1983–85			Erickson,	967–84
4.			Dispensational
1947			Chafer,	3:355–63;	6:162–298
1949			Thiessen,	283–89
1986			Ryrie,	300–306
5.			Lutheran
1917–24			Pieper,	3:3–86
1934			Mueller,	384–435
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1559			Calvin,	1:684–725,	833–49	(3.6–10,	19)
1724–58			Edwards,	2:173–85
1861			Heppe,	565–80
1871–73			Hodge,	3:213–465
1878			Dabney,	674–87
1887–1921			Warfield,	
SSW,	
2:325–28;	Perf.,	3–464
1889			Shedd,	2b:553–60
1937–66			Murray,	
CW,	
2:277–317;	
RAA,	
141–51
1938			Berkhof,	527–44
1962			Buswell,	2:196–215
7.			Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988–92			Williams,	2:83–117,	411–45
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955			Ott,	254–69
2.			Roman	Catholic:	Post-Vatican	II
1980			McBrien,	2:903–1099
Other	Works
Alexander,	Donald	L.,	ed.	
Christian	Spirituality:	Five	Views	of
Sanctification.	
Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,	1988.
Berkouwer,	G.	C.	
Faith	and	Sanctification.	
Trans.	by	John	Vriend.	Grand
Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1952.
Bockmuehl,	Klaus.	“Sanctification.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	613–16.
Chafer,	Lewis	Sperry.	
He	That	Is	Spiritual.	
Rev.	ed.	Grand	Rapids:
Zondervan,	1967.
Coppedge,	Allan.	
The	Biblical	Principles	of	Discipleship.	
Grand	Rapids:
Francis	Asbury	Press,	1989.
Downs,	Perry	G.	
Teaching	for	Spiritual	Growth:	An	Introduction	to
Christian	Education.	
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1994.
Hoekema,	Anthony	A.	“Sanctification.”	In	
Saved	by	Grace.	
Grand
Rapids:	Eerdmans	and	Exeter:	Paternoster,	1989,	pp.	192–233.
Murray,	John.	“Sanctification.”	In	
Redemption	Accomplished	and
Applied.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1955,	pp.	141–50.
Packer,	J.	I.	
Keep	in	Step	With	the	Spirit.	
Old	Tappan,	N.J.:	Revell,	1984.
Prior,	K.	
The	Way	of	Holiness.	
Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,
1967.
Ryle,	J.	C.	
Holiness:	Its	Nature,	Hindrances,	Difficulties	and	Roots.
Westwood,	N.J.:	Revell,	n.d.
White,	R.	E.	O.	“Sanctification.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	969–71.
Willard,	Dallas.	
The	Spirit	of	the	Disciplines:	Understanding	How	God
Changes	Lives.	
San	Francisco:	Harper	and	Row,	1988.
Ziesler,	J.	A.	
The	Meaning	of	Righteousness	in	Paul.	
Cambridge:
Cambridge	University	Press,	1972.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
Romans	6:11–14:	
So	you	also	must	consider	yourselves	dead	to	sin	and	alive
to	God	in	Christ	Jesus.	Let	not	sin	therefore	reign	in	your	mortal	bodies,	to
make	you	obey	their	passions.	Do	not	yield	your	members	to	sin	as
instruments	of	wickedness,	but	yield	yourselves	to	God	as	men	who	have	been
brought	from	death	to	life,	and	your	members	to	God	as	instruments	of
righteousness.	For	sin	will	have	no	dominion	over	you,	since	you	are	not
under	law	but	under	grace.
HYMN
“Take	Time	to	Be	Holy”
Take	time	to	be	holy,	speak	oft	with	thy	Lord;
Abide	in	him	always,	and	feed	on	his	Word.
Make	friends	of	God’s	children;	help	those	who	are	weak;
Forgetting	in	nothing	his	blessing	to	seek.
Take	time	to	be	holy,	the	world	rushes	on;
Spend	much	time	in	secret	with	Jesus	alone.
By	looking	to	Jesus,	like	him	thou	shalt	be;
Thy	friends	in	thy	conduct	his	likeness	shall	see.
Take	time	to	be	holy,	let	him	be	thy	guide,
And	run	not	before	him,	whatever	betide;
In	joy	or	in	sorrow,	still	follow	thy	Lord,
And,	looking	to	Jesus,	still	trust	in	his	Word.
Take	time	to	be	holy,	be	calm	in	thy	soul;
Each	thought	and	each	motive	beneath	his	control;
Thus	led	by	his	Spirit	to	fountains	of	love,
Thou	soon	shalt	be	fitted	for	service	above.
AUTHOR:	WILLIAM	D.	LONGSTAFF,	1887
Alternate	hymn:	“Trust	and	Obey”
NOTES
1
Although	the	initial	saving	faith	by	which	we	are	justified	occurs	only	at	the	time	of	conversion,	faith	and	repentance	do	continue
throughout	our	lives	as	well	(see	
chapter	35
).	Similarly,	although	regeneration,	justification,	and	adoption	are	instantaneous	one-
time	events	that	occur	at	the	beginning	of	the	Christian	life,	the	results	of	all	of	these	continue	throughout	life:	we	continue	to
have	the	spiritual	life	we	receive	from	regeneration,	the	legal	standing	we	receive	from	justification,	and	the	membership	in	God’s
family	we	receive	from	adoption.
2
The	Greek	expression	is	
tois	hēgiasmenois,	
a	substantival	perfect	passive	participle	that	expresses	both	a	completed	past	activity
(they	were	sanctified)	and	a	continuing	result	(they	continue	to	experience	the	sanctifying	influence	of	that	past	action).
3
Some	may	wish	to	add	to	this	section	one	or	more	passages	from	Hebrews	that	speak	about	our	sanctification	as	having	been
completed	in	the	past.	For	example,	the	author	says	that	by	the	will	of	God	“we	have	been	sanctified	through	the	offering	of	the
body	of	Jesus	Christ	once	for	all”	(Heb.	10:10).	The	Greek	expression	is	a	periphrastic	perfect	passive	participle,	
hēgiasmenoi
esmen,	
which	speaks	of	a	continuing	present	situation	that	results	from	a	completed	past	action:	“We	are	continually	in	the	state	of
‘having	been	sanctified’	(and	we	continue	to	feel	the	results	of	that	previous	act	of	sanctification).”
But	in	Hebrews	the	term	
sanctify	
(Gk.	
hagiazō
)	is	related	more	to	the	Old	Testament	background	of	ceremonial	purity	or	holiness
as	necessary	for	access	to	God’s	presence,	and	therefore	“sanctified”	in	Hebrews	means	“made	holy	and	righteous	in	God’s	sight
and	therefore	fit	to	draw	near	to	God	in	worship.”	As	such,	“sanctified”	in	Hebrews	is	roughly	equivalent	to	“justified”	in	Paul’s
vocabulary.	This	sense	of	“sanctified”	can	be	seen	in	Heb.	9:13;	10:10;	13:12.	These	passages	speak	of	a	ceremonial	kind	of
purification	that	allows	access	to	God,	and,	as	such,	“sanctification”	here	applies	to	the	beginning	of	the	Christian	life.
Nevertheless,	the	focus	is	more	on	access	to	God	in	worship,	while	the	Pauline	emphasis	is	on	justification	from	the	penalty	of	sin
that	was	due	under	God’s	law.
4
There	is	a	different	usage	of	the	word	
sanctified	
in	the	Wesleyan/Holiness	tradition	within	Protestantism.	In	these	circles	the
experience	of	sanctification	is	sometimes	viewed	as	a	single	event	subsequent	to	conversion	in	which	a	Christian	attains	a	higher
level	of	holiness,	a	level	sometimes	known	as	“entire	sanctification”	or	“sinless	perfection.”	Within	this	tradition,	sanctification	is
seen	as	an	experience	one	seeks	for	in	the	Christian	life	and	is	sometimes	able	to	attain.	(See	the	systematic	theologies	listed	under
the	category	“Arminian”	in	the	bibliography	at	the	end	of	this	chapter.)	Therefore,	while	most	Protestants	would	say,	“I	am	being
sanctified,”	some	within	the	Wesleyan/Holiness	tradition	would	say,	“I	
have	been	
sanctified,”	referring	not	to	the	initial	break	with
sin	that	comes	with	conversion,	but	to	a	subsequent	experience	in	which	they	began	to	know	freedom	from	conscious	sin	in	their
lives.	The	difficulties	with	this	position	are	outlined	in	section	4	below,	“Sanctification	Is	Never	Completed	in	This	Life.”
5
See	
chapter	42
	on	glorification	(that	is,	receiving	a	resurrection	body	when	Christ	returns).
6
See	
chapter	24
,	for	a	discussion	of	the	fact	that	God’s	commands	in	Scripture	do	not	always	imply	that	we	have	the	ability	to
obey	them.
7
1	John	5:18	is	to	be	understood	in	a	similar	way.
8
See	
chapter	24,	n.	16,
,	for	a	discussion	of	the	view	that	1	John	1:8	does	not	necessarily	apply	to	all	Christians.
9
John	Murray,	
Redemption	Accomplished	and	Applied,	
p.	145.
10
Ibid.,	pp.	148–49.
11
On	the	other	hand,	if	we	wish	to	say	that	sanctification	is	entirely	God’s	work,	and	that	we	use	the	means	of	sanctification	in
order	to	contribute	to	it	(or	some	similar	expression),	the	meaning	is	the	same.	I	am	simply	concerned	that	if	we	say	sanctification
is	entirely	God’s	work,	we	can	be	misunderstood	and	encourage	an	excessively	passive	role	on	the	part	of	Christians,	who	may	be
led	to	think	that	they	need	to	do	nothing	in	the	process	of	sanctification	in	their	lives.
12
See	
chapter	30
,	for	a	further	discussion	of	the	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in	sanctification.
13
This	verse	does	not	use	the	word	“salvation”	to	refer	to	initial	justification,	but	to	the	ongoing	process	of	experiencing	more	and
more	of	the	blessings	of	salvation;	here,	“salvation”	is	roughly	equivalent	to	“sanctification.”
14
Comparing	our	life	to	a	tree	with	two	large	roots,	John	Livingstone	said,	“Satan	strikes	.	.	.	either	at	the	root	of	faith	or	at	the
root	of	diligence”	(quoted	in	D.	M.	M’Intyre,	
The	Hidden	Life	of	Prayer	
[Minneapolis:	Bethany	Fellowship,	1969],	p.	
39).
15
See	
chapter	23
,	for	a	discussion	of	the	fact	that	“soul”	and	“spirit”	are	used	roughly	synonymously	in	the	Bible.
16
Of	course,	physical	weakness	will	inevitably	come	with	old	age,	and	sometimes	comes	earlier	due	to	infirmity,	but	this	can	be
consistent	with	increased	sanctification	as	God’s	power	is	“made	perfect	in	weakness”	(2	Cor.	12:9).	Paul	clearly	teaches	this
when	he	says,	“We	have	this	treasure	in	earthen	vessels,	to	show	that	the	transcendent	power	belongs	to	God	and	not	to	us”	(2	Cor.
4:7),	and,	“We	do	not	lose	heart.	Though	our	outer	nature	is	wasting	away,	our	inner	nature	is	being	renewed	every	day”	(2	Cor.
4:16).
17
See	
chapter	56
,	for	a	discussion	of	degrees	of	reward	in	heaven.
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	39
Baptism	in	and	Filling	With	the	Holy	Spirit
Should	we	seek	a	“baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit”	after	conversion?
What	does	it	mean	to	be	filled	with	the	Holy	Spirit?
Systematic	theology	books	have	not	traditionally	included	a	chapter
on	baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit	or	filling	with	the	Holy	Spirit	as	part
of	the	study	of	the	“order	of	salvation,”	the	study	of	the	various
steps	in	which	the	benefits	of	salvation	are	applied	to	our	lives.
	
1
But	with	the	spread	of	Pentecostalism	that	began	in	1901,	the
widespread	influence	of	the	charismatic	movement	in	the	1960’s
and	1970’s,	and	the	remarkable	growth	of	Pentecostal	and
charismatic
	
2
	
churches	worldwide	from	1970	to	the	present,	the
question	of	a	“baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit”	distinct	from
regeneration	has	come	into	increasing	prominence.	I	have	put	this
chapter	at	this	point	in	our	study	of	the	application	of	redemption
for	two	reasons:	(1)	A	proper	understanding	of	this	question	must
assume	an	understanding	of	regeneration,	adoption,	and
sanctification,	all	of	which	have	been	discussed	in	previous
chapters.	(2)	All	the	previous	chapters	on	the	application	of
redemption	have	discussed	events	that	occur	(or	in	the	case	of
sanctification,	that	begin)	at	the	point	at	which	a	person	becomes	a
Christian.	But	this	question	concerns	an	event	that	occurs	either	at
the	point	of	conversion	(according	to	one	view)	or	sometime	after
conversion	(according	to	another	view).	Moreover,	people	on	both
sides	of	the	question	agree	that	some	kind	of	second	experience	has
happened	to	many	people	after	their	conversion,	and	therefore	one
very	important	question	is	how	to	understand	this	experience	in	the
light	of	Scripture	and	what	scriptural	categories	properly	apply	to	it.
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
A.	The	Traditional	Pentecostal	Understanding
The	topic	of	this	chapter	has	become	important	today	because	many
Christians	say	that	they	have	experienced	a	“baptism	in	the	Holy
Spirit”	that	came	after	they	became	Christians	and	that	brought
great	blessing	in	their	lives.	They	claim	that	prayer	and	Bible	study
have	become	much	more	meaningful	and	effective,	that	they	have
discovered	new	joy	in	worship,	and	they	often	say	that	they	have
received	new	spiritual	gifts	(especially,	and	most	frequently,	the	gift
of	speaking	in	tongues).
This	traditional	Pentecostal	or	charismatic	position	is	supported
from	Scripture	in	the	following	way:
(1)	Jesus’	disciples	were	born-again	believers	long	before	the	day	of
Pentecost,	perhaps	during	Jesus’	life	and	ministry,	but	certainly	by
the	time	that	Jesus,	after	his	resurrection,	“breathed	on	them,	and
said	to	them,	‘Receive	the	Holy	Spirit’	”	(John	20:22).
(2)	Jesus	nevertheless	commanded	his	disciples	“not	to	depart	from
Jerusalem,	but	to	wait	for	the	promise	of	the	Father”	(Acts	1:4),
telling	them,	“Before	many	days	you	shall	be	
baptized	with	the
Holy	Spirit”	
(Acts	1:5).	He	told	them,	“You	shall	receive	power
when	the	Holy	Spirit	has	come	upon	you”	(Acts	1:8).	The	disciples
then	obeyed	Jesus’	command	and	waited	in	Jerusalem	for	the	Holy
Spirit	to	come	upon	them	so	that	they	would	receive	new
empowering	for	witness	and	ministry.
(3)	When	the	disciples	had	waited	for	ten	days,	the	day	of	Pentecost
came,	tongues	of	fire	rested	above	their	heads,	“And	they	were	all
filled	with	the	Holy	Spirit	and	began	to	speak	in	other	tongues,	as
the	Spirit	gave	them	utterance”	(Acts	2:4).	This	clearly	shows	that
they	received	a	baptism	in	(or	with)
	
3
	
the	Holy	Spirit.	Although	the
disciples	were	born	again	long	before	Pentecost,	at	Pentecost	they
received	a	“baptism	with	the	Holy	Spirit”	(Acts	1:5	and	11:16	refer
to	it	this	way)	that	was	subsequent	to	conversion	and	resulted	in
great	empowering	for	ministry	as	well	as	speaking	in	tongues.
	
4
(4)	Christians	today,	like	the	apostles,	should	ask	Jesus	for	a
“baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit”	and	thus	follow	the	pattern	of	the
disciples’	lives.
	
5
	
If	we	receive	this	baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit,	it
will	result	in	much	more	power	for	ministry	for	our	own	lives,	just
as	it	did	in	the	lives	of	the	disciples,	and	will	often	(or	always,
according	to	some	teachers)	result	in	speaking	in	tongues	as	well.
(5)	Support	for	this	pattern—in	which	people	are	first	born	again
and	then	later	are	baptized	in	the	Holy	Spirit—is	seen	in	several
other	instances	in	the	book	of	Acts.	It	is	seen,	for	example,	in	Acts
8,	where	the	people	of	Samaria	first	became	Christians	when	they
“believed	Philip	as	he	preached	good	news	about	the	kingdom	of
God	and	the	name	of	Jesus	Christ”	(Acts	8:12),	but	only	later
received	the	Holy	Spirit	when	the	apostles	Peter	and	John	came
from	Jerusalem	and	prayed	for	them	(Acts	8:14–17).
	
6
Another	example	is	found	in	Acts	19,	where	Paul	came	and	found
“some	disciples”	at	Ephesus	(Acts	19:1).	But,	“when	Paul	had	laid
his	hands	upon	them,	the	Holy	Spirit	came	on	them;	and	they	spoke
with	tongues	and	prophesied”	(Acts	19:6).
All	of	these	examples	(Acts	2,	8,	sometimes	10,	and	19)
	
7
	
are	cited
by	Pentecostals	in	order	to	show	that	a	“baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit”
subsequent	to	conversion	was	a	very	common	occurrence	for	New
Testament	Christians.	Therefore,	they	reason,	if	it	was	common	for
Christians	in	Acts	to	have	this	second	experience	sometime	after
conversion,	should	it	not	be	common	for	us	today	as	well?
We	can	analyze	this	issue	of	the	baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit	by
asking	three	questions:	(1)	What	does	the	phrase	“baptism	in	the
Holy	Spirit”	mean	in	the	New	Testament?	(2)	How	should	we
understand	the	“second	experiences”	that	came	to	born-again
believers	in	the	book	of	Acts?	(3)	Are	there	other	biblical
expressions,	such	as	“filling	with	the	Holy	Spirit,”	that	are	better
suited	to	describe	an	empowering	with	the	Holy	Spirit	that	comes
after	conversion?
B.	What	Does	“Baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit”	Mean	
in	the	New	Testament?
There	are	only	seven	passages	in	the	New	Testament	where	we	read
of	someone	being	baptized	in	the	Holy	Spirit.	(The	English
translations	quoted	here	use	the	word	
with	
rather	than	
in.
)
	
8
	
The
seven	passages	follow:
In	the	first	four	verses,	John	the	Baptist	is	speaking	of	Jesus	and
predicting	that	he	will	baptize	people	in	(or	with)	the	Holy	Spirit:
Matthew	3:11:	“I	baptize	you	with	water	for	repentance,	but	he	who	is
coming	after	me	is	mightier	than	I,	whose	sandals	I	am	not	worthy	to
carry;	he	will	
baptize	you	with	the	Holy	Spirit	
and	with	fire.”
Mark	1:8:	“I	have	baptized	you	with	water;	but	he	will	
baptize	you	with
the	Holy	Spirit.”
Luke	3:16:	“I	baptize	you	with	water;	but	he	who	is	mightier	that	I	is
coming,	the	thong	of	whose	sandals	I	am	not	worthy	to	untie;	he	will
baptize	you	with	the	Holy	Spirit	
and	with	fire.”
John	1:33:	“He	who	sent	me	to	baptize	with	water	said	to	me,	‘He	on
whom	you	see	the	Spirit	descend	and	remain,	this	is	he	who	
baptizes
with	the	Holy	Spirit.’	”
It	is	hard	to	draw	any	conclusions	from	these	four	passages	with
respect	to	what	baptism	with	the	Holy	Spirit	really	is.	We	discover
that	Jesus	is	the	one	who	will	carry	out	this	baptism	and	he	will
baptize	his	followers.	But	no	further	specification	of	this	baptism	is
given.
The	next	two	passages	refer	directly	to	Pentecost:
Acts	1:5:	[Here	Jesus	says,]	“John	baptized	with	water,	but	before	many
days	you	shall	be	
baptized	with	the	Holy	Spirit.”
Acts	11:16:	[Here	Peter	refers	back	to	the	same	words	of	Jesus	that
were	quoted	in	the	previous	verse.	He	says,]	“I	remembered	the	word	of
the	Lord,	how	he	said,	‘John	baptized	with	water,	but	you	shall	be
baptized	with	the	Holy	Spirit.’	”
These	two	passages	show	us	that	whatever	we	may	understand
baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit	to	be,	it	certainly	happened	at	the	day	of
Pentecost	as	recorded	in	Acts	2,	when	the	Holy	Spirit	fell	in	great
power	on	the	disciples	and	those	with	them,	and	they	spoke	in	other
tongues,	and	about	three	thousand	people	were	converted	(Acts
2:14).
It	is	important	to	realize	that	all	six	of	these	verses	use	almost
exactly	the	same	expression	in	Greek,	with	the	only	differences
being	some	variation	in	word	order	or	verb	tense	to	fit	the	sentence,
and	with	one	example	having	the	preposition	understood	rather	than
expressed	explicitly.
	
9
The	only	remaining	reference	in	the	New	Testament	is	in	the
Pauline	epistles:
1	Corinthians	12:13	(NIV	mg):	“For	we	were	all	
baptized	in	one	Spirit
into	one	body—whether	Jews	or	Greeks,	slave	or	free—and	we	were
all	given	the	one	Spirit	to	drink.”
Now	the	question	is	whether	1	Corinthians	12:13	refers	to	the	same
activity	as	these	other	six	verses.	In	many	English	translations	it
appears	to	be	different,	for	many	translations	are	similar	to	the	RSV,
which	says,	“For	
by	one	Spirit	
we	were	all	baptized	into	one	body.”
Those	who	support	the	Pentecostal	view	of	baptism	in	the	Holy
Spirit	after	conversion	are	quite	eager	to	see	this	verse	as	referring
to	something	other	than	baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit,	and	they
frequently	emphasize	the	difference	that	comes	out	in	the	English
translations.	In	all	the	other	six	verses,	Jesus	is	the	one	who
baptizes	people	and	the	Holy	Spirit	is	the	“element”	(parallel	to
water	in	physical	baptism)	in	which	or	with	which	Jesus	baptizes
people.	But	here	in	1	Corinthians	12:13	(so	the	Pentecostal
explanation	goes)	we	have	something	quite	different—here	the
person	doing	the	baptizing	is	not	Jesus	but	the	Holy	Spirit.
Therefore,	they	say,	1	Corinthians	12:13	should	not	be	taken	into
account	when	we	ask	what	the	New	Testament	means	by	“baptism
in	the	Holy	Spirit.”
This	point	is	very	important	to	the	Pentecostal	position,	because,	if
we	admit	that	1	Corinthians	12:13	refers	to	baptism	
in	
the	Holy
Spirit,	then	it	is	very	hard	to	maintain	that	it	is	an	experience	that
comes	after	conversion.	In	this	verse	Paul	says	that	this	baptism
in/with/by	the	Holy	Spirit	made	us	members	of	the	body	of	Christ
—“We	were	all	baptized	
in	
one	Spirit	into	one	body”	(1	Cor.	12:13
NIV	mg).	But	if	this	really	is	a	“baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit,”	the
same	as	the	event	that	was	referred	to	in	the	previous	six	verses,
then	Paul	is	saying	that	it	happened	to	all	the	Corinthians	
when	they
became	members	of	the	body	of	Christ;	that	is,	when	they	became
Christians.	
For	it	was	that	baptism	that	resulted	in	their	being
members	of	the	body	of	Christ,	the	church.	Such	a	conclusion
would	be	very	difficult	for	the	Pentecostal	position	that	holds	that
baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit	is	something	that	occurs	after
conversion,	not	at	the	same	time.
Is	it	possible	to	sustain	the	Pentecostal	view	that	the	other	six	verses
refer	to	a	baptism	
by	Jesus	
in	which	he	baptizes	us	in	(or	with)	the
Holy	Spirit,	but	that	1	Corinthians	12:13	refers	to	something
different,	to	a	baptism	
by	the	Holy	Spirit?	
Although	the	distinction
seems	to	make	sense	from	some	English	translations,	it	really
cannot	be	supported	by	an	examination	of	the	Greek	text,	for	there
the	expression	is	almost	identical	to	the	expressions	we	have	seen
in	the	other	six	verses.	Paul	says	
en	heni	pneumati	.	.	.
ebaptisthemen	
(“in	one	Spirit	.	.	.	we	were	baptized”).	Apart	from
one	small	difference	(he	refers	to	“one	Spirit”	rather	than	“the	Holy
Spirit”),
	
10
	
all	the	other	elements	are	the	same:	the	verb	is	
baptizō,
and	the	prepositional	phrase	contains	the	same	words	(
en	
plus	the
dative	noun	
pneumati
).	If	we	translate	this	same	Greek	expression
“baptize	
in	
the	Holy	Spirit”	(or	“baptize	with	the	Holy	Spirit”)	in
the	other	six	New	Testament	occurrences	where	we	find	it,	then	it
seems	only	proper	that	we	translate	it	in	the	same	way	in	this
seventh	occurrence.	And	no	matter	how	we	translate,	it	seems	hard
to	deny	that	the	original	readers	would	have	seen	this	phrase	as
referring	to	the	same	thing	as	the	other	six	verses,	because	for	them
the	words	were	the	same.
But	why	have	modern	English	translations	translated	this	verse	to
say,	“By	one	Spirit	we	were	all	baptized	into	one	body,”	thus	giving
apparent	support	to	the	Pentecostal	interpretation?	We	should	first
note	that	the	NASB	gives	“in”	as	a	marginal	translation,	and	the
NIV	margin	gives	both	“with”	and	“in”	as	alternatives.	The	reason
these	translations	have	chosen	the	word	“by”	has	apparently	been	a
desire	to	avoid	an	appearance	of	two	locations	for	the	baptism	in
the	same	sentence.	The	sentence	already	says	that	this	baptism	was
“into	one	body,”	and	perhaps	the	translators	thought	it	seemed
awkward	to	say,	
“in	
one	Spirit	we	were	all	baptized	
into	
one	body.”
But	this	should	not	be	seen	as	a	great	difficulty,	for	Paul	says,
referring	to	the	Israelites,	“all	were	baptized	
into	
Moses	
in	
the	cloud
and	
in	
the	sea”	(1	Cor.	10:2)—a	very	closely	parallel	expression
where	the	cloud	and	the	sea	are	the	“elements”	that	surrounded	or
overwhelmed	the	people	of	Israel	and	
Moses	
means	the	new	life	of
participation	in	the	Mosaic	covenant	and	the	fellowship	of	God’s
people	(led	by	Moses)	that	the	Israelites	found	themselves	in	after
they	had	passed	through	the	cloud	and	the	sea.	It	is	not	that	there
were	two	locations	for	the	same	baptism,	but	one	was	the	element
in	which	they	were	baptized	and	the	other	was	the	location	in	which
they	found	themselves	after	the	baptism.	This	is	very	similar	to	1
Corinthians	12:13:	the	Holy	Spirit	was	the	
element	
in	which	they
were	baptized,	and	the	body	of	Christ,	the	church,	was	the	
location
in	which	they	found	themselves	after	that	baptism.
	
11
	
It	thus	seems
appropriate	to	conclude	that	1	Corinthians	12:13	also	refers	to
baptism	“in”	or	“with”	the	Holy	Spirit,	and	is	referring	to	the	same
thing	as	the	other	six	verses	mentioned.
But	this	has	a	significant	implication	for	us:	it	means	that,	as	far	as
the	apostle	Paul	was	concerned,	
baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit	occurred
at	conversion.	
He	says	that	all	the	Corinthians	were	baptized	in	the
Holy	Spirit	and	the	result	was	that	they	became	members	of	the
body	of	Christ:	“For	we	were	all	baptized	in	one	Spirit	into	one
body”	(1	Cor.	12:13	NIV	mg).	“Baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit,”
therefore,	must	refer	to	the	activity	of	the	Holy	Spirit	at	the
beginning	of	the	Christian	life	when	he	gives	us	new	spiritual	life
(in	regeneration)	and	cleanses	us	and	gives	a	clear	break	with	the
power	and	love	of	sin	(the	initial	stage	of	sanctification).	In	this
way	“baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit”	refers	to	all	that	the	Holy	Spirit
does	at	the	beginning	of	our	Christian	lives.	But	this	means	that	it
cannot	refer	to	an	experience	after	conversion,	as	the	Pentecostal
interpretation	would	have	it.
	
12
But	how,	then,	do	we	understand	the	references	to	baptism	in	the
Holy	Spirit	in	Acts	1:5	and	11:6,	both	of	which	refer	to	the	day	of
Pentecost?	Were	these	not	instances	where	the	disciples,	having
previously	been	regenerated	by	the	Holy	Spirit,	now	experienced	a
new	empowering	from	the	Holy	Spirit	that	enabled	them	to	minister
effectively?
It	is	true	that	the	disciples	were	“born	again”	long	before	Pentecost,
and	in	fact	probably	long	before	Jesus	breathed	on	them	and	told
them	to	receive	the	Holy	Spirit	in	John	20:22.
	
13
	
Jesus	had	said,
“No	one	can	come	to	me	unless	the	Father	who	sent	me	draws	him”
(John	6:44),	but	the	disciples	certainly	had	come	to	Jesus	and	had
followed	him	(even	though	their	understanding	of	who	he	was
increased	gradually	over	time).	Certainly	when	Peter	said	to	Jesus,
“You	are	the	Christ,	the	Son	of	the	living	God”	(Matt.	16:16),	it	was
evidence	of	some	kind	of	regenerating	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in
his	heart.	Jesus	told	him,	“Flesh	and	blood	has	not	revealed	this	to
you,	but	my	Father	who	is	in	heaven”	(Matt.	16:17).	And	Jesus	had
said	to	the	Father	regarding	his	disciples,	“I	have	given	them	the
words	which	you	gave	me,	and	
they	have	received	them	
and	know
in	truth	that	I	came	from	you;	and	they	have	believed	that	you	sent
me.	.	.	.	
I	have	guarded	them,	
and	
none	of	them	is	lost	
but	the	son	of
perdition,	that	the	scripture	might	be	fulfilled”	(John	17:8,	12).	The
disciples	had	“little	faith”	(Matt.	8:26)	at	times,	but	they	did	have
faith!	Certainly	they	were	regenerated	long	before	the	day	of
Pentecost.
	
14
But	we	must	realize	that	the	day	of	Pentecost	is	much	more	than	an
individual	event	in	the	lives	of	Jesus’	disciples	and	those	with	them.
The	day	of	Pentecost	was	the	point	of	transition	between	the	old
covenant	work	and	ministry	of	the	Holy	Spirit	and	the	new
covenant	work	and	ministry	of	the	Holy	Spirit.	Of	course	the	Holy
Spirit	was	at	work	throughout	the	Old	Testament,	hovering	over	the
waters	of	the	first	day	of	creation	(Gen.	1:2),	empowering	people
for	service	to	God	and	leadership	and	prophecy	(Ex.	31:3;	35:31;
Deut.	34:9;	Judg.	14:6;	1	Sam.	16:13;	Ps.	51:11,	et	al.).	But	during
that	time	the	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in	individual	lives	was,	in
general,	a	work	of	lesser	power.
There	are	several	indications	of	a	less	powerful	and	less	extensive
work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in	the	old	covenant:	the	Holy	Spirit	only
came	to	a	few	people	with	significant	power	for	ministry	(Num.
11:16–17,	for	example),	but	Moses	longed	for	the	day	when	the
Holy	Spirit	would	be	poured	out	on	all	of	God’s	people:	“Would
that	all	the	L
ORD
’s	people	were	prophets,	that	the	L
ORD
	would	put
his	spirit	upon	them!”	(Num.	11:29).	The	equipping	of	the	Holy
Spirit	for	special	ministries	could	be	lost,	as	it	was	in	the	life	of
Saul	(1	Sam.	16:14),	and	as	David	feared	that	it	might	be	in	his	own
life	(Ps.	51:11).	In	terms	of	spiritual	power	in	the	lives	of	the	people
of	God,	there	was	little	power	over	the	dominion	of	Satan,	resulting
in	very	little	effective	evangelism	of	the	nations	around	Israel,	and
no	examples	of	ability	to	cast	out	demons.
	
15
	
The	old	covenant
work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	was	almost	completely	confined	to	the
nation	of	Israel,	but	in	the	new	covenant	there	is	created	a	new
“dwelling	place	of	God”	(Eph.	2:22),	the	church,	which	unites	both
Gentiles	and	Jews	in	the	body	of	Christ.
Moreover,	the	Old	Testament	people	of	God	looked	forward	to	a
“new	covenant”	age	when	the	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	would	be
much	more	powerful	and	much	more	widespread	(Num.	11:29;	Jer.
31:31–33;	Ezek.	36:26–27;	Joel	2:28–29).
	
16
When	the	New	Testament	opens,	we	see	John	the	Baptist	as	the	last
of	the	Old	Testament	prophets.	Jesus	said,	“Among	those	born	of
women	there	has	risen	no	one	greater	than	John	the	Baptist;	yet	he
who	is	least	in	the	kingdom	of	heaven	is	greater	than	he	.	.	.	all	the
prophets	and	the	law	prophesied	until	John;	and	if	you	are	willing
to	accept	it,	he	is	Elijah	who	is	to	come”	(Matt.	11:11–14).	John
knew	that	he	baptized	with	water,	but	Jesus	would	baptize	with	the
Holy	Spirit	(John	3:16).	John	the	Baptist,	then,	still	was	living	in	an
“old	covenant”	experience	of	the	working	of	the	Holy	Spirit.
In	the	life	of	Jesus,	we	first	see	the	new	covenant	power	of	the	Holy
Spirit	at	work.	The	Holy	Spirit	descends	on	him	at	his	baptism
(Luke	3:21–22),	and	after	his	temptation	Jesus	“returned	
in	the
power	of	the	Spirit	
into	Galilee”	(Luke	4:14).	Then	we	begin	to	see
what	this	new	covenant	power	of	the	Holy	Spirit	will	look	like,
because	Jesus	casts	out	demons	with	a	word,	heals	all	who	are
brought	to	him,	and	teaches	with	authority	that	people	had	not
heard	before	(see	Luke	4:16–44,	et	al.).
The	disciples,	however,	do	not	receive	this	full	new	covenant
empowering	for	ministry	until	the	Day	of	Pentecost,	for	Jesus	tells
them	to	wait	in	Jerusalem,	and	promises,	“
You	shall	receive	power
when	the	Holy	Spirit	has	come	upon	you”	(Acts	1:8).	This	was	a
transition	in	the	lives	of	the	disciples	as	well	(see	John	7:39;	14:17;
16:7;	Acts	2:16).	The	promise	of	Joel	that	the	Holy	Spirit	would
come	in	new	covenant	fullness	was	fulfilled	(Acts	2:16)	as	Jesus
returned	to	heaven	and	then	was	given	authority	to	pour	out	the
Holy	Spirit	in	new	fullness	and	power	(Acts	2:33).
What	was	the	result	in	the	lives	of	the	disciples?	These	believers,
who	had	had	an	old-covenant	less-powerful	experience	of	the	Holy
Spirit	in	their	lives,	received	on	the	Day	of	Pentecost	a	more-
powerful	new-covenant	experience	of	the	Holy	Spirit	working	in
their	lives.
	
17
	
They	received	much	greater	“power”	(Acts	1:8),
power	for	living	the	Christian	life	and	for	carrying	out	Christian
ministry.
This	transition	from	an	old	covenant	experience	of	the	Holy	Spirit
to	a	new	covenant	experience	of	the	Holy	Spirit	can	be	seen	in
figure	39.1.
	
18
In	this	diagram,	the	thinner	line	at	the	bottom	represents	the	less-
powerful	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in	individuals’	lives	during	the	old
covenant.	The	thicker	line	that	begins	at	Pentecost	shows	the	more-
powerful	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in	people’s	lives	after	that	time.
The	lines	for	“this	age”	and	“the	age	to	come”	overlap	now	because
the	powers	of	the	age	to	come	have	broken	into	this	present	evil
age,	so	that	Christians	live	during	an	“overlap	of	the	ages.”	The
dotted	lines	prior	to	Pentecost	indicate	that	in	the	life	of	Jesus	the
more-powerful	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	had	already	begun	in	a	way
that	anticipated	(and	even	surpassed)	what	would	come	at
Pentecost.
	
19
AT	PENTECOST	BELIEVERS	EXPERIENCED	A	TRANSITION	FROM	AN	OLD	COVENANT	EXPERIENCE	OF	THE
HOLY	SPIRIT	TO	A	MORE	POWERFUL,	NEW	COVENANT	EXPERIENCE	OF	THE	HOLY	SPIRIT
Figure	39.1
This	new	covenant	power	gave	the	disciples	more	effectiveness	in
their	witness	and	their	ministry	(Acts	1:8;	Eph.	4:8,	11–13),	much
greater	power	for	victory	over	the	influence	of	sin	in	the	lives	of	all
believers	(note	the	emphasis	on	the	power	of	Christ’s	resurrection	at
work	within	us	in	Rom.	6:11–14;	8:13–14;	Gal.	2:20;	Phil.	3:10),
and	power	for	victory	over	Satan	and	demonic	forces	that	would
attack	believers	(2	Cor.	10:3–4;	Eph.	1:19–21;	6:10–18;	1	John
4:4).	This	new	covenant	power	of	the	Holy	Spirit	also	resulted	in	a
wide	and	hitherto	unknown	distribution	of	gifts	for	ministry	to	all
believers	(Acts	2:16–18;	1	Cor.	12:7,	11;	1	Peter	4:10;	cf.	Num.
11:17,	24–29).	These	gifts	also	had	corporate	implications	because
they	were	intended	not	to	be	used	individualistically	but	for	the
corporate	building	up	of	the	body	of	Christ	(1	Cor.	12:7;	14:12).	It
also	meant	that	the	gospel	was	no	longer	effectively	limited	to	the
Jews	only,	but	that	all	races	and	all	nations	would	hear	the	gospel	in
power	and	would	be	united	into	the	church,	to	the	glory	of	God
(Eph.	2:11–3:10).
	
20
	
The	Day	of	Pentecost	was	certainly	a
remarkable	time	of	transition	in	the	whole	history	of	redemption	as
recorded	in	Scripture.	It	was	a	remarkable	day	in	the	history	of	the
world,	because	on	that	day	the	Holy	Spirit	began	to	function	among
God’s	people	with	new	covenant	power.
But	this	fact	helps	us	understand	what	happened	to	the	disciples	at
Pentecost.	They	received	this	remarkable	new	empowering	from
the	Holy	Spirit	
because	they	were	living	at	the	time	of	the	transition
between	the	old	covenant	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	and	the	new
covenant	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit.	
Though	it	was	a	“second
experience”	of	the	Holy	Spirit,	coming	as	it	did	long	after	their
conversion,	it	is	not	to	be	taken	as	a	pattern	for	us,	for	we	are	not
living	at	a	time	of	transition	in	the	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit.	In	their
case,	believers	with	an	old	covenant	empowering	from	the	Holy
Spirit	became	believers	with	a	new	covenant	empowering	from	the
Holy	Spirit.	But	we	today	do	not	first	become	believers	with	a
weaker,	old	covenant	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in	our	hearts	and	wait
until	some	later	time	to	receive	a	new	covenant	work	of	the	Holy
Spirit.	Rather,	we	are	in	the	same	position	as	those	who	became
Christians	in	the	church	at	Corinth:	when	we	become	Christians	we
are	all	“
baptized	in	one	Spirit	
into	one	body”	(1	Cor.	12:13)—just
as	the	Corinthians	were,	and	just	as	were	the	new	believers	in	many
churches	who	were	converted	when	Paul	traveled	on	his	missionary
journeys.
In	conclusion,	the	disciples	certainly	did	experience	“a	baptism	in
the	Holy	Spirit”	after	conversion	on	the	Day	of	Pentecost,	but	this
happened	because	they	were	living	at	a	unique	point	in	history,	and
this	event	in	their	lives	is	therefore	not	a	pattern	that	we	are	to	seek
to	imitate.
What	shall	we	say	about	the	phrase	“baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit”?	It
is	a	phrase	that	the	New	Testament	authors	use	to	speak	of	coming
into	the	new	covenant	power	of	the	Holy	Spirit.	It	happened	at
Pentecost	for	the	disciples,	but	it	happened	at	conversion	for	the
Corinthians	and	for	us.
	
21
It	is	not	a	phrase	the	New	Testament	authors	would	use	to	speak	of
any	post-conversion	experience	of	empowering	by	the	Holy	Spirit.
C.	How	Should	We	Understand	the	“Second	Experiences”	in	Acts?
But	even	if	we	have	correctly	understood	the	experience	of	the
disciples	at	Pentecost	as	recorded	in	Acts	2,	are	there	not	other
examples	of	people	who	had	a	“second	experience”	of	empowering
of	the	Holy	Spirit	after	conversion,	such	as	those	in	Acts	8	(at
Samaria),	Acts	10	(Cornelius’	household),	and	Acts	19	(the
Ephesian	disciples)?
These	are	not	really	convincing	examples	to	prove	the	Pentecostal
doctrine	of	baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit	either.	First,	the	expression
“baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit”	is	not	ordinarily	used	to	refer	to	any	of
these	events,
	
22
	
and	this	should	give	us	some	hesitation	in	applying
this	phrase	to	them.	But	more	importantly,	a	closer	look	at	each
case	shows	more	clearly	what	was	happening	in	these	events.
In	Acts	8:4–25	the	Samaritan	people	“believed	Philip	as	he
preached	good	news	about	the	kingdom	of	God	and	the	name	of
Jesus	Christ”	and	“they	were	baptized,	both	men	and	women”	(Acts
8:12).	Some	have	argued	that	this	was	not	genuine	saving	faith	on
the	part	of	the	Samaritans.
	
23
	
However,	there	is	no	indication	in	the
text	that	Philip	had	a	deficient	understanding	of	the	gospel	(he	had
been	prominent	in	the	Jerusalem	church)	or	that	Philip	himself
thought	that	their	faith	in	Christ	was	inadequate,	for	he	allowed
them	to	be	baptized	(Acts	8:12).
A	better	understanding	of	this	event	would	be	that	God,	in	his
providence,	sovereignly	waited	to	give	the	new	covenant
empowering	of	the	Holy	Spirit	to	the	Samaritans	directly	through
the	hands	of	the	apostles	(Acts	8:14–17)
	
24
	
so	that	it	might	be
evident	to	the	highest	leadership	in	the	Jerusalem	church	that	the
Samaritans	were	not	second-class	citizens	but	full	members	of	the
church.	This	was	important	because	of	the	historical	animosity
between	Jews	and	Samaritans	(“Jews	have	no	dealings	with
Samaritans,”	John	4:9),	and	because	Jesus	had	specified	that	the
spread	of	the	gospel	to	Samaria	would	be	the	next	major	step	after
it	had	been	preached	in	Jerusalem	and	the	region	of	Judea	that
surrounded	Jerusalem:	“You	shall	be	my	witnesses	in	Jerusalem	and
in	all	Judea	
and	Samaria	
and	to	the	end	of	the	earth”	(Acts	1:8).
Thus,	the	event	in	Acts	8	was	a	kind	of	“Samaritan	Pentecost,”	a
special	outpouring	of	the	Holy	Spirit	on	the	people	of	Samaria,	who
were	a	mixed	race	of	Jewish	and	Gentile	ancestry,	so	that	it	might
be	evident	to	all	that	the	full	new	covenant	blessings	and	power	of
the	Holy	Spirit	had	come	to	this	group	of	people	as	well,	and	were
not	confined	to	Jews	only.	Because	this	is	a	special	event	in	the
history	of	redemption,	as	the	pattern	of	Acts	1:8	is	worked	out	in
the	book	of	Acts,	it	is	not	a	pattern	for	us	to	repeat	today.	It	is
simply	part	of	the	transition	between	the	old	covenant	experience	of
the	Holy	Spirit	and	the	new	covenant	experience	of	the	Holy	Spirit.
The	situation	in	Acts	10	is	less	complicated,	because	it	is	not	even
clear	that	Cornelius	was	a	genuine	believer	before	Peter	came	and
preached	the	gospel	to	him.	Certainly	he	had	not	trusted	in	Christ
for	salvation.	He	is	rather	a	Gentile	who	was	one	of	the	first
examples	of	the	way	in	which	the	gospel	would	go	“to	the	end	of
the	earth”	(Acts	1:8).
	
25
	
Certainly	Cornelius	had	not	first	believed
in	Christ’s	death	and	resurrection	to	save	him	and	then	later	come
into	a	second	experience	after	his	conversion.
In	Acts	19,	once	again	we	encounter	a	situation	of	some	people
who	had	not	really	heard	the	gospel	of	salvation	through	Christ.
They	had	been	baptized	into	the	baptism	of	John	the	Baptist	(Acts
19:3),	so	they	were	probably	people	who	had	heard	John	the	Baptist
preach,	or	had	talked	to	others	who	had	heard	John	the	Baptist
preach,	and	had	been	baptized	“into	John’s	baptism”	(Acts	19:3)	as
a	sign	that	they	were	repenting	of	their	sins	and	preparing	for	the
Messiah	who	was	to	come.	They	certainly	had	not	heard	of	Christ’s
death	and	resurrection,	for	they	had	not	even	heard	that	there	was	a
Holy	Spirit	(Acts	19:2)!—a	fact	that	no	one	who	was	present	at
Pentecost	or	who	had	heard	the	gospel	after	Pentecost	could	have
failed	to	know.	It	is	likely	that	they	had	not	even	heard	that	Jesus
had	come	and	lived	and	died,	because	Paul	had	to	explain	to	them,
“John	baptized	with	the	baptism	of	repentance,	telling	the	people	to
believe	in	the	one	who	was	to	come	after	him,	
that	is,	Jesus”	
(Acts
19:4).	Therefore	these	“disciples”	in	Ephesus	did	not	have	new
covenant	understanding	or	new	covenant	faith,	and	they	certainly
did	not	have	a	new	covenant	empowering	of	the	Holy	Spirit—they
were	“disciples”	only	in	the	sense	of	followers	of	John	the	Baptist
who	were	still	waiting	for	the	Messiah.	When	they	heard	of	him
they	believed	in	him,	and	then	received	the	power	of	the	Holy	Spirit
that	was	appropriate	to	the	gospel	of	the	risen	Lord	Jesus	Christ.
Because	of	this,	these	disciples	at	Ephesus	are	certainly	not	a
pattern	for	us	today	either,	for	we	do	not	first	have	faith	in	a
Messiah	that	we	are	waiting	for,	and	then	later	learn	that	Jesus	has
come	and	lived	and	died	and	risen	again.	We	come	into	an
understanding	of	the	gospel	of	Christ	immediately,	and	we,	like	the
Corinthians,	enter	immediately	into	the	new	covenant	experience	of
the	power	of	the	Holy	Spirit.
	
26
It	seems	therefore	that	there	are	no	New	Testament	texts	that
encourage	us	to	seek	for	a	second	experience	of	“baptism	in	the
Holy	Spirit”	that	comes	after	conversion.
D.	What	Terms	Shall	We	Use	to	Refer	to	an	Empowering	by	the	Holy	Spirit	That	Comes	After	Conversion?
The	previous	sections	have	argued	that	“baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit”
is	not	the	term	the	New	Testament	authors	would	use	to	speak	of	a
post-conversion	work	of	the	Spirit,	and	that	the	examples	of
“second	experiences”	of	receiving	the	Holy	Spirit	in	the	book	of
Acts	are	not	patterns	for	us	to	imitate	in	our	Christian	lives.	But	the
question	remains,	“What	is	actually	happening	to	the	millions	of
people	who	claim	that	they	have	received	this	‘baptism	in	the	Holy
Spirit’	and	that	it	has	brought	much	blessing	to	their	lives?	Could	it
be	that	this	has	been	a	genuine	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	but	that	the
biblical	categories	and	biblical	examples	used	to	illustrate	it	have
been	incorrect?	Might	it	be	that	there	are	other	biblical	expressions
and	biblical	teachings	that	point	to	this	kind	of	work	of	the	Holy
Spirit	after	conversion	and	help	us	understand	it	more	accurately?”
I	think	there	are,	but	before	we	look	at	these,	it	is	appropriate	to
comment	on	the	importance	of	having	a	correct	understanding	at
this	point.
1.
	Harm	Comes	to	the	Church	From	Teaching	Two-Class	Christianity.
	At
various	times	in	the	history	of	the	church	Christians	have	attempted	to	divide
the	church	into	two	categories	of	believers.	This	is	in	effect	what	happens
with	the	Pentecostal	doctrine	of	baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit.	It	might	be
pictured	as	in	figure	39.2,	which	shows	the	world	divided	into	Christians	and
non-Christians,	and	then	shows	Christians	divided	into	two	categories,
ordinary	believers	and	Spirit-baptized	believers.
But	such	a	division	of	Christians	into	two	categories	is	not	a	unique
understanding	that	is	found	only	in	Pentecostal	teaching	in	the
twentieth	century.	In	fact,	much	Pentecostal	teaching	came	out	of
earlier	holiness	groups	that	had	taught	that	Christians	could	either
be	ordinary	believers	or	“sanctified”	believers.	Other	groups	have
divided	Christians	using	different	categories,	such	as	ordinary
believers	and	those	who	are	“Spirit	filled,”	or	ordinary	believers
and	those	who	are	“disciples,”	or	“carnal”	and	“spiritual”
Christians.	In	fact,	the	Roman	Catholic	Church	has	long	had	not
two	but	three	categories:	ordinary	believers,	priests,	and	saints.	All
of	these	divisions	into	different	categories	of	Christians	can	be	seen
in	figure	39.3.
	
27
CHRISTIANS	DIVIDED	INTO	TWO	CATEGORIES:	
ORDINARY	SND	SPIRIT-BAPTIZED
Figure	39.2
OTHER	WAYS	PEOPLE	HAVE	CLASSIFIED	CHRISTIANS	SO	AS	TO	DIVIDE	THEM	INTO	TWO
(OR	THREE)	CATEGORIES
Figure	39.3
Although	those	who	teach	the	classical	Pentecostal	view	of	baptism
in	the	Holy	Spirit	may	deny	that	they	are	attempting	to	divide
Christians	into	two	categories,	such	a	division	is	implicit	every	time
they	ask	whether	someone	has	been	baptized	in	the	Holy	Spirit	or
not.	Such	a	question	strongly	suggests	that	there	are	two	groups	of
Christians,	those	who	have	had	this	experience	of	“baptism	in	the
Holy	Spirit”	and	those	who	have	not.
What	is	the	problem	with	viewing	Christians	as	existing	in	two
categories	like	this?	The	problem	is	that	it	contributes	to	a	“we-
they”	mentality	in	churches,	and	leads	to	jealousy,	pride,	and
divisiveness.	No	matter	how	much	these	people	who	have	received
this	special	empowering	of	the	Holy	Spirit	try	to	be	thoughtful	and
considerate	of	those	who	have	not,	if	they	genuinely	love	their
fellow	brothers	and	sisters	in	Christ,	and	if	this	has	been	a	very
helpful	experience	in	their	own	Christian	lives,	they	cannot	help	but
give	the	impression	that	they	would	like	others	to	share	this
experience	as	well.	Even	if	they	are	not	proud	in	their	hearts	(and	it
seems	to	me	that	most	are	not)	with	respect	to	this	experience,	such
a	conviction	that	there	is	a	second	category	of	Christians	will
inevitably	give	an	impression	of	pride	or	spiritual	superiority.	Yet
there	will	very	likely	be	a	sense	of	jealousy	on	the	part	of	those	who
have	not	had	such	an	experience.	In	this	way,	a	view	of	two	groups
within	the	church	is	fostered,	and	the	repeated	charge	of
divisiveness	that	is	made	against	the	charismatic	movement	is	given
some	credibility.	In	fact,	divisions	often	do	occur	in	churches.
The	major	objection	to	this	position	is	that	the	New	Testament	itself
teaches	no	such	two-level	or	two-class	Christianity.	Nowhere	in	the
Epistles	do	we	read	of	Paul	or	Peter	telling	a	church	that	is	having
problems,	“You	all	need	to	be	baptized	in	the	Holy	Spirit.”
Nowhere	do	we	hear	of	the	risen	Lord	Jesus	speaking	to	the
troubled	and	weak	churches	in	Revelation	2–3,	“Ask	me	to	baptize
you	in	the	Holy	Spirit.”	It	is	hard	to	avoid	the	conclusion	that	the
two-level	or	two-class	view	taught	by	all	of	these	groups
throughout	history	does	not	have	a	solid	foundation	in	the	New
Testament	itself.
2.	There	Are	Many	Degrees	of	Empowering,	Fellowship	With	God,	and
Personal	Christian	Maturity.
	Is	there	a	better	model	for	understanding	the
varying	degrees	of	maturity	and	power	and	fellowship	with	God	that
Christians	experience?	If	we	are	willing	to	eliminate	the	categories	that	make
us	think	of	Christians	in	one	group	or	another,	a	better	model	is	possible,	as
represented	in	figure	39.4.
This	chart	shows	the	world	as	divided	into	non-Christians	and
Christians,	but	among	Christians	there	are	not	categories	into	which
we	can	place	believers	and	divide	them	into	set	groups.	Rather,
there	are	Christians	at	all	points	along	a	scale	of	increasing
Christian	maturity	(sanctification),	increasing	closeness	of
fellowship	in	their	walk	with	God	(an	aspect	of	adoption),	and
greater	experiences	of	the	power	of	the	Holy	Spirit	at	work	in	their
lives	and	ministries.
The	Christian	life	should	be	one	of	
growth	in	all	of	these	areas	
as
we	progress	throughout	life.	For	many	people	that	growth	will	be
gradual	and	progressive,	and	will	extend	over	all	the	years	of	their
lives.	We	could	represent	it	by	the	arrow	in	figure	39.5.
	
28
A	BETTER	PICTURE:	CHRISTIANS	HAVE	EXPERIENCED	VARYING	DEGREES	OF	GROWTH,
BUT	THEY	SHOULD	NOT	BE	DIVIDED	INTO	TWO	DISTINCT	CATEGORIES
Figure	39.4
FOR	MOST	CHRISTIANS	GROWTH	WILL	BE	GRADUAL	AND	PROGRESSIVE	AND	WILL
EXTEND	OVER	THEIR	WHOLE	LIVES
Figure	39.5
a.	How	Should	We	Understand	Contemporary	Experience?
	What	then	has
happened	to	people	who	say	they	have	experienced	a	“baptism	in	the	Holy
Spirit”	that	has	brought	great	blessing	to	their	lives?	We	must	understand	first
what	is	commonly	taught	about	the	need	to	prepare	for	baptism	in	the	Holy
Spirit.	Very	often	people	will	be	taught	that	they	should	confess	all	known
sins,	repent	of	any	remaining	sin	in	their	lives,	trust	Christ	to	forgive	those
sins,	commit	every	area	of	their	lives	to	the	Lord’s	service,	yield	themselves
fully	to	him,	and	believe	that	Christ	is	going	to	empower	them	in	a	new	way
and	equip	them	with	new	gifts	for	ministry.	Then	after	that	preparation,	they
are	encouraged	to	ask	Jesus	in	prayer	to	baptize	them	in	the	Holy	Spirit.	But
what	does	this	preparation	do?	It	is	a	guaranteed	prescription	for	significant
growth	in	the	Christian	life!	Such	confession,	repentance,	renewed
commitment,	and	heightened	faith	and	expectation,	if	they	are	genuine,	can
only	bring	positive	results	in	a	person’s	life.	If	any	Christian	is	sincere	in
these	steps	of	preparation	to	receive	baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit,	there	will
certainly	be	growth	in	sanctification	and	deeper	fellowship	with	God.	In
addition	to	that,	we	may	expect	that	at	many	of	these	times	the	Holy	Spirit
will	graciously	bring	a	measure	of	the	additional	fullness	and	empowering
that	sincere	Christians	are	seeking,	even	though	their	theological
understanding	and	vocabulary	may	be	imperfect	in	the	asking.	If	this	happens,
they	may	well	realize	increased	power	for	ministry	and	growth	in	spiritual
gifts	as	well.	We	could	say	that	a	person	has	moved	from	point	A	to	point	B	in
figure	39.6	and	has	made	one	very	large	step	forward	in	the	Christian	life.
Of	course	prayer	and	Bible	study	and	worship	will	seem	more
meaningful.	Of	course	there	will	be	more	fruitfulness	in	evangelism
and	other	kinds	of	ministry.	But	it	is	important	to	recognize	that
someone	who	moves	from	point	A	to	point	B	on	the	chart	is	not
now	in	a	separate	category	of	Christians,	such	as	a	group	of	those
who	have	been	“baptized	in	the	Holy	Spirit”	and	who	are	therefore
different	from	those	who	have	not	had	such	an	experience.	There
might	be	another	Christian	in	the	same	church	who	has	never	had
such	a	large	step	of	growth	but	who	has	nonetheless	been	making
steady	progress	for	the	last	forty	years	of	his	or	her	Christian	life
and	has	come	to	point	C	on	the	chart	above.	Though	that	person	has
never	had	a	single	experience	that	Pentecostals	would	call	a
“baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit,”	he	or	she	is	still	much	farther	along
the	path	of	Christian	growth	than	the	younger	Christian	who	has
recently	been	“baptized	in	the	Holy	Spirit”	(according	to
Pentecostal	terminology)	and	moved	from	point	A	to	point	B.
Although	the	Christian	who	moved	from	point	A	to	point	B	is	not
farther	along	in	the	Christian	life	than	another	person	who	is	at
point	C,	the	person	who	moved	to	point	B	is	certainly	farther	along
than	he	or	she	was	before,	
and	this	is	certainly	a	positive	result	in
his	or	her	life.	Thus,	with	this	understanding	of	the	Christian	life,
we	have	no	divisions	of	Christians	into	two	categories.
A	SINGLE	EXPERIENCE	MAY	RESULT	IN	A	LARGE	STEP	OF	GROWTH	IN	THE	CHRISTIAN
LIFE
Figure	39.6
Before	we	leave	this	chart,	one	more	observation	should	be	made:
in	many	cases	the	charismatic	movement	has	brought	teaching	on
the	baptism	of	the	Holy	Spirit	into	more	liberal	churches	where,	for
many	years,	there	has	not	been	a	clear	proclamation	of	the	gospel	of
salvation	by	faith	in	Christ	alone,	and	where	people	have	not	been
taught	that	they	can	believe	the	Bible	completely	as	God’s	Word	to
us.	In	such	cases,	many	of	the	people	in	those	churches	have	never
experienced	saving	faith—they	are	at	point	N	on	the	chart	above,
actually	non-Christians	and	not	born	again.
	
29
	
Now	when	a
representative	of	a	charismatic	renewal	comes	to	these	churches
and	tells	them	that	they	can	experience	new	vitality	in	their
Christian	lives,	and	then	tells	them	that	the	preparation	is	to	repent
of	all	known	sins,	ask	Christ	for	forgiveness	of	those	sins	and	trust
him	to	forgive	them,	and	commit	their	lives	totally	to	Christ	as	their
Lord,	they	eagerly	respond	to	those	directions.	Then	they	pray	and
ask	Jesus	to	baptize	them	in	the	Holy	Spirit.	The	actual	result	is	that
they	move	from	point	N	on	the	chart	to	point	A	or	perhaps	even
point	B,	because	of	their	sincerity	and	deep	eagerness	to	draw
closer	to	God.	While	they	think	that	they	have	been	baptized	by	the
Holy	Spirit	as	a	second	experience	in	their	Christian	lives,	what	has
in	fact	happened	is	that	they	have	become	Christians	for	the	first
time.	(They	have	been	“baptized	in	the	Holy	Spirit”	in	the	true	New
Testament	sense!)	The	next	day	it	is	almost	impossible	to	keep	them
silent,	they	are	so	excited.	Suddenly,	reading	the	Bible	has	become
meaningful.	Suddenly	prayer	has	become	real.	Suddenly	they	know
the	presence	of	God	in	their	lives.	Suddenly	worship	has	become	an
experience	of	deep	joy,	and	often	they	have	begun	to	experience
spiritual	gifts	that	they	had	not	known	before.	It	is	no	wonder	that
the	charismatic	renewal	has	brought	such	excitement	(and	often
much	controversy)	to	many	Roman	Catholic	parishes	and	to	many
mainline,	more	liberal	Protestant	denominations.	Though	we	may
differ	with	the	way	this	teaching	is	actually	presented,	no	one
should	fault	the	good	results	that	have	come	about	as	a	result	of	it	in
these	churches.
b.	What	Terms	Should	We	Use	Today?
	Now	we	can	understand	why	our
use	of	terms	to	describe	this	experience	and	the	category	of	understanding	we
put	it	in	are	so	important.	If	we	use	the	traditional	Pentecostal	terminology	of
“baptism	of	the	Holy	Spirit,”	then	we	almost	inevitably	end	up	with	two-
category	Christianity,	for	this	is	seen	as	a	common	experience	that	
can	
and
indeed	
should	
happen	to	Christians	at	one	point	in	time,	and,	once	it	has
happened,	does	not	need	to	be	repeated.	It	is	seen	as	a	single	experience	of
empowering	for	ministry	that	is	distinct	from	the	experience	of	becoming	a
Christian,	and	people	either	have	received	that	experience	or	they	have	not.
Especially	when	the	experience	is	described	in	terms	of	what	happened	to	the
disciples	at	Pentecost	in	Acts	2	(which	was	clearly	a	one-time	experience	for
them),	the	Samaritans	in	Acts	8,	and	the	Ephesian	disciples	in	Acts	19,	it	is
clearly	implied	that	this	is	a	one-time	event	that	empowers	people	for	ministry
but	that	also	puts	them	in	a	separate	category	or	group	than	the	one	they	were
in	before	this	experience.	The	use	of	the	term	“
the	
baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit”
inevitably	implies	two	groups	of	Christians.
But	if	we	are	correct	in	understanding	the	experience	that	has	come
to	millions	of	people	in	the	charismatic	renewal	as	a	large	step	of
growth	in	their	Christian	lives,	then	some	other	term	than	“baptism
in	the	Holy	Spirit”	would	seem	to	be	more	appropriate.	There	might
be	several	terms	that	we	could	use,	so	long	as	they	allow	for
repetition,	varying	degrees	of	intensity,	and	further	development
beyond	that	one	experience,	and	so	long	as	they	do	not	suggest	that
all	truly	obedient	Christians	should	have	the	same	experience.
	
30
We	have	already	used	one	expression,	“
a	large	step	of	growth	
in
several	aspects	of	the	Christian	life.”	Because	this	phrase	speaks	of
“
a	
large	step	of	growth”	it	cannot	be	misunderstood	to	refer	to	a
single	experience	that	puts	Christians	in	a	new	category.	And
because	it	is	referred	to	as	a	large	step	of	growth,	it	clearly	implies
that	others	may	experience	such	growth	in	smaller	steps	over	a
longer	period	of	time	but	reach	the	same	point	in	the	Christian	life.
31
Another	term	that	may	be	helpful	is	“a	new	
empowering	for
ministry.”	
It	is	certainly	true	that	many	who	have	received	such	a
charismatic	experience	do	find	new	power	for	ministry	in	their
Christian	lives,	including	the	ability	to	use	spiritual	gifts	that	had
not	been	theirs	before.	However,	the	problem	with	this	phrase	is
that	it	does	not	say	anything	about	the	deepened	fellowship	with
God,	the	greater	effectiveness	in	prayer	and	Bible	study,	and	the
new	joy	in	worship	that	often	also	result	from	this	experience.
c.	What	Is	“Being	Filled	With	the	Spirit”?
	Yet	an	even	more	commonly
used	term	in	the	New	Testament	is	
“being	filled	with	the	Holy	Spirit.”
Because	of	its	frequent	use	in	contexts	that	speak	of	Christian	growth	and
ministry,	
this	seems	to	me	to	be	the	best	term	to	use	
to	describe	genuine
“second	experiences”	today	(or	third	or	fourth	experiences,	etc.).	Paul	tells	the
Ephesians,	“Do	not	get	drunk	with	wine,	for	that	is	debauchery;	but	
be	filled
with	the	Spirit”	
(Eph.	5:18).	He	uses	a	present	tense	imperative	verb	that
could	more	explicitly	be	translated,	“Be	continually	being	filled	with	the	Holy
Spirit,”	thus	implying	that	this	is	something	that	should	repeatedly	be
happening	to	Christians.	Such	fullness	of	the	Holy	Spirit	will	result	in
renewed	worship	and	thanksgiving	
(Eph.	5:19–20),	and	in	renewed
relationships	to	others,	especially	those	in	authority	over	us	or	those	under	our
authority	(Eph.	5:21—6:9).	In	addition,	since	the	Holy	Spirit	is	the	Spirit	who
sanctifies	us,	such	a	filling	will	often	result	in	
increased	sanctification.
Furthermore,	since	the	Holy	Spirit	is	the	one	who	empowers	us	for	Christian
service	and	gives	us	spiritual	gifts,	such	filling	will	often	result	in	
increased
power	for	ministry	
and	increased	effectiveness	and	perhaps	diversity	in	the
use	of	
spiritual	gifts.
We	see	examples	of	repeated	filling	with	the	Holy	Spirit	in	the	book
of	Acts.	In	Acts	2:4,	the	disciples	and	those	with	them	were	“all
filled	with	the	Holy	Spirit.”	
Later,	when	Peter	was	standing	before
the	Sanhedrin,	we	read,	“Then	Peter,	
filled	with	the	Holy	Spirit,	
said
to	them	.	.	.”	(Acts	4:8).	But	a	little	later,	when	Peter	and	the	other
apostles	had	returned	to	the	church	to	tell	what	had	happened	(Acts
4:23)	they	joined	together	in	prayer.	After	they	had	prayed	they
were	again	filled	with	the	Holy	Spirit,	a	sequence	of	events	that
Luke	makes	clear:	“
After	
they	prayed,	the	place	where	they	were
meeting	was	shaken.	And	they	were	all	
filled	with	the	Holy	Spirit
and	spoke	the	word	of	God	boldly”	(Acts	4:31	NIV).	Even	though
Peter	had	been	filled	with	the	Holy	Spirit	at	Pentecost	(Acts	2:4)
and	had	later	been	filled	with	the	Holy	Spirit	before	speaking	to	the
Sanhedrin	(Acts	4:8),	he	was	once	again	filled	with	the	Holy	Spirit
after	the	group	of	Christians	he	was	meeting	with	had	prayed.
Therefore,	it	is	appropriate	to	understand	filling	with	the	Holy
Spirit	
not	as	a	one-time	event	
but	as	
an	event	that	can	occur	over
and	over	again	
in	a	Christian’s	life.	It	may	involve	a	momentary
empowering	for	a	specific	ministry	(such	as	apparently	happened	in
Acts	4:8;	7:55),	but	it	may	also	refer	to	a	long-term	characteristic	of
a	person’s	life	(see	Acts	6:3;	11:24).	In	either	case	such	filling	can
occur	many	times	in	a	person’s	life:	even	though	Stephen,	as	an
early	deacon	(or	apostolic	assistant),	was	a	man	“full	of	the	Spirit
and	of	wisdom”	(Acts	6:3,	5),	when	he	was	being	stoned	he
apparently	received	a	fresh	new	filling	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in	great
power	(Acts	7:55).
Someone	might	object	that	a	person	who	is	already	“full”	of	the
Holy	Spirit	cannot	become	more	full—if	a	glass	is	full	of	water	no
more	water	can	be	put	into	it.	But	a	water	glass	is	a	poor	analogy
for	us	as	real	people,	for	God	is	able	to	cause	us	to	grow	and	to	be
able	to	contain	much	more	of	the	Holy	Spirit’s	fullness	and	power.
A	better	analogy	might	be	a	balloon,	which	can	be	“full”	of	air	even
though	it	has	very	little	air	in	it.	When	more	air	is	blown	in,	the
balloon	expands	and	in	a	sense	it	is	“more	full.”	So	it	is	with	us:	we
can	be	filled	with	the	Holy	Spirit	and	at	the	same	time	be	able	to
receive	much	more	of	the	Holy	Spirit	as	well.	It	was	only	Jesus
himself	to	whom	the	Father	gave	the	Spirit	without	measure	(John
3:34).
The	divisiveness	that	comes	with	the	term	
“baptism	in	the	Holy
Spirit”	
could	easily	be	avoided	by	using	any	of	the	alternative
terms	mentioned	in	this	section.	People	could	be	thankful	for	“a
new	fullness	of	the	Holy	Spirit”	or	“a	new	empowering	for
ministry”	or	“a	significant	step	in	growth”	in	some	aspect	of
another	Christian’s	life.	There	would	be	no	separating	into	“we”
and	“they,”	for	we	would	recognize	that	we	are	all	part	of	one	body
with	no	separate	categories.
	
32
	
In	fact,	many	charismatics	and	even
some	traditional	Pentecostals	today	are	using	the	term	“baptism	in
the	Holy	Spirit”	far	less	frequently,	preferring	to	use	other	terms
such	as	“being	filled	with	the	Holy	Spirit”	instead.
	
33
Moreover,	many	people	who	have	had	no	single	dramatic
experience	(such	as	what	Pentecostals	have	called	a	baptism	in	the
Holy	Spirit)	have	nonetheless	begun	to	experience	new	freedom
and	joy	in	worship	(often	with	the	advent	of	modern	worship	or
praise	songs	in	their	churches),	and	to	use	a	wider	variety	of
spiritual	gifts	with	effectiveness	and	edification	for	themselves	and
their	churches	(including	gifts	such	as	healing,	prophecy,	working
of	miracles,	discernment	of	spirits,	and	the	ability	to	exercise
authority	over	demonic	forces	with	prayer	and	a	word	of	rebuke
spoken	directly	to	the	evil	spirits).	Sometimes	the	gift	of	speaking
in	tongues	and	the	gift	of	interpretation	have	been	used	as	well,	but
in	other	cases	they	have	not.	All	of	this	is	to	say	that	the	differences
between	Pentecostals	and	charismatics	on	the	one	hand,	and	more
traditional	and	mainstream	evangelical	Christians	on	the	other
hand,	seem	to	me	to	be	breaking	down	more	and	more,	and	there
are	fewer	and	fewer	differences	between	them.
Someone	may	object	that	it	is	specifically	this	experience	of
praying	for	a	baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit	that	catapults	people	into	a
new	level	of	power	in	ministry	and	effectiveness	in	use	of	spiritual
gifts.	Since	this	experience	has	been	so	helpful	in	the	lives	of
millions	of	people,	should	we	so	quickly	dismiss	it?	In	response,	it
must	be	said	that,	if	the	terminology	“baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit”	is
changed	for	something	more	representative	of	New	Testament
teaching,	there	should	be	no	objection	at	all	to	people	coming	into
churches,	and	to	encouraging	people	to	prepare	their	hearts	for
spiritual	renewal	by	sincere	repentance	and	renewed	commitment	to
Christ	and	by	believing	that	the	Holy	Spirit	can	work	much	more
powerfully	in	their	lives.
	
34
	
There	is	nothing	wrong	with	teaching
people	to	pray	and	to	seek	this	greater	infilling	of	the	Holy	Spirit,	or
to	expect	and	ask	the	Lord	for	an	outpouring	of	more	spiritual	gifts
in	their	lives,	for	the	benefit	of	the	body	of	Christ	(see	1	Cor.	12:31;
14:1,	12).	In	fact,	most	evangelical	Christians	in	every
denomination	genuinely	long	for	greater	power	in	ministry,	greater
joy	in	worship,	and	deeper	fellowship	with	God.	Many	would	also
welcome	increased	understanding	of	spiritual	gifts,	and
encouragement	to	grow	in	the	use	of	them.	If	Pentecostal	and
charismatic	Christians	would	be	willing	to	teach	on	these	things
without	the	additional	baggage	of	two-level	Christianity	that	is
implied	by	the	term	“baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit,”	they	might	find	a
new	era	of	greatly	increased	effectiveness	in	bringing	teaching	on
these	other	areas	of	the	Christian	life	to	evangelicals	generally.
3.	Being	Filled	With	the	Holy	Spirit	Does	Not	Always	Result	in	Speaking
in	Tongues.
	One	remaining	point	needs	to	be	made	with	respect	to	the
experience	of	being	filled	with	the	Holy	Spirit.	Because	there	were	several
cases	in	Acts	where	people	received	the	new	covenant	power	of	the	Holy
Spirit	and	began	to	speak	with	tongues	at	the	same	time	(Acts	2:4;	10:46;
19:6;	probably	also	implied	in	8:17–19	because	of	the	parallel	with	the
experience	of	the	disciples	in	Acts	2),	Pentecostal	teaching	has	commonly
maintained	that	the	outward	sign	of	baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit	is	speaking	in
tongues	(that	is,	speaking	in	languages	that	are	not	understood	by	and	have
not	been	learned	by	the	person	speaking,	whether	known	human	languages	or
other	kinds	of	angelic	or	heavenly	or	miraculously	given	languages).
	
35
But	it	is	important	to	realize	that	there	are	many	cases	where	being
filled	with	the	Holy	Spirit	
did	not	
result	in	speaking	in	tongues.
When	Jesus	was	filled	with	the	Spirit	in	Luke	4:1,	the	result	was
strength	to	overcome	the	temptations	of	Satan	in	the	wilderness.
When	the	temptations	were	ended,	and	Jesus	“returned	in	the	power
of	the	Spirit	into	Galilee”	(Luke	4:14),	the	results	were	miracles	of
healing,	casting	out	of	demons,	and	teaching	with	authority.	When
Elizabeth	was	filled	with	the	Holy	Spirit,	she	spoke	a	word	of
blessing	to	Mary	(Luke	1:41–45).	When	Zechariah	was	filled	with
the	Holy	Spirit,	he	prophesied	(Luke	1:67–79).	Other	results	of
being	filled	with	the	Holy	Spirit	were	powerful	preaching	of	the
gospel	(Acts	4:31),	(perhaps)	wisdom	and	Christian	maturity	and
sound	judgment	(Acts	6:3),	powerful	preaching	and	testimony
when	on	trial	(Acts	4:8),	a	vision	of	heaven	(Acts	7:55),	and
(apparently)	faith	and	maturity	of	life	(Acts	11:24).	Several	of	these
cases	may	also	imply	the	fullness	of	the	Holy	Spirit	to	empower
some	kind	of	ministry,	especially	in	the	context	of	the	book	of	Acts,
where	the	empowering	of	the	Holy	Spirit	is	frequently	seen	to	result
in	miracles,	preaching,	and	works	of	great	power.
	
36
Therefore,	while	an	experience	of	being	filled	with	the	Holy	Spirit
may	result	in	the	gift	of	speaking	in	tongues,	or	in	the	use	of	some
other	gifts	that	had	not	previously	been	experienced,	it	also	may
come	without	the	gift	of	speaking	in	tongues.	In	fact,	many
Christians	throughout	history	have	experienced	powerful	infillings
of	the	Holy	Spirit	that	have	not	been	accompanied	by	speaking	in
tongues.	With	regard	to	this	gift	as	well	as	all	other	gifts,	we	must
simply	say	that	the	Holy	Spirit	“apportions	each	one	individually	as
he	wills”	(1	Cor.	12:11).
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
Before	reading	this	chapter,	what	was	your	understanding	of	“baptism	in
the	Holy	Spirit”?	How	has	your	understanding	changed,	if	at	all?
2
.	
Has	your	own	Christian	life	included	one	or	more	events	that	you	could
call	“a	large	step	of	growth”	in	some	area	or	another	in	the	Christian	life?
Or	has	it	rather	been	one	of	small	but	continuing	steps	in	sanctification,
in	fellowship	with	God,	and	in	use	of	spiritual	gifts	and	power	in
ministry?
3
.	
Have	you	known	people	who	have	claimed	they	received	a	“baptism	in
the	Holy	Spirit”	after	conversion?	In	your	evaluation,	has	the	result	in
their	lives	been	mostly	positive,	or	mostly	negative,	or	has	it	been	rather
mixed?	If	you	have	had	such	an	experience	yourself,	do	you	think	that
understanding	it	as	a	one-time	“baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit”	was	essential
to	the	experience,	or	could	the	same	results	have	come	in	your	Christian
life	if	it	had	been	called	“being	filled	with	the	Holy	Spirit”?	Do	you
think	it	would	be	right	to	seek	for	an	experience	of	filling	with	the	Holy
Spirit	in	your	own	life	now?	How	might	someone	go	about	doing	this?
4
.	
We	all	realize	that	it	is	possible	to	overemphasize	something	good	in	the
Christian	life	to	such	an	extent	that	our	lives	become	unbalanced	and	not
as	effective	in	ministry	as	they	might	be.	If	we	think	of	the	various	ways
in	which	we	can	grow	in	the	Christian	life	(knowledge	of	the	Word	and
sound	doctrine,	prayer,	love	for	God,	love	for	other	Christians	and	for
non-Christians,	trust	in	God	each	day,	worship,	holiness	of	life,	use	of
spiritual	gifts,	effective	power	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in	our	witness	and
ministry,	daily	fellowship	with	God,	etc.),	in	what	areas	do	you	think	you
need	to	ask	God	for	more	growth	in	your	own	life?	Would	it	be
appropriate	to	ask	him	for	a	new	fullness	of	the	Holy	Spirit	to
accompany	growth	in	those	areas?
5
.	
With	regard	to	this	topic	of	baptism	in	or	being	filled	with	the	Holy
Spirit,	do	you	think	that	evangelical	churches	generally	have	been
moving	toward	more	divisiveness	or	more	unity	on	this	issue?
SPECIAL	TERMS
baptism	by	the	Holy	Spirit
	
new	covenant	experience	of	the
baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit
	
Holy	Spirit
baptism	with	the	Holy	Spirit
	
old	covenant	experience	of	the
being	filled	with	the	Holy	Spirit
	
Holy	Spirit
Pentecost	two-class
	
Christianity
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the
bibliography	to	chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be
found	in	
Appendix	4
.)	Note:	Very	few	systematic	theologies	have
included	explicit	treatment	of	this	topic,	since	it	has	only	become	a
controversial	issue	in	this	century.)
Sections	In	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1983			Carter,	1:435–47
3.			Baptist
1983–85			Erickson,	879–80
4.			Dispensational
1947			Chafer,	6:138–61
1986			Ryrie,	362–66
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1962			Buswell,	2:208–12
7.			Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988–92			Williams,	2:177–79,	181–207,	271–321
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
(no	explicit	treatment)
Other	Works
Bennett,	Dennis	and	Rita.	
The	Holy	Spirit	and	You.	
Plainfield,	N.J.:
Logos,	1971.
Bruner,	Frederick	Dale.	
A	Theology	of	the	Holy	Spirit:	The	Pentecostal
Experience	and	the	New	Testament	Witness.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,
1970.
Dunn,	James	D.	G.	
Baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit.	
London:	SCM,	1970.
Ervin,	Howard	M.	
Conversion-Initiation	and	the	Baptism	in	the	Holy
Spirit:	A	Critique	of	James	D.	G.	Dunn,	“Baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit.”
Peabody,	Mass.:	Hendrickson,	1984.
_____.	
Spirit	Baptism.	
Peabody,	Mass.:	Hendriksen,	1987.
Gaffin,	Richard.	
Perspectives	on	Pentecost.	
Phillipsburg,	N.J.:
Presbyterian	and	Reformed,	1979.
Green,	Michael.	
Baptism:	Its	Purpose,	Practice	and	Power.	
Downers
Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,	1987,	pp.	127–41.
_____.	“The	Spirit’s	Baptism.”	In	
I	Believe	in	the	Holy	Spirit.	
London:
Hodder	and	Stoughton,	and	Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1975,	pp.	123–47.
Hoekema,	Anthony	A.	
Holy	Spirit	Baptism.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,
(1972).
Lloyd-Jones,	Martyn.	
Joy	Unspeakable:	Power	and	Renewal	in	the	Holy
Spirit.	
Ed.	by	Christopher	Catherwood.	Wheaton,	Ill.:	Shaw,	1984.
McGee,	Gary	B.,	ed.	
Initial	Evidence.	
Peabody,	Mass.:	Hendrickson,
1991.
Packer,	J.	I.	“Baptism	in	the	Spirit.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	73–74.
_____.	
Keep	in	Step	With	the	Spirit.	
Old	Tappan,	N.J.:	Revell,	and
Leicester:	Inter-Varsity	Press,	1984.
Stott,	John.	
Baptism	and	Fulness.	
Leicester	and	Downers	Grove,	Ill.:
InterVarsity	Press,	1976.
Unger,	Merrill	F.	
The	Baptizing	Work	of	the	Holy	Spirit.	
Wheaton,	Ill.:
Van	Kampen	Press,	1953.
White,	R.	E.	O.	“Baptism	of	the	Spirit.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	121–22.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
1
	Corinthians	12:12–13:	
For	just	as	the	body	is	one	and	has	many	members,
and	all	the	members	of	the	body,	though	many,	are	one	body,	so	it	is	with
Christ.	For	by	[or	“in”]	one	Spirit	we	were	all	baptized	into	one	body—Jews
or	Greeks,	slaves	or	free—and	all	were	made	to	drink	of	one	Spirit.
HYMN
“Spirit	of	God,	Descend	Upon	My	Heart”
Spirit	of	God,	descend	upon	my	heart;
Wean	it	from	earth,	through	all	its	pulses	move;
Stoop	to	my	weakness,	mighty	as	thou	art,
And	make	me	love	thee	as	I	ought	to	love.
Hast	thou	not	bid	us	love	thee,	God	and	King?
All,	all	thine	own,	soul,	heart,	and	strength	and	mind.
I	see	thy	cross—there	teach	my	heart	to	cling:
O	let	me	seek	thee,	and	O	let	me	find.
Teach	me	to	feel	that	thou	art	always	nigh;
Teach	me	the	struggles	of	the	soul	to	bear,
To	check	the	rising	doubt,	the	rebel	sigh;
Teach	me	the	patience	of	unanswered	prayer.
Teach	me	to	love	thee	as	thine	angels	love,
One	holy	passion	filling	all	my	frame;
The	baptism	of	the	heav’n	descended	dove
My	heart	an	altar,	and	thy	love	the	flame.
AUTHOR:	GEORGE	CROLY,	1854
Alternative	hymn:	“Spirit	of	the	Living	God”
NOTES
1
See	
chapter	32
,	for	a	list	of	the	elements	in	the	order	of	salvation.
2
I	am	using	the	terms	
Pentecostal	
and	
charismatic	
in	the	following	way:	
Pentecostal	
refers	to	any	denomination	or	group	that
traces	its	historical	origin	back	to	the	Pentecostal	revival	that	began	in	the	United	States	in	1901	and	that	holds	to	the	doctrinal
positions	(a)	that	baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit	is	ordinarily	an	event	subsequent	to	conversion,	and	(b)	that	baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit
is	made	evident	by	the	sign	of	speaking	in	tongues,	and	(c)	that	all	the	spiritual	gifts	mentioned	in	the	New	Testament	are	to	be
sought	and	used	today.	Pentecostal	groups	usually	have	their	own	distinct	denominational	structures,	the	most	prominent	of	which
is	the	Assemblies	of	God.
Charismatic	
refers	to	any	groups	(or	people)	that	trace	their	historical	origin	to	the	charismatic	renewal	movement	of	the	1960s
and	1970s,	seek	to	practice	all	the	spiritual	gifts	mentioned	in	the	New	Testament	(including	prophecy,	healing,	miracles,	tongues,
interpretation,	and	distinguishing	between	spirits),	and	allow	differing	viewpoints	on	whether	baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit	is
subsequent	to	conversion	and	whether	tongues	is	a	sign	of	baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit.	Charismatics	will	very	often	refrain	from
forming	their	own	denomination,	but	will	view	themselves	as	a	force	for	renewal	within	existing	Protestant	and	Roman	Catholic
churches.	There	is	no	representative	charismatic	denomination	in	the	United	States	today,	but	the	most	prominent	charismatic
spokesman	is	probably	Pat	Robertson	with	his	Christian	Broadcasting	Network,	the	television	program	“The	700	Club,”	and
Regent	University	(formerly	CBN	University).
In	the	1980s	yet	a	third	renewal	movement	arose,	called	the	
“third	wave”	
by	missions	professor	C.	Peter	Wagner	at	Fuller
Seminary	(he	referred	to	the	Pentecostal	renewal	as	the	first	wave	of	the	Holy	Spirit’s	renewing	work	in	the	modern	church,	and
the	charismatic	movement	as	the	second	wave).	“Third	wave”	people	encourage	the	equipping	of	all	believers	to	use	New
Testament	spiritual	gifts	today,	and	say	that	the	proclamation	of	the	gospel	should	ordinarily	be	accompanied	by	“signs,	wonders,
and	miracles,”	according	to	the	New	Testament	pattern.	They	teach,	however,	that	baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit	happens	to	all
Christians	at	conversion,	and	that	subsequent	experiences	are	better	called	“filling”	with	the	Holy	Spirit.	The	most	prominent
representative	of	the	“third	wave”	is	John	Wimber,	senior	pastor	of	the	Vineyard	Christian	Fellowship	in	Anaheim,	California,	and
leader	of	the	Association	of	Vineyard	Churches.	Wimber’s	two	most	influential	books,	
Power	Evangelism	
(San	Francisco:	Harper
and	Row,	1986;	rev.	ed.,	1992)	and	
Power	Healing	
(San	Francisco:	Harper	and	Row,	1987),	both	co-authored	by	Kevin	Springer,
are	widely	recognized	as	representative	of	distinctive	“third	wave”	emphases.
The	definitive	reference	work	for	these	movements	is	now	Stanley	M.	Burgess	and	Gary	B.	McGee,	eds.,	
Dictionary	of
Pentecostal	and	Charismatic	Movements	
(Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1988).
3
It	does	not	matter	much	whether	we	translate	the	Greek	phrase	
en	pneumati	
as	“in	the	Spirit”	or	“with	the	Spirit”	because	both
are	acceptable	translations,	and	people	on	all	sides	of	this	topic	seem	to	use	those	two	expressions	rather	interchangeably.	I	have
used	“in	the	Holy	Spirit”	ordinarily	throughout	this	chapter,	but	the	RSV	translation	which	I	quote	here	generally	prefers	to	use
“with	the	Holy	Spirit.”	I	do	not	make	any	distinction	between	these	two	phrases	in	the	discussion	of	this	chapter.	(But	see	the
beginning	of	
chapter	39
,	for	a	discussion	of	the	frequent	claim	by	Pentecostals	that	baptism	
by	
the	Holy	Spirit	[as	in	1	Cor.	12:13]
is	a	different	event	than	baptism	
in	
[or	with]	the	Holy	Spirit.)
4
Most	Pentecostal	discussions	of	baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit	include	the	view	that	speaking	in	tongues	is	a	“sign”	that	one	has	been
baptized	in	the	Holy	Spirit,	and	that	this	sign	will	be	given	to	all	who	have	been	baptized	in	the	Holy	Spirit,	even	though	not	all
will	later	have	the	gift	of	speaking	in	tongues	as	a	continuing	gift	in	their	lives.
5
I	personally	heard	such	teaching	on	baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit	as	a	first-year	university	student	in	1967,	and	later	privately
prayed,	as	instructed,	first	repenting	of	all	known	sin	and	once	again	yielding	every	area	of	my	life	to	God,	then	asking	Jesus	to
baptize	me	in	the	Holy	Spirit.	Though	my	understanding	of	that	experience	has	since	changed,	so	that	I	would	explain	it	in
different	terms	(see	below),	the	result	in	my	life	was	undoubtedly	a	positive	and	lasting	one,	including	a	much	deeper	love	for
Christ	and	much	greater	effectiveness	in	personal	ministry.
6
Another	example	sometimes	cited	is	that	of	Cornelius	in	Acts	10.	He	was	a	devout	man	who	prayed	constantly	to	God	(Acts
10:2),	but	when	Peter	came	and	preached	to	him	and	his	household,	Peter	and	those	with	him	were	amazed	“because	the	gift	of	the
Holy	Spirit	had	been	poured	out	even	on	the	Gentiles.	For	they	heard	them	speaking	in	tongues	and	extolling	God”	(Acts	10:45–
46).
7
The	case	of	Paul	in	Acts	9:17	is	sometimes	mentioned	as	well,	but	it	is	not	as	clear-cut,	since	his	violent	persecution	of	the
church	prior	to	that	time	indicates	that	he	was	not	born	again	before	the	Damascus	Road	experience.	But	some	have	seen	a	similar
pattern	in	the	distinction	between	his	conversion	on	the	Damascus	Road	and	his	receiving	the	Holy	Spirit	at	the	hands	of	Ananias
three	days	later.
8
See	above,	footnote	
3
.
9
The	expression	used	in	all	six	passages	is	the	verb	
baptizō	
(“baptize”)	plus	the	prepositional	phrase	
en	pneumati	hagiō	
(“in	[or
with]	the	Holy	Spirit”),	except	that	Mark	omits	the	preposition	
en.	
Even	so,	there	is	no	difference	in	meaning,	because	the	dative
noun	alone	can	take	the	same	sense	as	the	preposition	
en	
plus	the	dative	noun.	Matthew	and	Luke	also	add	“and	with	fire.”
10
In	this	context,	in	which	he	is	talking	repeatedly	about	the	Holy	Spirit	and	spiritual	gifts,	there	can	be	little	doubt	that	he	is
referring	to	the	Holy	Spirit.
11
In	addition	to	the	fact	that	this	Greek	phrase	found	in	1	Cor.	12:13	is	translated	to	refer	to	baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit	in	all	the
other	six	occurrences,	there	is	a	grammatical	argument	that	supports	the	translation	“
in	
one	Spirit	we	were	all	baptized	into	one
body”	in	1	Cor.	12:13:	if	Paul	had	wanted	to	say	that	we	were	baptized	
by	
the	Holy	Spirit,	he	would	have	used	a	different
expression.	To	be	baptized	“by”	someone	in	the	New	Testament	is	always	expressed	by	the	preposition	
hypo	
followed	by	a
genitive	noun.	This	is	the	way	New	Testament	writers	say	that	people	were	baptized	in	the	Jordan	River	“by”	John	the	Baptist
(Matt.	3:6;	Mark	1:5;	Luke	3:7)	or	that	Jesus	was	baptized	“by”	John	(Matt.	3:13;	Mark	1:9),	or	that	the	Pharisees	had	not	been
baptized	“by”	John	(Luke	7:30),	or	that	John	the	Baptist	told	Jesus,	“I	need	to	be	baptized	by	you”	(Matt.	3:14).	Therefore,	if	Paul
had	wanted	to	say	that	the	Corinthians	had	all	been	baptized	
by	
the	Holy	Spirit	he	would	have	used	
hypo	
plus	the	genitive,	not	
en
plus	the	dative.	(It	is	common	in	the	New	Testament	for	the	agent	who	performs	the	action	expressed	by	a	passive	verb	to	be
named	using	
hypo	
plus	the	genitive.)	Further	support	for	the	view	that	1	Cor.	12:13	means	“in	(or	with)	one	Spirit”	is	found	in	M.
J.	Harris,	“Prepositions	and	Theology	in	the	Greek	New	Testament,”	in	
NIDNTT,	
vol.	3,	p.	
1210.
12
Howard	M.	Ervin,	
Conversion-Initiation	and	the	Baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit	
(Peabody,	Mass.:	Hendrickson,	1984),	pp.	98–102,
admits	that	1	Cor.	12:13,	however	it	is	translated,	does	refer	to	the	beginning	of	the	Christian	life	(he	says	it	is	“initiatory,”	p.	
101),
but	then	he	says	that	the	next	phrase,	“we	were	made	to	drink	of	one	Spirit”	(his	translation)	refers	to	a	subsequent	empowering
for	service.	He	also	says	that	Paul’s	use	of	the	phrase	“baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit”	is	different	from	the	sense	the	phrase	takes	in
the	other	six	occurrences	in	the	New	Testament.	Thus,	he	apparently	grants	the	non-Pentecostal	interpretation	of	1	Cor.	12:13,	but
still	says	that	Paul	uses	the	same	phrase	with	different	meaning.	Yet	this	argument	does	not	seem	persuasive.	It	would	be	very
unlikely	if	Luke,	who	was	Paul’s	traveling	companion	throughout	much	of	his	missionary	activity,	and	who	was	probably	with
Paul	in	Rome	when	he	wrote	the	book	of	Acts	(Acts	28:30–31),	would	use	a	phrase	in	a	different	sense	than	Paul,	or	that	Paul
would	use	this	phrase	in	a	different	sense	than	the	sense	in	which	it	was	so	prominently	used	by	Matthew,	Mark,	Luke	and	John.
Another	attempt	to	avoid	our	conclusion	on	1	Cor.	12:13	is	found	in	John	P.	Baker,	
Baptized	in	One	Spirit	
(Plainfield,	N.J.:	Logos
Books,	1970),	pp.	18–25,	where	he	argues	that	1	Cor.	12:13	does	not	mean	that	we	were	baptized	
into	
one	body,	but	that	we	were
baptized	“
for	
the	one	body	of	Christ”	(p.	
24).	But	Baker’s	argument	is	not	convincing,	because	the	word	“for”	at	the	beginning	of
v.	
13	shows	that	it	must	be	an	argument	that	supports	v.	
12,	where	Paul	says	that	we	are	many	members,	but	one	body.	Yet	in	order
for	v.	
13	to	show	that	all	Christians	are	a	part	of	one	body,	it	is	necessary	for	v.	
13	to	communicate	why	we	are	
all	
members	of	one
body,	and	Paul	does	this	by	showing	that	we	are	all	baptized	into	one	body.	Baker’s	view,	that	this	happens	only	to	some	“who	are
already	members	
of	
the	body	of	Christ	to	enable	them	to	function	effectively”	(p.	
24),	is	not	convincing	in	view	of	Paul’s
statement	that	“all”	Christians	were	baptized	into	one	body.	Moreover,	baptism	
for	the	benefit	of	
one	body	(which	is	essentially
what	Baker	takes	it	to	mean)	gives	a	very	unusual	sense	to	the	preposition	
eis—
if	Paul	had	meant	this,	we	would	have	expected
something	like	
heneka,	
“for	the	sake	of,”	or	
hyper	
plus	the	genitive,	meaning	“in	behalf,	for	the	sake	of.”
13
When	Jesus	breathed	on	his	disciples	and	said	to	them,	“Receive	the	Holy	Spirit”	(John	20:22),	it	probably	was	an	acted-out
prophecy	of	what	would	happen	to	them	at	Pentecost.	In	this	same	context—in	fact,	in	the	verse	immediately	preceding—Jesus
had	told	them	something	that	would	not	happen	until	Pentecost:	“As	the	Father	has	sent	me,	
even	so	I	send	you”	
(John	20:21).	But
even	though	he	said	this	before	he	had	ascended	into	heaven,	he	did	not	really	send	them	out	to	preach	the	gospel	until	the	Day	of
Pentecost	had	come.	Therefore	his	words	were	looking	forward	to	what	would	happen	at	Pentecost.	It	is	best	to	understand	the
words	in	the	next	sentence,	“Receive	the	Holy	Spirit,”	in	the	same	way—he	was	speaking	in	advance	of	something	that	would
happen	on	the	Day	of	Pentecost.	On	that	day	they	would	receive	the	new	covenant	fullness	and	power	of	the	Holy	Spirit,	a	much
greater	empowering	of	the	Holy	Spirit	than	what	they	had	experienced	before.
14
I	do	not	mean	to	say	that	believers’	experience	of	regeneration	in	the	old	covenant	was	exactly	the	same	as	that	of	new	covenant
believers.	While	considerations	listed	in	the	following	discussion	indicate	a	less-powerful	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in	the	old
covenant,	defining	the	nature	of	the	differences	is	difficult,	since	Scripture	gives	us	little	explicit	information	about	it.	But	the	fact
that	there	was	any	saving	faith	at	all	in	old	covenant	believers	requires	us	to	think	that	there	was	some	kind	of	regenerating	work
of	the	Holy	Spirit	in	them,	enabling	them	to	believe.	(See	the	discussion	of	regeneration	in	
chapter	34
.)
15
The	closest	thing	to	casting	out	demons	in	the	Old	Testament	is	the	situation	where	the	evil	spirit	troubling	Saul	departed	from
him	whenever	David	played	his	lyre	(1	Sam.	16:23),	but	this	is	hardly	equivalent	to	the	effective	and	lasting	casting	out	of	demons
of	which	we	see	in	the	New	Testament	age.
16
Of	course,	there	were	examples	in	the	Old	Testament	where	certain	leaders	were	remarkably	gifted	by	God	and	empowered	by
the	Holy	Spirit—Moses,	David,	Daniel,	many	of	the	writing	prophets,	and	even	Samson	received	unusual	empowering	from	the
Holy	Spirit	for	specific	ministries.	But	their	experiences	were	not	typical	of	the	vast	numbers	of	God’s	people	who	were	saved	by
faith	as	they	looked	forward	to	the	promised	Messiah’s	coming,	but	who	did	not	have	the	outpouring	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in	the	new
covenant	power	that	we	experience	today.
17
Ervin,	
Conversion-Initiation,	
pp.	14,	15–19,	objects	that	the	new	covenant	did	not	begin	at	Pentecost	but	earlier	at	the	time	of
Jesus’	death.	This	is	certainly	true,	but	it	misses	the	point.	We	are	not	arguing	that	the	new	covenant	itself	began	at	the	day	of
Pentecost,	but	the	new	covenant	experience	of	the	Holy	Spirit	began	at	Pentecost,	because	it	was	there	that	Jesus	poured	out	the
Holy	Spirit	in	new	covenant	fullness	and	power	(Acts	2:33;	cf.	1:4–5).
Ervin	also	objects	that	the	disciples	at	Pentecost	received	“power-in-mission”	from	the	Holy	Spirit,	not	entrance	into	the	new
covenant	(pp.	17–18).	But	here	Ervin	has	put	forth	a	false	dichotomy:	it	is	not	either/or,	but	both/and:	at	Pentecost	the	disciples
both	entered	into	a	new	covenant	experience	of	the	Holy	Spirit	and	(of	course)	received	a	new	empowering	for	ministry	with	that
experience	of	the	Holy	Spirit.
18
I	have	adapted	this	diagram	from	George	Ladd,	
A	Theology	of	the	New	Testament	
(Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1974),	pp.	68–69.
19
Because	of	their	association	with	Jesus,	the	disciples	also	received	some	foretaste	of	the	post-Pentecostal	power	of	the	Holy
Spirit	when	they	healed	the	sick	and	cast	out	demons	(cf.	Luke	9:1;	10:1,	8,	17–20,	and	many	other	verses).
20
When	the	Holy	Spirit	came	in	power	he	ordinarily	came	to	groups	of	people	rather	than	to	isolated	individuals	(so	Acts	2:4;
8:17;	10:44;	19:6;	but	the	conversion	of	Saul	is	different:	see	Acts	9:17–18).	A	new	community,	filled	with	love	for	one	another,
was	the	evident	result	of	the	outpouring	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in	this	way	(see	Acts	2:41–47).
21
My	student	James	Renehan	has	argued	(in	a	lengthy	paper)	that	baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit,	while	occurring	at	the	same	time	as
conversion,	should	nevertheless	be	considered	a	distinct	element	in	the	“order	of	salvation”	(the	list	of	things	that	happen	to	us	in
experiencing	salvation;	see	
chapter	32
).	He	notes	that	baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit	is	not	exactly	the	same	as	any	of	the	other
elements	in	the	order	of	salvation	(such	as	regeneration	or	conversion),	and	may	also	be	called	“receiving	the	Holy	Spirit”	(see
Acts	8:15–16;	19:2,	6;	Rom.	8:9,	11;	Gal.	3:2).	Renehan’s	idea	is	clearly	not	the	charismatic	doctrine	of	a	baptism	in	the	Holy
Spirit	subsequent	to	conversion	(for	he	would	say	it	always	accompanies	genuine	conversion	and	always	occurs	at	the	same	time
as	conversion).	The	suggestion	is	an	interesting	one	and,	while	I	have	not	presently	adopted	it	in	this	chapter,	I	think	it	deserves
further	consideration.	It	would	not	be	inconsistent	with	my	overall	argument	in	this	chapter.
22
The	only	exception	is	Acts	11:15–17.	While	this	passage	does	not	explicitly	call	the	falling	of	the	Holy	Spirit	on	Cornelius’
household	a	“baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit,”	when	Peter	says,	“the	Holy	Spirit	fell	on	them	
just	as	on	us	at	the	beginning,”	
and	then
recalls	Jesus’	words	about	baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit,	he	clearly	implies	that	the	members	of	Cornelius’s	household	were	baptized
in	the	Holy	Spirit	when	he	preached	to	them	(see	Acts	10:44–48).
23
This	is	the	argument	of	James	Dunn,	
Baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit	
(London:	SCM,	1970),	pp.	55–72.
24
In	this	section	I	am	largely	following	the	careful	discussion	of	John	Stott,	
Baptism	and	Fulness,	
2d	ed.	(Leicester	and	Downers
Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,	1976),	pp.	31–34.
25
Even	if	we	did	regard	him	as	someone	who	first	had	a	kind	of	old	covenant	faith	in	the	Jewish	Messiah	who	was	to	come,	this
would	only	show	that	he	is	one	more	example	of	someone	who	first	had	an	old	covenant	experience	of	the	Holy	Spirit	and	then
came	into	a	new	covenant	experience	of	the	Holy	Spirit.
26
Regarding	Acts	19:1–7,	Ervin,	
Conversion-Initiation,	
pp.	55–59,	objects	that	these	disciples	were	first	baptized	and	then,	when
Paul	laid	his	hands	on	them,	they	were	empowered	with	the	Holy	Spirit.	We	may	admit	that	this	is	true,	but	the	two	events	were	so
closely	connected	in	time	that	it	is	hard	to	make	a	clear	separation	between	them,	and	they	certainly	do	not	fit	the	common
Pentecostal	pattern	of	instruction	and	prayer,	sometimes	weeks	or	months	or	years	after	conversion,	seeking	a	subsequent	baptism
in	the	Holy	Spirit.	If	we	had	asked	them	later	if	their	baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit	was	“subsequent”	to	their	conversion,	they	would
probably	have	said	that	it	was	at	the	same	time,	so	closely	connected	were	these	events	in	the	actual	historical	sequence.
27
I	have	not	included	in	this	diagram	another	division	that	is	sometimes	reflected,	not	in	any	official	teaching,	but	in	attitude	and
practice,	in	Reformed	circles:	the	division	between	ordinary	Christians	and	those	who	are	“truly	Reformed.”
28
To	be	more	precise	we	need	to	recognize	that	we	can	grow	in	some	aspects	of	the	Christian	life	without	growing	in	others,	and	a
single	chart	is	therefore	inadequate	to	show	all	of	this.	For	example,	Christians	can	grow	in	power	but	not	in	holiness	(as	the
Corinthian	church	had	done),	or	people	can	grow	in	knowledge	but	not	in	power,	or	knowledge	but	not	in	holiness	of	life
(something	that	tragically	happens	to	some—but	certainly	not	all—students	in	theological	seminaries,	and	to	some	pastors	who
place	excessive	emphasis	on	academic	pursuits).	Or	a	person	can	grow	in	personal	fellowship	with	God	but	not	in	knowledge	of
Scripture	(something	that	happens	with	an	extensive	“pietistic”	emphasis).	Or	someone	can	grow	in	holiness	of	life	but	not	in
power	or	use	of	spiritual	gifts.	All	sorts	of	combinations	like	this	are	possible,	but	we	would	need	several	charts	to	show	them	in	a
schematic	way.	For	the	sake	of	simplicity	I	have	simply	represented	“Christian	growth”	in	general	on	this	chart.
29
However,	in	many	cases,	both	in	some	Protestant	churches	and	in	Roman	Catholic	churches,	people	have	been	told	that	they
received	Christ	and	became	Christians	at	their	baptism	when	they	were	infants.
30
The	same	criteria	could	be	used	to	find	replacement	terms	for	some	of	the	other	“two-category”	views	mentioned	above,	or	else
to	explain	the	terms	that	are	used	so	as	to	avoid	misunderstanding.
31
Paul	does	say	that	we	“are	to	grow	up	
in	every	way	
into	him	who	is	the	head,	into	Christ”	(Eph.	4:15).
32
It	is	my	personal	opinion	that	most	of	the	divisiveness	that	has	come	with	the	influence	of	charismatic	renewal	in	many
churches	has	not	come	because	of	spiritual	gifts	but	because	of	a	misunderstanding	of	what	is	happening	and	the	implications	of
two	groups	of	Christians	that	come	with	the	term	“baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit.”
33
John	Wimber,	who	does	not	like	to	identify	himself	as	a	Pentecostal	or	a	charismatic,	says	with	much	wisdom,	“I	have
discovered	that	the	argument	concerning	the	baptism	of	the	Spirit	usually	comes	down	to	a	question	of	labels.	Good	medicine	may
be	incorrectly	labeled,	which	is	probably	true	in	this	case.	The	Pentecostals’	experience	of	God	is	better	than	their	explanation	of
it”	(John	Wimber	with	Kevin	Springer,	
Power	Evangelism,	
p.	145).	In	recent	years	I	have	noticed	in	personal	conversation	with
professors	at	institutions	affiliated	with	the	charismatic	movement	that	there	is	an	increasing	tendency	to	talk	about	filling	with	the
Holy	Spirit	rather	than	baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit	to	represent	what	has	happened	to	those	within	the	charismatic	movement.
34
My	student	Jack	Mattern,	though	not	himself	a	charismatic,	has	told	me	that	in	over	a	decade	of	working	with	students	on
university	campuses,	he	has	found	a	great	hunger	among	Christians	to	know	how	they	may	be	filled	with	the	Holy	Spirit.	He
rightly	points	out	that	effective	teaching	on	this	area	must	include	the	need	(1)	to	yield	our	lives	fully	to	God	(Rom.	12:1;	Gal.
2:20),	(2)	to	depend	fully	on	God	for	power	to	live	the	Christian	life	(Rom.	8:13;	Gal.	2:20;	3:2–3),	and	(3)	to	obey	the	Lord’s
commands	in	our	lives	(1	John	2:6).	These	elements	are	similar	to	the	steps	of	preparation	mentioned	above	in	the	discussion	of
common	charismatic	teaching.	In	any	case,	to	these	steps	could	certainly	be	added	a	prayer	that	the	Holy	Spirit	would	fill	us,	in
accordance	with	the	will	of	God	as	expressed	in	Eph.	5:18.	There	should	be	no	objection	to	teaching	Christians	to	pray	daily	in
accordance	with	these	principles.
35
See	
chapter	53
,	for	a	discussion	of	speaking	in	tongues.
36
Scripture	does	not	specify	what	result	there	was	in	the	life	of	John	the	Baptist,	who	was	“filled	with	the	Holy	Spirit,	even	from
his	mother’s	womb”	(Luke	1:15),	but	“the	hand	of	the	Lord	was	with	him”	(Luke	1:66),	and	“the	child	grew	and	became	strong	in
spirit”	(Luke	1:80).
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	40
The	Perseverance	of	the	Saints	(Remaining
a	Christian)
Can	true	Christians	lose	their	salvation?	How	can	we	know	if	we
are	truly	born	again?
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
Our	previous	discussion	has	dealt	with	many	aspects	of	the	full
salvation	that	Christ	has	earned	for	us	and	that	the	Holy	Spirit	now
applies	to	us.	But	how	do	we	know	that	we	shall	continue	to	be
Christians	throughout	our	lives?	Is	there	anything	that	will	keep	us
from	falling	away	from	Christ,	anything	to	guarantee	that	we	will
remain	Christians	until	we	die	and	that	we	will	in	fact	live	with	God
in	heaven	forever?	Or	might	it	be	that	we	will	turn	away	from
Christ	and	lose	the	blessings	of	our	salvation?	The	topic	of	the
perseverance	of	the	saints	speaks	to	these	questions.	
The
perseverance	of	the	saints	means	that	all	those	who	are	truly	born
again	will	be	kept	by	God’s	power	and	will	persevere	as	Christians
until	the	end	of	their	lives,	and	that	only	those	who	persevere	until
the	end	have	been	truly	born	again.
This	definition	has	two	parts	to	it.	It	indicates	first	that	there	is
assurance	to	be	given	to	those	who	are	truly	born	again,	for	it
reminds	them	that	God’s	power	will	keep	them	as	Christians	until
they	die,	and	they	will	surely	live	with	Christ	in	heaven	forever.	On
the	other	hand,	the	second	half	of	the	definition	makes	it	clear	that
continuing	in	the	Christian	life	is	one	of	the	evidences	that	a	person
is	truly	born	again.	It	is	important	to	keep	this	aspect	of	the	doctrine
in	mind	as	well,	lest	false	assurance	be	given	to	people	who	were
never	really	believers	in	the	first	place.
It	should	be	noted	that	this	question	is	one	on	which	evangelical
Christians	have	long	had	significant	disagreement.	Many	within	the
Wesleyan/Arminian	tradition	have	held	that	it	is	possible	for
someone	who	is	truly	born	again	to	lose	his	or	her	salvation,	while
Reformed	Christians	have	held	that	that	is	not	possible	for	someone
who	is	
truly	
born	again.
1
	Most	Baptists	have	followed	the
Reformed	tradition	at	this	point;	however,	they	have	frequently
used	the	term	“
eternal	security
”	or	the	“
eternal	security	of	the
believer
”	rather	than	the	term	“
perseverance	of	the	saints.
”
A.	All	Who	Are	Truly	Born	Again	Will	Persevere	to	the	End
There	are	many	passages	that	teach	that	those	who	are	truly	born
again,	who	are	genuinely	Christians,	will	continue	in	the	Christian
life	until	death	and	will	then	go	to	be	with	Christ	in	heaven.	Jesus
says,
I	have	come	down	from	heaven,	not	to	do	my	own	will,	but	the	will	of
him	who	sent	me;	and	this	is	the	will	of	him	who	sent	me,	that	I
should	lose	nothing	of	all	that	he	has	given	me,	but	raise	it	up	at	the
last	day.	For	this	is	the	will	of	my	Father,	that	
every	one	who	
sees	the
Son	and	
believes	in	
him	should	have	eternal	life;	and	
I	will	raise	him
up	at	the	last	day.	
(John	6:38–40)
Here	Jesus	says	that	everyone	who	believes	in	him	will	have	eternal	life.	He
says	that	he	will	raise	that	person	up	at	the	last	day—which,	in	this	context	of
believing	in	the	Son	and	having	eternal	life,	clearly	means	that	Jesus	will	raise
that	person	up	to	eternal	life	with	him	(not	just	raise	him	up	to	be	judged	and
condemned).	It	seems	hard	to	avoid	the	conclusion	that	everyone	who	truly
believes	in	Christ	will	remain	a	Christian	up	to	the	day	of	final	resurrection
into	the	blessings	of	life	in	the	presence	of	God.
2
	Moreover,	this	text
emphasizes	that	Jesus	does	the	will	of	the	Father,	which	is	that	he	should
“
lose	nothing	
of	all	that	he	has	given	me”	(John	6:39).	Once	again,	those
given	to	the	Son	by	the	Father	will	not	be	lost.
Another	passage	emphasizing	this	truth	is	John	10:27–29,	in	which
Jesus	says:
My	sheep	hear	my	voice,	and	I	know	them,	and	they	follow	me;	and	I
give	them	eternal	life,	and	
they	shall	never	perish,	
and	no	one	shall
snatch	them	out	of	my	hand.	My	Father,	who	has	given	them	to	me,	is
greater	than	all,	and	no	one	is	able	to	snatch	them	out	of	the	Father’s
hand.
Here	Jesus	says	that	those	who	follow	him,	those	who	are	his	sheep,
are	given	eternal	life.	He	further	says	that	“no	one	shall	snatch	them
out	of	my	hand”	(v.	
28).	Now	some	have	objected	to	this	that	even
though	no	one	else	can	take	Christians	out	of	Christ’s	hand,	we
might	remove	ourselves	from	Christ’s	hand.	But	that	seems	to	be
pedantic	quibbling	over	words—does	not	“no	one”	also	include	the
person	who	is	in	Christ’s	hand?	Moreover,	we	know	that	our	own
hearts	are	far	from	trustworthy.	Therefore	if	the	possibility
remained	that	we	could	remove	ourself	from	Christ’s	hand,	the
passage	would	hardly	give	the	assurance	that	Jesus	intends	by	it.
But	more	importantly,	the	most	forceful	phrase	in	the	passage	is
“they	shall	never	perish”	
(v.	28).	The	Greek	construction	(
ou	mē
plus	aorist	subjunctive)	is	especially	emphatic	and	might	be
translated	more	explicitly,	“and	they	shall	certainly	not	perish
forever.”	This	emphasizes	that	those	who	are	Jesus’	“sheep”	and
who	follow	him,	and	to	whom	he	has	given	eternal	life,	shall	never
lose	their	salvation	or	be	separated	from	Christ—they	shall	“never
perish.”
3
There	are	several	other	passages	that	say	those	who	believe	have
“eternal	life.”	One	example	is	John	3:36:	“He	who	believes	in	the
Son	
has	eternal	life”	
(cf.	also	John	5:24;	6:4–7;	10:28;	1	John
5:13).	Now	if	this	is	truly	eternal	life	that	believers	have,	then	it	is
life	that	lasts	forever	with	God.	It	is	a	gift	of	God	that	comes	with
salvation	(it	is	put	in	contrast	to	condemnation	and	eternal	judgment
in	John	3:16–17,	36;	10:28).	Arminians	have	objected	that	“eternal
life”	is	simply	a	quality	of	life,	a	type	of	life	in	relationship	with
God,	which	one	can	have	for	a	time	and	then	lose.	But	this
objection	does	not	seem	to	be	convincing	in	view	of	the	clear
nuance	of	unending	time	involved	in	the	adjective	
eternal	
(Gk.
aiōnios,	
“eternal,	without	end”).
4
	Certainly	there	is	a	special	quality
about	this	life,	but	the	emphasis	in	the	adjective	
eternal	
is	on	the
fact	that	it	is	the	opposite	of	death;	it	is	the	opposite	of	judgment
and	separation	from	God;	it	is	life	that	goes	on	forever	in	the
presence	of	God.	And	he	who	believes	in	the	Son	has	this	“
eternal
life”	(John	3:36).
Evidence	in	Paul’s	writings	and	the	other	New	Testament	epistles
also	indicates	that	those	who	are	truly	born	again	will	persevere	to
the	end.	There	remains	“no	condemnation	for	those	who	are	in
Christ	Jesus”	(Rom.	8:1);	therefore,	it	would	be	unjust	for	God	to
give	any	kind	of	eternal	punishment	to	those	who	are	Christians—
no	condemnation	remains	for	them,	for	the	entire	penalty	for	their
sins	has	been	paid.
Then	in	Romans	8:30,	Paul	emphasizes	the	clear	connection
between	God’s	eternal	purposes	in	predestination	and	his	working
out	of	those	purposes	in	life,	together	with	his	final	realization	of
those	purposes	in	“glorifying”	or	giving	final	resurrection	bodies	to
those	whom	he	has	brought	into	union	with	Christ:	“And	those
whom	he	predestined	he	also	called;	and	those	whom	he	called	he
also	justified;	and	those	whom	he	justified	he	also	glorified.”	Here
Paul	sees	the	future	event	of	glorification	as	such	a	certainty	in
God’s	settled	purpose	that	he	can	speak	of	it	as	if	it	were	already
accomplished	(“he	also	glorified”).	This	is	true	of	all	those	who	are
called	and	justified—that	is,	all	those	who	truly	become	Christians.
Further	evidence	that	God	keeps	those	who	are	born	again	safe	for
eternity	is	the	“seal”	that	God	places	upon	us.	This	“seal”	is	the
Holy	Spirit	within	us,	who	also	acts	as	God’s	“guarantee”	that	we
will	receive	the	inheritance	promised	to	us:	“In	him	you	also,	who
have	heard	the	word	of	truth,	the	gospel	of	your	salvation,	and	have
believed	in	him,	were	
sealed	with	the	promised	Holy	Spirit,	
which
is	the	
guarantee	
of	our	inheritance	until	we	acquire	possession	of	it,
to	the	praise	of	his	glory”	(Eph.	1:13–14).	The	Greek	word
translated	“guarantee”	in	this	passage	(
arrabōn
)	is	a	legal	and
commercial	term	that	means	“first	installment,	deposit,	down
payment,	pledge”	and	represents	“a	payment	which	obligates	the
contracting	party	to	make	further	payments.”
5
	When	God	gave	us
the	Holy	Spirit	within,	he	committed	himself	to	give	all	the	further
blessings	of	eternal	life	and	a	great	reward	in	heaven	with	him.	This
is	why	Paul	can	say	that	the	Holy	Spirit	is	the	“
guarantee	
of	our
inheritance	until	we	acquire	possession	of	it”	(Eph.	1:14).	All	who
have	the	Holy	Spirit	within	them,	all	who	are	truly	born	again,	have
God’s	unchanging	promise	and	guarantee	that	the	inheritance	of
eternal	life	in	heaven	will	certainly	be	theirs.	God’s	own
faithfulness	is	pledged	to	bring	it	about.
6
Another	example	of	assurance	that	believers	will	persevere	to	the
end	is	found	in	Paul’s	statement	to	the	Philippians:	“I	am	sure	that
he	who	began	a	good	work	in	you	will	bring	it	to	completion	at	the
day	of	Jesus	Christ”	(Phil.	1:6).	It	is	true	that	the	word	“you”	here	is
plural	(Gk.	
hymas
),	and	thus	he	is	referring	to	Christians	in	the
Philippian	church	generally,	but	he	is	still	talking	about	the	specific
believers	to	whom	he	is	writing,	and	saying	that	God’s	good	work
that	began	in	them	will	continue	and	will	be	completed	at	the	day
Christ	returns.
7
	Peter	tells	his	readers	that	they	are	those	“who	
by
God’s	power	are	guarded	
through	faith	for	a	salvation	ready	to	be
revealed	in	the	last	time”	(1	Peter	1:5).	The	word	
guarded	
(Gk.
phroureō
)	can	mean	both	“kept	from	escaping”	and	“protected	from
attack,”	and	perhaps	both	kinds	of	guarding	are	intended	here:	God
is	preserving	believers	from	escaping	out	of	his	kingdom,	and	he	is
protecting	them	from	external	attacks.
The	present	participle	that	Peter	uses	gives	the	sense	“You	are
continually	being	guarded.”
8
	He	stresses	that	this	is	by	God’s
power.	Yet	God’s	power	does	not	work	apart	from	the	personal	faith
of	those	being	guarded,	but	through	their	faith.	(“Faith,”	
pistis,	
is
regularly	a	personal	activity	of	individual	believers	in	Peter’s
epistles;	see	1	Peter	1:7,	9,	21;	5:9;	2	Peter	1:1,	5;	and	commonly	in
the	New	Testament.)	The	parallel	examples	of	God	working
“through”	someone	or	something	in	Peter’s	writings	(1	Peter	1:3,
23:	2	Peter	1:4,	and	probably	also	1	Peter	1:12;	2:14;	3:1)	suggest
that	the	believer’s	personal	faith	or	trust	in	God	is	the	means	God
uses	to	guard	his	people.	Thus	we	might	give	the	sense	of	the	verse
by	saying	that	“God	is	continually	using	his	power	to	guard	his
people	by	means	of	their	faith,”	a	statement	that	seems	to	imply	that
God’s	power	in	fact	energizes	and	continually	sustains	individual,
personal	faith.
9
This	guarding	is	not	for	a	temporary	goal	but	for	a	salvation	ready
to	be	revealed	in	the	last	time.	“Salvation”	is	used	here	not	of	past
justification	or	of	present	sanctification	(speaking	in	theological
categories)	but	of	the	future	full	possession	of	all	the	blessings	of
our	redemption—of	the	final,	complete	fulfillment	of	our	salvation
(cf.	Rom.	13:11;	1	Peter	2:2).	Though	already	prepared	or	“ready,”
it	will	not	be	“revealed”	by	God	to	mankind	generally	until	the	“last
time,”	the	time	of	final	judgment.
This	last	phrase	makes	it	difficult	if	not	impossible	to	see	any	end	to
God’s	guarding	activity.	If	God’s	guarding	has	as	its	purpose	the
preservation	of	believers	until	they	receive	their	full,	heavenly
salvation,	then	it	is	safe	to	conclude	that	God	will	accomplish	that
purpose	and	they	will	in	fact	attain	that	final	salvation.	Ultimately
their	attainment	of	final	salvation	depends	on	God’s	power.
Nevertheless,	God’s	power	continually	works	“through”	their	faith.
Do	they	wish	to	know	whether	God	is	guarding	them?	If	they
continue	to	trust	God	through	Christ,	God	is	working	and	guarding
them,	and	he	should	be	thanked.
This	emphasis	on	God’s	guarding	in	combination	with	our	faith
provides	a	natural	transition	to	the	second	half	of	the	doctrine	of
perseverance.
B.	Only	Those	Who	Persevere	to	the	End	Have	Been	
Truly	Born	Again
While	Scripture	repeatedly	emphasizes	that	those	who	are	truly
born	again	will	persevere	to	the	end	and	will	certainly	have	eternal
life	in	heaven	with	God,	there	are	other	passages	that	speak	of	the
necessity	of	continuing	in	faith	throughout	life.	They	make	us
realize	that	what	Peter	said	in	1	Peter	1:5	is	true,	namely,	that	God
does	not	guard	us	
apart	from	
our	faith,	but	only	by	working	
through
our	faith	so	that	he	enables	us	to	continue	to	believe	in	him.	In	this
way,	those	who	continue	to	trust	in	Christ	gain	assurance	that	God
is	working	in	them	and	guarding	them.
One	example	of	this	kind	of	passage	is	John	8:31–32:	“Jesus	then
said	to	the	Jews	who	had	believed	in	him,	‘
If	you	continue	in	my
word,	
you	are	truly	my	disciples,	and	you	will	know	the	truth,	and
the	truth	will	make	you	free.’	”	Jesus	is	here	giving	a	warning	that
one	evidence	of	genuine	faith	is	continuing	in	his	word,	that	is,
continuing	to	believe	what	he	says	and	living	a	life	of	obedience	to
his	commands.	Similarly,	Jesus	says,	“
He	who	endures	to	the	end
will	be	saved”	(Matt.	10:22),	as	a	means	of	warning	people	not	to
fall	away	in	times	of	persecution.
Paul	says	to	the	Colossian	Christians	that	Christ	has	reconciled
them	to	God,	“in	order	to	present	you	holy	and	blameless	and
irreproachable	before	him,	
provided	that	you	continue	in	the	faith,
stable	and	steadfast,	not	shifting	from	the	hope	of	the	gospel	which
you	heard”	(Col.	1:22–23).	It	is	only	natural	that	Paul	and	the	other
New	Testament	writers	would	speak	this	way,	for	they	are
addressing	groups	of	people	who	profess	to	be	Christians,	without
being	able	to	know	the	actual	state	of	every	person’s	heart.	There
may	have	been	people	at	Colossae	who	had	joined	in	the	fellowship
of	the	church,	and	perhaps	even	professed	that	they	had	faith	in
Christ	and	had	been	baptized	into	membership	of	the	church,	but
who	never	had	true	saving	faith.	How	is	Paul	to	distinguish	such
people	from	true	believers?	How	can	he	avoid	giving	them	false
assurance,	assurance	that	they	will	be	saved	eternally	when	in	fact
they	will	not,	unless	they	come	to	true	repentance	and	faith?	Paul
knows	that	those	whose	faith	is	not	real	will	eventually	fall	away
from	participation	in	the	fellowship	of	the	church.	Therefore	he
tells	his	readers	that	they	will	ultimately	be	saved,	“
provided	that
you	continue	in	the	faith”	
(Col.	1:23).	Those	who	continue	show
thereby	that	they	are	genuine	believers.	But	those	who	do	not
continue	in	the	faith	show	that	there	was	no	genuine	faith	in	their
hearts	in	the	first	place.
A	similar	emphasis	is	seen	in	Hebrews	3:14	(NASB):	“For	we	have
become	partakers	of	Christ,	
if	we	hold	fast	the	beginning	of	our
assurance	firm	to	the	end.”	
This	verse	provides	an	excellent
perspective	on	the	doctrine	of	perseverance.	How	do	we	know	if
“we	have	become	partakers	of	Christ”?	How	do	we	know	if	this
being	joined	to	Christ	has	happened	to	us	at	some	time	in	the	past?
10
	One	way	in	which	we	know	that	we	have	come	to	genuine	faith
in	Christ	is	if	we	continue	in	faith	until	the	end	of	our	lives.
Attention	to	the	context	of	Hebrews	3:14	will	keep	us	from	using
this	and	other	similar	passages	in	a	pastorally	inappropriate	way.
We	must	remember	that	there	are	other	evidences	elsewhere	in
Scripture	that	give	Christians	assurance	of	salvation,
11
	so	
we	should
not	think	that	assurance	that	we	belong	to	Christ	is	impossible	until
we	die.	
However,	continuing	in	faith	is	the	one	means	of	assurance
that	is	named	here	by	the	author	of	Hebrews.	He	mentions	this	to
warn	his	readers	that	they	should	not	fall	away	from	Christ,	because
he	is	writing	to	a	situation	where	such	a	warning	is	needed.	The
beginning	of	that	section,	just	two	verses	earlier,	said,	“Take	care,
brethren,	lest	there	be	in	any	of	you	an	evil,	unbelieving	heart,
leading	you	to	fall	away	from	the	living	God”	(Heb.	3:12).	In	fact,
in	all	of	the	passages	where	continuing	to	believe	in	Christ	to	the
end	of	our	lives	is	mentioned	as	one	indication	of	genuine	faith,	the
purpose	is	never	to	make	those	who	are	presently	trusting	in	Christ
worry	that	some	time	in	the	future	they	might	fall	away	(and	we
should	never	use	these	passages	that	way	either,	for	that	would	be
to	give	wrongful	cause	for	worry	in	a	way	that	Scripture	does	not
intend).	Rather,	the	purpose	is	always	
to	warn	those	who	are
thinking	of	falling	away	or	have	fallen	away	
that	if	they	do	this	it	is
a	strong	indication	that	they	were	never	saved	in	the	first	place.
Thus,	the	necessity	for	continuing	in	faith	should	just	be	used	as	a
warning	against	falling	away,	a	warning	that	those	who	fall	away
give	evidence	that	their	faith	was	never	real.
John	clearly	states	that	when	people	fall	away	from	fellowship	with
the	church	and	from	belief	in	Christ	they	thereby	show	that	their
faith	was	not	real	in	the	first	place	and	that	they	were	never	part	of
the	true	body	of	Christ.	Speaking	of	people	who	have	left	the
fellowship	of	believers,	John	says,	“They	went	out	from	us,	but
they	were	not	of	us;	for	
if	they	had	been	of	us,	they	would	have
continued	with	us;	
but	they	went	out,	that	it	might	be	plain	that	they
all	are	not	of	us”	(1	John	2:19).	John	says	that	those	who	have
departed	showed	by	their	actions	that	they	“were	not	of	us”—that
they	were	not	truly	born	again.
C.	Those	Who	Finally	Fall	Away	May	Give	
Many	External	Signs	of	Conversion
Is	it	always	clear	which	people	in	the	church	have	genuine	saving
faith	and	which	have	only	an	intellectual	persuasion	of	the	truth	of
the	gospel	but	no	genuine	faith	in	their	hearts?	It	is	not	always	easy
to	tell,	and	Scripture	mentions	in	several	places	that	
unbelievers	
in
fellowship	with	the	visible	church	can	give	some	external	signs	or
indications	that	make	them	look	or	sound	like	genuine	believers.
For	example,	Judas,	who	betrayed	Christ,	must	have	acted	almost
exactly	like	the	other	disciples	during	the	three	years	he	was	with
Jesus.	So	convincing	was	his	conformity	to	the	behavior	pattern	of
the	other	disciples,	that	at	the	end	of	three	years	of	Jesus’	ministry,
when	he	said	that	one	of	his	disciples	would	betray	him,	they	did
not	all	turn	and	suspect	Judas,	but	they	rather	“began	to	say	to	him
one	after	another,	‘Is	it	I?’	”	(Matt.	26:22;	cf.	Mark	14:19;	Luke
22:23;	John	13:22).	However,	Jesus	himself	knew	that	there	was	no
genuine	faith	in	Judas’	heart,	because	he	said	at	one	point,	“Did	I
not	choose	you,	the	twelve,	and	one	of	you	is	a	devil?”	(John	6:70).
John	later	wrote	in	his	gospel	that	“Jesus	knew	from	the	first	who
those	were	that	did	not	believe,	and	who	it	was	that	would	betray
him”	(John	6:64).	But	the	disciples	themselves	did	not	know.
Paul	also	speaks	of	“
false	brethren	
secretly	brought	in”	(Gal.	2:4),
and	says	that	in	his	journeys	he	has	been	“in	danger	from	
false
brethren”	
(2	Cor.	11:26).	He	also	says	that	the	servants	of	Satan
“
disguise	themselves	
as	servants	of	righteousness”	(2	Cor.	11:15).
This	does	not	mean	that	all	unbelievers	in	the	church	who
nevertheless	give	some	signs	of	true	conversion	are	servants	of
Satan	secretly	undermining	the	work	of	the	church,	for	some	may
be	in	process	of	considering	the	claims	of	the	gospel	and	moving
toward	real	faith,	others	may	have	heard	only	an	inadequate
explanation	of	the	gospel	message,	and	others	may	not	have	come
under	genuine	conviction	of	the	Holy	Spirit	yet.	But	Paul’s
statements	do	mean	that	some	unbelievers	in	the	church	will	be
false	brothers	and	sisters	sent	to	disrupt	the	fellowship,	while	others
will	simply	be	unbelievers	who	will	eventually	come	to	genuine
saving	faith.	In	both	cases,	however,	they	give	several	external
signs	that	make	them	look	like	genuine	believers.
We	can	see	this	also	in	Jesus’	statement	about	what	will	happen	at
the	last	judgment:
Not	every	one	who	says	to	me,	“Lord,	Lord,”	shall	enter	the	kingdom
of	heaven,	but	he	who	does	the	will	of	my	Father	who	is	in	heaven.
On	that	day	many	will	say	to	me,	“Lord,	Lord,	did	we	not	prophesy	in
your	name,	and	cast	out	demons	in	your	name,	and	do	many	mighty
works	in	your	name?”	And	then	will	I	declare	to	them,	“
I	never	knew
you;	
depart	from	me,	you	evildoers.”	(Matt.	7:21–23)
Although	these	people	prophesied	and	cast	out	demons	and	did
“many	mighty	works”	in	Jesus’	name,	the	ability	to	do	such	works
did	not	guarantee	that	they	were	Christians.	Jesus	says,	“I	never
knew	you.”	He	does	not	say,	“I	knew	you	at	one	time	but	I	no
longer	know	you,”	nor	“I	knew	you	at	one	time	but	you	strayed
away	from	me,”	but	rather,	“I	
never	
knew	you.”	They	never	were
genuine	believers.
A	similar	teaching	is	found	in	the	parable	of	the	sower	in	Mark	4.
Jesus	says,	“Other	seed	fell	on	rocky	ground,	where	it	had	not	much
soil,	and	immediately	it	sprang	up,	since	it	had	no	depth	of	soil;	and
when	the	sun	rose	it	was	scorched,	and	since	it	had	no	root	it
withered	away”	(Mark	4:5–6).	Jesus	explains	that	the	seed	sown
upon	rocky	ground	represents	people	who	“when	they	hear	the
word,	immediately	receive	it	with	joy;	and	
they	have	no	root	in
themselves,	
but	endure	for	a	while;	then,	when	tribulation	or
persecution	arises	on	account	of	the	word,	immediately	they	fall
away”	(Mark	4:16–17).	The	fact	that	they	“have	no	root	in
themselves”	indicates	that	there	is	no	source	of	life	within	these
plants;	similarly,	the	people	represented	by	them	have	no	genuine
life	of	their	own	within.	They	have	an	appearance	of	conversion
and	they	apparently	have	become	Christians	because	they	receive
the	word	“with	joy,”	but	when	difficulty	comes,	they	are	nowhere	to
be	found—their	apparent	conversion	was	not	genuine	and	there	was
no	real	saving	faith	in	their	hearts.
The	importance	of	continuing	in	faith	is	also	affirmed	in	the	parable
of	Jesus	as	the	vine,	in	which	Christians	are	portrayed	as	branches
(John	15:1–7).	Jesus	says:
I	am	the	true	vine,	and	my	Father	is	the	vinedresser.	Every	branch	of
mine	that	bears	no	fruit,	he	takes	away,	and	every	branch	that	does
bear	fruit	he	prunes,	that	it	may	bear	more	fruit.	.	.	.	If	a	man	does	not
abide	in	me,	he	is	cast	forth	as	a	branch	and	withers;	and	the	branches
are	gathered,	thrown	into	the	fire	and	burned.	(John	15:1–2,	6)
Arminians	have	argued	that	the	branches	that	do	not	bear	fruit	are
still	true	branches	on	the	vine—Jesus	refers	to	“Every	branch	
of
mine	
that	bears	no	fruit”	(v.	
2).	Therefore	the	branches	that	are
gathered	and	thrown	into	the	fire	and	burned	must	refer	to	true
believers	that	were	once	part	of	the	vine	but	fell	away	and	became
subject	to	eternal	judgment.	But	that	is	not	a	necessary	implication
of	Jesus’	teaching	at	this	point.	The	imagery	of	the	vine	used	in	this
parable	is	limited	in	how	much	detail	it	can	teach.	In	fact,	if	Jesus
had	wanted	to	teach	that	there	were	true	and	false	believers
associated	with	him,	and	if	he	wanted	to	use	the	analogy	of	a	vine
and	branches,	then	the	only	way	he	could	refer	to	people	who	do
not	have	genuine	life	in	themselves	would	be	to	speak	of	branches
that	bear	no	fruit	(somewhat	after	the	analogy	of	the	seeds	that	fell
on	rocky	ground	and	had	“no	root	in	themselves”	in	Mark	4:17).
Here	in	John	15	the	branches	that	do	not	bear	fruit,	though	they	are
in	some	way	connected	to	Jesus	and	give	an	outward	appearance	of
being	genuine	branches,	nonetheless	give	indication	of	their	true
state	by	the	fact	that	they	bear	no	fruit.	This	is	similarly	indicated
by	the	fact	that	the	person	“does	not	abide”	in	Christ	(John	15:6)
and	is	cast	off	as	a	branch	and	withers.	If	we	try	to	press	the
analogy	any	further,	by	saying,	for	example,	that	all	branches	on	a
vine	really	are	alive	or	they	would	not	be	there	in	the	first	place,
then	we	are	simply	trying	to	press	the	imagery	beyond	what	it	is
able	to	teach—and	in	that	case	there	would	be	nothing	in	the
analogy	that	could	represent	false	believers	in	any	case.	The	point
of	the	imagery	is	simply	that	those	who	bear	fruit	thereby	give
evidence	that	they	are	abiding	in	Christ;	those	who	do	not,	are	not
abiding	in	him.
Finally,	there	are	two	passages	in	Hebrews	that	also	affirm	that
those	who	finally	fall	away	may	give	many	external	signs	of
conversion	and	may	look	in	many	ways	like	Christians.	The	first	of
these,	Hebrews	6:4–6,	has	frequently	been	used	by	Arminians	as
proof	that	believers	can	lose	their	salvation.	But	on	closer
inspection	such	an	interpretation	is	not	convincing.	The	author
writes,
For	it	is	impossible	to	restore	again	to	repentance	those	who	have
once	been	enlightened,	who	have	tasted	the	heavenly	gift,	and	have
become	partakers	of	the	Holy	Spirit,	and	have	tasted	the	goodness	of
the	word	of	God	and	the	powers	of	the	age	to	come,	if	they	then
commit	apostasy,	since	they	crucify	the	Son	of	God	on	their	own
account	and	hold	him	up	to	contempt.	(Heb.	6:4–6)
The	author	continues	with	an	example	from	agriculture:
For	land	which	has	drunk	the	rain	that	often	falls	upon	it,	and	brings
forth	vegetation	useful	to	those	for	whose	sake	it	is	cultivated,
receives	a	blessing	from	God.	But	if	it	bears	thorns	and	thistles,	it	is
worthless	and	near	to	being	cursed;	its	end	is	to	be	burned.	(Heb.	6:7–
8)
In	this	agricultural	metaphor,	those	who	receive	final	judgment	are
compared	to	land	that	bears	no	vegetation	or	useful	fruit,	but	rather
bears	thorns	and	thistles.	When	we	recall	the	other	metaphors	in
Scripture	where	good	fruit	is	a	sign	of	true	spiritual	life	and
fruitlessness	is	a	sign	of	false	believers	(for	example,	Matt.	3:8–10;
7:15–20;	12:33–35),	we	already	have	an	indication	that	the	author
is	speaking	of	people	whose	most	trustworthy	evidence	of	their
spiritual	condition	(the	fruit	they	bear)	is	negative,	suggesting	that
the	author	is	talking	about	people	who	are	not	genuinely	Christians.
Some	have	objected	that	the	long	description	of	things	that	have
happened	to	these	people	who	fall	away	means	that	they	must	have
been	genuinely	born	again.	But	that	is	not	a	convincing	objection
when	we	look	at	the	individual	terms	used.	The	author	says	they
have	“once	been	
enlightened”	
(Heb.	6:4).	But	this	enlightening
simply	means	that	they	came	to	understand	the	truths	of	the	gospel,
not	that	they	responded	to	those	truths	with	genuine	saving	faith.
12
Similarly,	the	word	
once	
that	is	used	to	speak	of	those	who	“have
once	been	enlightened”	is	the	Greek	term	
hapax,	
which	is	used,	for
example,	in	Philippians	4:16	of	the	Philippians’	sending	Paul	a	gift
“
once	
and	again,”	and	in	Hebrews	9:7	of	entrance	in	the	Holy	of
Holies	“
once	
a	year.”	Therefore,	this	word	does	not	mean	that
something	happened	“once”	and	can	never	be	repeated,	but	simply
that	it	happened	once,	without	specifying	whether	it	will	be
repeated	or	not.
13
The	text	further	says	that	these	people	“have	
tasted	
the	heavenly
gift”	and	that	they	“have	
tasted	
the	goodness	of	the	word	of	God
and	the	powers	of	the	age	to	come”	(Heb.	6:4–5).	Inherent	in	the
idea	of	tasting	is	the	fact	that	the	tasting	is	temporary	and	one	might
or	might	not	decide	to	accept	the	thing	that	is	tasted.	For	example,
the	same	Greek	word	(
geuomai
)	is	used	in	Matthew	27:34	to	say
that	those	crucifying	Jesus	“offered	him	wine	to	drink,	mingled
with	gall;	but	when	he	
tasted	
it,	he	would	not	drink	it.”	The	word	is
also	used	in	a	figurative	sense	meaning	“come	to	know
something.”
14
	If	we	understand	it	in	this	figurative	sense,	as	it	must
be	understood	here	since	the	passage	is	not	talking	about	tasting
literal	food,	then	it	means	that	these	people	have	come	to
understand	the	heavenly	gift	(which	probably	means	here	that	they
had	experienced	some	of	the	power	of	the	Holy	Spirit	at	work)	and
to	know	something	of	the	Word	of	God	and	the	powers	of	the	age	to
come.	It	does	not	necessarily	mean	that	they	had	(or	did	not	have)
genuine	saving	faith,	but	may	simply	mean	that	they	came	to
understand	it	and	have	some	experience	of	spiritual	power.
15
The	text	also	further	says	that	these	people	“have	become	
partakers
of	the	Holy	Spirit”	(Heb.	6:4).	The	question	here	is	the	exact
meaning	of	the	word	
metochos,	
which	is	here	translated	“partaker.”
It	is	not	always	clear	to	English-speaking	readers	that	this	term	has
a	range	of	meaning	and	may	imply	very	close	participation	and
attachment,	or	may	only	imply	a	loose	association	with	the	other
person	or	persons	named.	For	example,	the	context	shows	that	in
Hebrews	3:14	to	become	a	“partaker”	of	Christ	means	to	have	a
very	close	participation	with	him	in	a	saving	relationship.
16
	On	the
other	hand,	
metochos	
can	also	be	used	in	a	much	looser	sense,
simply	to	refer	to	associates	or	companions.	We	read	that	when	the
disciples	took	in	a	great	catch	of	fish	so	that	their	nets	were
breaking,	“they	beckoned	to	their	
partners	
in	the	other	boat	to	come
and	help	them”	(Luke	5:7).	Here	it	simply	refers	to	those	who	were
companions	or	partners	with	Peter	and	the	other	disciples	in	their
fishing	work.
17
	Ephesians	5:7	uses	a	closely	related	word
(
symmetochos,	
a	compound	of	
metochos	
and	the	preposition	
syn
[”with”])	when	Paul	warns	Christians	about	the	sinful	acts	of
unbelievers	and	says,	“do	not	associate	with	them”	(Eph.	5:7).	He	is
not	concerned	that	their	total	nature	will	be	transformed	by	the
unbelievers,	but	simply	that	they	will	associate	with	them	and	have
their	own	witness	compromised	and	their	own	lives	influenced	to
some	degree	by	them.
By	analogy,	Hebrews	6:4–6	speaks	of	people	who	have	been
“associated	with”	
the	Holy	Spirit,	and	thereby	had	their	lives
influenced	by	him,	but	it	need	not	imply	that	they	had	a	redeeming
work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in	their	lives,	or	that	they	were	regenerated.
By	similar	analogy	with	the	example	of	the	fishing	companions	in
Luke	5:7,	Peter	and	the	disciples	could	be	
associated	with	
them	and
even	to	some	degree	influenced	by	them	without	having	a
thoroughgoing	change	of	life	caused	by	that	association.	The	very
word	
metochos	
allows	for	a	range	of	influence	from	fairly	weak	to
fairly	strong,	for	it	only	means	“one	who	participates	with	or	shares
with	or	accompanies	in	some	activity.”	This	was	apparently	what
had	happened	to	these	people	spoken	of	in	Hebrews	6,	who	had
been	associated	with	the	church	and	as	such	associated	with	the
work	of	the	Holy	Spirit,	and	no	doubt	had	been	influenced	by	him
in	some	ways	in	their	lives.
18
Finally,	the	text	says	that	it	is	impossible	“to	restore	again	to
repentance”	
people	who	have	experienced	these	things	and	have
then	committed	apostasy.	Some	have	argued	that	if	this	is	a
repentance	to	which	they	need	to	be	restored	again,	then	it	must	be
genuine	repentance.	But	this	is	not	necessarily	the	case.	First,	we
must	realize	that	“repentance”	(Gk.	
metanoia
)	does	not	need	to
refer	to	inward	heart	repentance	unto	salvation.	For	example,
Hebrews	12:17	uses	this	word	to	speak	of	a	change	of	mind	that
Esau	sought	concerning	the	sale	of	his	birthright,	and	refers	to	it	as
“repentance”	(
metanoia
).	This	would	not	have	been	a	repentance
for	salvation,	but	simply	a	change	of	mind	and	an	undoing	of	the
transaction	regarding	his	birthright.	(Note	also	the	example	of
Judas’	repentance	in	Matt.	27:3—howbeit	with	a	different	Greek
word.)
The	cognate	verb	“to	repent”	(Gk.	
metanoeō
)	is	sometimes	used	to
refer	not	to	saving	repentance,	but	just	to	sorrow	for	individual
offenses	in	Luke	17:3–4:	“If	your	brother	sins,	rebuke	him,	and	
if
he	repents	
forgive	him;	and	if	he	sins	against	you	seven	times	in	the
day,	and	turns	to	you	seven	times,	and	says,	‘I	repent,’	you	must
forgive	him.”	We	conclude	that	“repentance”	simply	means	a
sorrow	for	actions	that	have	been	done	or	for	sins	that	have	been
committed.	Whether	or	not	it	is	a	genuine	saving	repentance,	a
“repentance	unto	salvation,”	may	not	be	always	evident	right	away.
The	author	of	Hebrews	is	not	concerned	to	specify	whether	it	is	a
genuine	repentance	or	not.	He	is	simply	saying	that	if	someone	has
a	sorrow	for	sin	and	comes	to	understand	the	gospel	and
experiences	these	various	blessings	of	the	Holy	Spirit’s	work	(no
doubt	in	fellowship	with	the	church),	and	then	turns	away,	it	will
not	be	possible	to	restore	such	a	person	again	to	a	place	of	sorrow
for	sin.	But	this	does	not	necessarily	imply	that	the	repentance	was
genuine	saving	repentance	in	the	first	place.
At	this	point	we	may	ask	what	kind	of	person	is	described	by	all	of
these	terms.	These	are	no	doubt	people	who	have	been	affiliated
closely	with	the	fellowship	of	the	church.	They	have	had	some
sorrow	for	sin	(repentance).	They	have	clearly	understood	the
gospel	(they	have	been	enlightened).	They	have	come	to	appreciate
the	attractiveness	of	the	Christian	life	and	the	change	that	comes
about	in	people’s	lives	because	of	becoming	a	Christian,	and	they
have	probably	had	answers	to	prayer	in	their	own	lives	and	felt	the
power	of	the	Holy	Spirit	at	work,	perhaps	even	using	some	spiritual
gifts	in	the	manner	of	the	unbelievers	in	Matthew	7:22	(they	have
become	“associated	with”	the	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	or	have
become	“partakers”	of	the	Holy	Spirit	and	have	tasted	the	heavenly
gift	and	the	powers	of	the	age	of	come).	They	have	been	exposed	to
the	true	preaching	of	the	Word	and	have	appreciated	much	of	its
teachings	(they	have	tasted	the	goodness	of	the	Word	of	God).
But	then	in	spite	of	all	this,	if	they	“commit	apostasy”	and	“crucify
the	Son	of	God	on	their	own	account	and	hold	him	up	to	contempt”
(Heb.	6:6),	then	they	are	willfully	rejecting	all	of	these	blessings
and	turning	decidedly	against	them.	Perhaps	all	of	us	have	known
in	our	own	churches	people	who	(sometimes	by	their	own
profession)	have	long	been	affiliated	with	the	fellowship	of	the
church	but	are	not	themselves	born-again	Christians.	They	have
thought	about	the	gospel	for	years	and	have	continued	to	resist	the
wooing	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in	their	lives,	perhaps	through	an
unwillingness	to	give	up	lordship	of	their	lives	to	Jesus	and
preferring	to	cling	to	it	themselves.
Now	the	author	tells	us	that	
if	these	people	willfully	turn	away	from
all	of	these	temporary	blessings,	
then	it	will	be	impossible	to
restore	them	again	to	any	kind	of	repentance	or	sorrow	for	sin.
Their	hearts	will	be	hardened	and	their	consciences	calloused.	What
more	could	be	done	to	bring	them	to	salvation?	If	we	tell	them
Scripture	is	true	they	will	say	that	they	know	it	but	they	have
decided	to	reject	it.	If	we	tell	them	God	answers	prayer	and	changes
lives	they	will	respond	that	they	know	that	as	well,	but	they	want
nothing	of	it.	If	we	tell	them	that	the	Holy	Spirit	is	powerful	to
work	in	people’s	lives	and	the	gift	of	eternal	life	is	good	beyond
description,	they	will	say	that	they	understand	that,	but	they	want
nothing	of	it.	Their	repeated	familiarity	with	the	things	of	God	and
their	experience	of	many	influences	of	the	Holy	Spirit	has	simply
served	to	harden	them	against	conversion.
Now	the	author	of	Hebrews	knows	that	there	are	some	in	the
community	to	which	he	writes	who	are	in	danger	of	falling	away	in
just	this	way	(see	Heb.	2:3;	3:8,	12,	14–15;	4:1,	7,	11;	10:26,	29,
35–36,	38–39;	12:3,	15–17).	He	wants	to	warn	them	that,	though
they	have	participated	in	the	fellowship	of	the	church	and
experienced	a	number	of	God’s	blessings	in	their	lives,	yet	if	they
fall	away	after	all	that,	there	is	no	salvation	for	them.	This	does	not
imply	that	he	thinks	that	true	Christians	could	fall	away—Hebrews
3:14	implies	quite	the	opposite.	But	he	wants	them	to	gain
assurance	of	salvation	through	their	continuing	in	faith,	and	thereby
implies	that	if	they	fall	away	it	would	show	that	they	never	were
Christ’s	people	in	the	first	place	(see	Heb.	3:6:	“We	are	his	house	
if
we	hold	fast	our	confidence	and	pride	in	our	hope”).
Therefore	the	author	wants	to	give	a	severe	warning	to	those	in
danger	of	slipping	away	from	their	Christian	profession.	He	wants
to	use	the	strongest	language	possible	to	say,	“Here	is	how	far	a
person	can	come	in	experiencing	
temporary	blessings	
and	still	not
really	be	saved.”	He	is	warning	them	to	watch	out,	because
depending	on	temporary	blessings	and	experiences	is	not	enough.
To	do	this	he	talks	not	of	any	true	change	of	heart	or	any	good	fruit
produced,	but	simply	about	the	temporary	blessings	and
experiences	that	have	come	to	these	persons	and	have	given	them
some	understanding	of	Christianity.
For	this	reason	he	immediately	passes	from	this	description	of	those
who	commit	apostasy	to	a	further	analogy	that	shows	that	these
people	who	fell	away	never	had	any	genuine	fruit	in	their	lives.	As
we	explained	above,	verses	7–8	speak	of	these	people	in	terms	of
“thorns	and	thistles,”	
the	kind	of	crop	that	is	brought	forth	on	land
that	has	no	worthwhile	life	in	itself	even	though	it	receives	repeated
blessings	from	God	(in	terms	of	the	analogy,	even	though	rain
frequently	falls	upon	it).	We	should	notice	here	that	people	who
commit	apostasy	are	not	compared	to	a	field	that	once	bore	good
fruit	and	now	does	not,	but	that	they	are	like	
land	that	never	bore
good	fruit,	
but	only	thorns	and	thistles.	The	land	may	look	good
before	the	crops	start	to	come	up,	but	the	fruit	gives	the	genuine
evidence,	and	it	is	bad.
Strong	support	for	this	interpretation	of	Hebrews	6:4–8	is	found	in
the	verse	immediately	following.	Though	the	author	has	been
speaking	very	harshly	about	the	possibility	of	falling	away,	he	then
returns	to	speak	to	the	situation	of	the	great	majority	of	the	hearers,
whom	he	thinks	to	be	genuine	Christians.	He	says,	“Though	we
speak	thus,	
yet	in	your	case,	
beloved,	
we	feel	sure	of	better	things
that	belong	to	salvation”	
(Heb.	6:9).	But	the	question	is	“better
things”	than	what?	The	plural	“better	things”	forms	an	appropriate
contrast	to	the	“good	things”	that	have	been	mentioned	in	verses	4–
6:	the	author	is	convinced	that	most	of	his	readers	have	experienced
better	things	than	simply	the	partial	and	temporary	influences	of	the
Holy	Spirit	and	the	church	talked	about	in	verses	4–6.
In	fact,	the	author	talks	about	these	things	by	saying	(literally)	that
they	are	“better	things,	
also	belonging	to	salvation”	
(Gk.	
kai
echomena	sōtērias
).
19
	These	are	not	only	the	temporary	blessings
talked	about	in	verses	4–6,	but	these	are	better	things,	things	having
not	only	temporary	influence,	but	“also	belonging	to	salvation.”	In
this	way	the	Greek	word	
kai	
(“also”)	shows	that	salvation	is
something	that	was	not	part	of	the	things	mentioned	in	verses	4–6
above.	Therefore	this	word	
kai,	
which	is	not	explicitly	translated	in
the	RSV	or	NIV	(but	the	NASB	comes	close),
20
	provides	a	crucial
key	for	understanding	the	passage.	If	the	author	had	meant	to	say
that	the	people	mentioned	in	verses	4–6	were	truly	saved,	then	it	is
very	difficult	to	understand	why	he	would	say	in	verse	9	that	he	is
convinced	of	
better	things	
for	them,	things	that	belong	to	salvation,
or	that	have	salvation	in	addition	to	those	things	mentioned	above.
He	thus	shows	that	he	can	use	a	brief	phrase	to	say	that	people
“have	salvation”	if	he	wishes	to	do	so	(he	does	not	need	to	pile	up
many	phrases),	and	he	shows,	moreover,	that	the	people	whom	he
speaks	of	in	verses	4–6	are	not	saved.
21
What	exactly	are	these	“better	things”?	In	addition	to	salvation
mentioned	in	verse	9,	they	are	things	that	give	real	evidence	of
salvation—genuine	fruit	in	their	lives	(v.	
10),	full	assurance	of	hope
(v.	
11),	and	saving	faith,	of	the	type	exhibited	by	those	who	inherit
the	promises	(v.	
12).	In	this	way	he	reassures	those	who	are	genuine
believers—those	who	show	fruit	in	their	lives	and	show	love	for
other	Christians,	who	show	hope	and	genuine	faith	that	is
continuing	at	the	present	time,	and	who	are	not	about	to	fall	away.
He	wants	to	reassure	these	readers	(who	are	certainly	the	great
majority	of	the	ones	to	whom	he	writes)	while	still	issuing	a	strong
warning	to	those	among	them	who	may	be	in	danger	of	falling
away.
A	similar	teaching	is	found	in	Hebrews	10:26–31.	There	the	author
says,	“If	we	deliberately	keep	on	sinning	after	we	have	received	the
knowledge	of	the	truth,	no	sacrifice	for	sins	is	left”	(v.	
26	NIV).	A
person	who	rejects	Christ’s	salvation	and	“has	treated	as	an	unholy
thing	the	blood	of	the	covenant	that	sanctified	him”	(v.	
29	NIV)
deserves	eternal	punishment.	This	again	is	a	strong	warning	against
falling	away,	but	it	should	not	be	taken	as	proof	that	someone	who
has	truly	been	born	again	can	lose	his	or	her	salvation.	When	the
author	talks	about	the	blood	of	the	covenant	“that	sanctified	him,”
the	word	
sanctified	
is	used	simply	to	refer	to	“external
sanctification,	like	that	of	the	ancient	Israelites,	by	outward
connection	with	God’s	people.”
22
	The	passage	does	not	talk	about
someone	who	is	genuinely	saved,	but	someone	who	has	received
some	beneficial	moral	influence	through	contact	with	the	church.
23
One	other	passage	in	John’s	writings	has	been	claimed	to	teach	the
possibility	of	loss	of	salvation.	In	Revelation	3:5,	Jesus	says,	“He
who	conquers	shall	be	clad	thus	in	white	garments,	and	
I	will	not
blot	his	name	out	of	the	book	of	life.”	
Some	have	claimed	that	when
Jesus	says	this	he	implies	that	it	is	possible	that	he	would	blot	out
the	names	of	some	people	from	the	book	of	life,	people	who	had
already	had	their	names	written	in	it	and	were	thus	already	saved.
But	the	fact	that	Jesus	emphatically	states	that	he	will	
not	
do
something	should	not	be	taken	as	teaching	that	he	will	do	that	same
thing	in	other	cases!	The	same	kind	of	Greek	construction
24
	is	used
to	give	an	emphatic	negation	in	John	10:28,	where	Jesus	says,	“I
give	them	eternal	life,	and	
they	shall	never	perish.”	
This	does	not
mean	that	there	are	some	of	Jesus’	sheep	who	do	not	hear	his	voice
and	follow	him	and	who	will	perish;	it	is	simply	affirming	that	his
sheep	certainly	will	not	perish.	Similarly,	when	God	says,	“I	will
never	fail	you	nor	forsake	you”	(Heb.	13:5),	it	does	not	imply	that
he	will	leave	or	forsake	others;	it	just	emphatically	states	that	he
will	not	leave	nor	forsake	his	people.	Or,	in	even	a	closer	parallel,
in	Matthew	12:32,	Jesus	says,	“Whoever	speaks	against	the	Holy
Spirit	
will	not	be	forgiven,	
either	in	this	age	
or	in	the	age	to	come.”
This	does	not	imply	that	some	sins	will	be	forgiven	in	the	age	to
come	(as	Roman	Catholics	claim	in	support	for	the	doctrine	of
purgatory)
25
	—	that	is	simply	an	error	in	reasoning:	to	say	that
something	will	not	happen	in	the	age	to	come	does	not	imply	that	it
might	happen	in	the	age	to	come!	In	the	same	way,	Revelation	3:5
is	just	a	strong	assurance	that	those	who	are	clad	in	the	white
garments	and	who	have	remained	faithful	to	Christ	will	not	have
their	names	blotted	out	of	the	book	of	life.
26
Finally,	one	passage	from	the	Old	Testament	is	sometimes	used	to
argue	that	people	can	lose	their	salvation:	the	story	of	the	Holy
Spirit	departing	from	King	Saul.	But	Saul	should	not	be	taken	as	an
example	of	someone	who	lost	his	salvation,	for	when	“the	Spirit	of
the	L
ORD
	departed	from	Saul”	(1	Sam.	16:14),	it	was	immediately
after	Samuel	had	anointed	David	king	and	“the	Spirit	of	the	L
ORD
came	mightily	upon	David	from	that	day	forward”	(1	Sam.	16:13).
In	fact,	the	Spirit	of	the	Lord	coming	upon	David	is	reported	in	the
immediately	previous	sentence	to	the	one	in	which	we	read	that	the
Spirit	departed	from	Saul.	This	close	connection	means	that
Scripture	is	not	here	talking	about	a	total	loss	of	all	work	of	the
Holy	Spirit	in	Saul’s	life,	but	simply	about	the	withdrawing	of	the
Holy	Spirit’s	function	of	empowering	Saul	as	king.
27
	But	that	does
not	mean	that	Saul	was	eternally	condemned.	It	is	simply	very	hard
to	tell	from	the	pages	of	the	Old	Testament	whether	Saul,
throughout	his	life,	was	(a)	an	unregenerate	man	who	had
leadership	capabilities	and	was	used	by	God	as	a	demonstration	of
the	fact	that	someone	worthy	to	be	king	in	the	eyes	of	the	world
was	not	thereby	suited	to	be	king	over	the	Lord’s	people,	or	(b)	a
regenerate	man	with	poor	understanding	and	a	life	that	increasingly
strayed	from	the	Lord.
D.	What	Can	Give	a	Believer	Genuine	Assurance?
If	it	is	true,	as	explained	in	the	previous	section,	that	those	who	are
unbelievers	and	who	finally	fall	away	may	give	many	external	signs
of	conversion,	then	what	will	serve	as	evidence	of	genuine
conversion?	What	can	give	real	assurance	to	a	real	believer?	We
can	list	three	categories	of	questions	that	a	person	could	ask	of
himself	or	herself.
1.
	Do	I	Have	a	Present	Trust	in	Christ	for	Salvation?
	Paul	tells	the
Colossians	that	they	will	be	saved	on	the	last	day,	“provided	that	you	
continue
in	the	faith,	
stable	and	steadfast,	not	shifting	from	the	hope	of	the	gospel
which	you	heard”	(Col.	1:23).	The	author	of	Hebrews	says,	“We	share	in
Christ,	if	only	we	hold	our	first	confidence	firm	to	the	end”	(Heb.	3:14)	and
encourages	his	readers	to	be	imitators	of	those	“who	
through	faith	
and
patience	inherit	the	promises”	(Heb.	6:12).	In	fact,	the	most	famous	verse	in
the	entire	Bible	uses	a	present	tense	verb	that	may	be	translated,	“whoever
continues	believing	in	him”	may	have	eternal	life	(see	John	3:16).
Therefore	a	person	should	ask	himself	or	herself,	“Do	I	today	have
trust	in	Christ	to	forgive	my	sins	and	take	me	without	blame	into
heaven	forever?	Do	I	have	confidence	in	my	heart	that	he	has	saved
me?	If	I	were	to	die	tonight	and	stand	before	God’s	judgment	seat,
and	if	he	were	to	ask	me	why	he	should	let	me	into	heaven,	would	I
begin	to	think	of	my	good	deeds	and	depend	on	them,	or	would	I
without	hesitation	say	that	I	am	depending	on	the	merits	of	Christ
and	am	confident	that	he	is	a	sufficient	Savior?”
This	emphasis	on	
present	
faith	in	Christ	stands	in	contrast	to	the
practice	of	some	church	“testimonies”	where	people	repeatedly
recite	details	of	a	conversion	experience	that	may	have	happened	20
or	30	years	ago.	If	a	testimony	of	saving	faith	is	genuine,	it	should
be	a	testimony	of	faith	that	is	active	this	very	day.
2.	Is	There	Evidence	of	a	Regenerating	Work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in	My
Heart?
	The	evidence	of	the	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in	our	hearts	comes	in
many	different	forms.	Although	we	should	not	put	confidence	in	the
demonstration	of	miraculous	works	(Matt.	7:22),	or	long	hours	and	years	of
work	at	some	local	church	(which	may	simply	be	building	with	“wood,	hay,
straw”	[in	terms	of	1	Cor.	3:12]	to	further	one’s	own	ego	or	power	over
others,	or	to	attempt	to	earn	merit	with	God),	there	are	many	other	evidences
of	a	real	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in	one’s	heart.
First,	there	is	a	subjective	testimony	of	the	Holy	Spirit	within	our
hearts	bearing	witness	that	we	are	God’s	children	(Rom.	8:15–16;	1
John	4:13).	This	testimony	will	usually	be	accompanied	by	a	sense
of	being	led	by	the	Holy	Spirit	in	paths	of	obedience	to	God’s	will
(Rom.	8:14).
In	addition,	if	the	Holy	Spirit	is	genuinely	at	work	in	our	lives,	he
will	be	producing	the	kind	of	character	traits	that	Paul	calls	“the
fruit	of	the	Spirit”	(Gal.	5:22).	He	lists	several	attitudes	and
character	traits	that	are	produced	by	the	Holy	Spirit:	“love,	joy,
peace,	patience,	kindness,	goodness,	faithfulness,	gentleness,	self-
control”	(Gal.	5:22–23).	Of	course,	the	question	is	not,	“Do	I
perfectly	exemplify	all	of	these	characteristics	in	my	life?”	but
rather,	“Are	these	things	a	general	characteristic	of	my	life?	Do	I
sense	these	attitudes	in	my	heart?	Do	others	(especially	those
closest	to	me)	see	these	traits	exhibited	in	my	life?	Have	I	been
growing	in	them	over	a	period	of	years?”	There	is	no	suggestion	in
the	New	Testament	that	any	non-Christian,	any	unregenerate
person,	can	convincingly	fake	these	character	traits,	especially	for
those	who	know	the	person	most	closely.
Related	to	this	kind	of	fruit	is	another	kind	of	fruit—the	results	of
one’s	life	and	ministry	as	they	have	influence	on	others	and	on	the
church.	There	are	some	people	who	profess	to	be	Christians	but
whose	influence	on	others	is	to	discourage	them,	to	drag	them
down,	to	injure	their	faith,	and	to	provoke	controversy	and
divisiveness.	The	result	of	their	life	and	ministry	is	not	to	build	up
others	and	to	build	up	the	church,	but	to	tear	it	down.	On	the	other
hand,	there	are	those	who	seem	to	edify	others	in	every
conversation,	every	prayer,	and	every	work	of	ministry	they	put
their	hand	to.	Jesus	said,	regarding	false	prophets,	“You	will	know
them	by	their	fruits.	.	.	.	Every	sound	tree	bears	good	fruit,	but	the
bad	tree	bears	evil	fruit.	.	.	.	Thus	you	will	know	them	by	their
fruits”	(Matt.	7:16–20).
Another	evidence	of	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	is	continuing	to
believe	and	accept	the	sound	teaching	of	the	church.	Those	who
begin	to	deny	major	doctrines	of	the	faith	give	serious	negative
indications	concerning	their	salvation:	“No	one	who	denies	the	Son
has	the	Father.	.	.	.	If	what	you	heard	from	the	beginning	abides	in
you,	then	you	will	abide	in	the	Son	and	in	the	Father”	(1	John	2:23–
24).	John	also	says,	“Whoever	knows	God	listens	to	us,	and	he	who
is	not	of	God	does	not	listen	to	us”	(1	John	4:6).	Since	the	New
Testament	writings	are	the	current	replacement	for	the	apostles	like
John,	we	might	also	say	that	whoever	knows	God	will	continue	to
read	and	to	delight	in	God’s	Word,	and	will	continue	to	believe	it
fully.	Those	who	do	not	believe	and	delight	in	God’s	Word	give
evidence	that	they	are	not	“of	God.”
Another	evidence	of	genuine	salvation	is	a	continuing	present
relationship	with	Jesus	Christ.	Jesus	says,	“Abide	in	me,	and	I	in
you”	and,	“If	you	abide	in	me,	and	my	words	abide	in	you,	ask
whatever	you	will,	and	it	shall	be	done	for	you”	(John	15:4,	7).	This
abiding	in	Christ	will	include	not	only	day-by-day	trust	in	him	in
various	situations,	but	also	certainly	regular	fellowship	with	him	in
prayer	and	worship.
Finally,	a	major	area	of	evidence	that	we	are	genuine	believers	is
found	in	a	life	of	obedience	to	God’s	commands.	John	says,	“He
who	says	‘I	know	him’	but	disobeys	his	commandments	is	a	liar,
and	the	truth	is	not	in	him;	but	whoever	keeps	his	word,	in	him
truly	love	for	God	is	perfected.	By	this	we	may	be	sure	that	we	are
in	him:	he	who	says	he	abides	in	him	ought	to	walk	in	the	same
way	in	which	he	walked”	(1	John	2:4–6).	A	perfect	life	is	not
necessary,	of	course.	John	is	rather	saying	that	in	general	our	lives
ought	to	be	ones	of	imitation	of	Christ	and	likeness	to	him	in	what
we	do	and	say.	If	we	have	genuine	saving	faith,	there	will	be	clear
results	in	obedience	in	our	lives	(see	also	1	John	3:9–10,	24;	5:18).
Thus	James	can	say,	“Faith	by	itself,	if	it	has	no	works,	is	dead”	and
“I	by	my	works	will	show	you	my	faith”	(James	2:17–18).	One
large	area	of	obedience	to	God	includes	love	for	fellow	Christians.
“He	who	loves	his	brother	abides	in	the	light”	(1	John	2:10).	“We
know	that	we	have	passed	out	of	death	into	life,	because	we	love
the	brethren.	He	who	does	not	love	abides	in	death”	(1	John	3:14,
cf.	3:17;	4:7).	One	evidence	of	this	love	is	continuing	in	Christian
fellowship	(1	John	2:19),	and	another	is	giving	to	a	brother	in	need
(1	John	3:17;	cf.	Matt.	25:31–46).
3.	Do	I	See	a	Long-Term	Pattern	of	Growth	in	My	Christian	Life?
	The
first	two	areas	of	assurance	dealt	with	present	faith	and	present	evidence	of
the	Holy	Spirit	at	work	in	our	lives.	But	Peter	gives	one	more	kind	of	test	that
we	can	use	to	ask	whether	we	are	genuinely	believers.	He	tells	us	that	there
are	some	character	traits	which,	if	we	keep	on	increasing	in	them,	will
guarantee	that	we	will	“never	fall”	(2	Peter	1:10).	He	tells	his	readers	to	add
to	their	faith	“virtue	.	.	.	knowledge	.	.	.	self-control	.	.	.	steadfastness	.	.	.
godliness	.	.	.	brotherly	affection	.	.	.	love”	(2	Peter	1:5–7).	Then	he	says	that
these	things	are	to	belong	to	his	readers	and	to	continually	“abound”	in	their
lives	(2	Peter	1:8).	He	adds	that	they	are	to	“be	the	more	zealous	to	confirm
your	call	and	election”	and	says	then	that	“
if	you	do	this	
(literally,	“these
things,”	referring	to	the	character	traits	mentioned	in	vv.	5–7)	
you	will	never
fall”	
(2	Peter	1:10).
The	way	that	we	confirm	our	call	and	election,	then,	is	to	continue
to	grow	in	“these	things.”	This	implies	that	our	assurance	of
salvation	can	be	something	that	increases	over	time	in	our	lives.
Every	year	that	we	add	to	these	character	traits	in	our	lives,	we	gain
greater	and	greater	assurance	of	our	salvation.	Thus,	though	young
believers	can	have	a	quite	strong	confidence	in	their	salvation,	that
assurance	can	increase	to	even	deeper	certainty	over	the	years	in
which	they	grow	toward	Christian	maturity.
28
	If	they	continue	to
add	these	things	they	will	confirm	their	call	and	election	and	will
“never	fall.”
The	result	of	these	three	questions	that	we	can	ask	ourselves	should
be	to	give	strong	assurance	to	those	who	are	genuinely	believers.	In
this	way	the	doctrine	of	the	perseverance	of	the	saints	will	be	a
tremendously	comforting	doctrine.	No	one	who	has	such	assurance
should	wonder,	“Will	I	be	able	to	persevere	to	the	end	of	my	life
and	therefore	be	saved?”	Everyone	who	gains	assurance	through
such	a	self-examination	should	rather	think,	“I	am	truly	born	again;
therefore,	I	will	certainly	persevere	to	the	end,	because	I	am	being
guarded	‘by	God’s	power’	working	through	my	faith	(1	Peter	1:5)
and	therefore	I	will	never	be	lost.	Jesus	will	raise	me	up	at	the	last
day	and	I	will	enter	into	his	kingdom	forever”	(John	6:40).
On	the	other	hand,	this	doctrine	of	the	perseverance	of	the	saints,	if
rightly	understood,	should	cause	genuine	worry,	and	even	fear,	in
the	hearts	of	any	who	are	“backsliding”	or	straying	away	from
Christ.	Such	persons	must	clearly	be	warned	that	only	those	who
persevere	to	the	end	have	been	truly	born	again.	If	they	fall	away
from	their	profession	of	faith	in	Christ	and	life	of	obedience	to	him,
they	may	not	really	be	saved—in	fact,	the	
evidence	
that	they	are
giving	
is	that	they	are	not	saved,	
and	they	never	really	were	saved.
Once	they	stop	trusting	in	Christ	and	obeying	him	(I	am	speaking	in
terms	of	outward	evidence)	they	have	no	genuine	assurance	of
salvation,	and	they	should	consider	themselves	unsaved,	and	turn	to
Christ	in	repentance	and	ask	him	for	forgiveness	of	their	sins.
At	this	point,	in	terms	of	pastoral	care	with	those	who	have	strayed
away	from	their	Christian	profession,	we	should	realize	that
Calvinists	and	Arminians	
(those	who	believe	in	the	perseverance	of
the	saints	and	those	who	think	that	Christians	can	lose	their
salvation)	
will	both	counsel	a	“backslider”	in	the	same	way.
According	to	the	Arminian	this	person	was	a	Christian	at	one	time
but	is	no	longer	a	Christian.	According	to	the	Calvinist,	such	a
person	never	really	was	a	Christian	in	the	first	place	and	is	not	one
now.	But	in	both	cases	the	biblical	counsel	given	would	be	the
same:	“You	do	not	appear	to	be	a	Christian	now—you	must	repent
of	your	sins	and	trust	in	Christ	for	your	salvation!”	Though	the
Calvinist	and	Arminian	would	differ	on	their	interpretation	of	the
previous	history,	they	would	agree	on	what	should	be	done	in	the
present.
29
But	here	we	see	why	the	phrase	
eternal	security	
can	be	quite
misleading.	In	some	evangelical	churches,	instead	of	teaching	the
full	and	balanced	presentation	of	the	doctrine	of	the	perseverance	of
the	saints,	pastors	have	sometimes	taught	a	watered-down	version,
which	in	effect	tells	people	that	all	who	have	once	made	a
profession	of	faith	and	been	baptized	are	“eternally	secure.”	The
result	is	that	some	people	who	are	not	genuinely	converted	at	all
may	“come	forward”	at	the	end	of	an	evangelistic	sermon	to	profess
faith	in	Christ,	and	may	be	baptized	shortly	after	that,	but	then	they
leave	the	fellowship	of	the	church	and	live	a	life	no	different	from
the	one	they	lived	before	they	gained	this	“eternal	security.”	In	this
way	people	are	given	false	assurance	and	are	being	cruelly	deceived
into	thinking	they	are	going	to	heaven	when	in	fact	they	are	not.
30
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
Do	you	have	assurance	that	you	are	truly	born	again?	What	evidence	do
you	see	in	your	own	life	to	give	you	that	assurance?	Do	you	think	that
God	wants	true	believers	to	go	on	throughout	life	worrying	about
whether	they	are	really	born	again,	or	to	have	firm	assurance	that	they
are	his	people?	(See	1	John	5:13.)	Have	you	seen	a	pattern	of	growth	in
your	Christian	life	over	time?	Are	you	trusting	in	your	own	power	to
keep	on	believing	in	Christ,	or	in	God’s	power	to	keep	your	faith	active
and	alive?
2
.	
If	you	have	doubts	about	whether	you	are	truly	born	again,	what	is	it	in
your	life	that	is	giving	reason	for	those	doubts?	What	would	Scripture
encourage	you	to	do	to	resolve	those	doubts	(see	2	Peter	1:5–11;	also
Matt.	11:28–30;	John	6:37)?	Do	you	think	that	Jesus	now	knows	about
your	doubts	and	understands	them?	What	do	you	think	he	would	like	you
to	do	now	to	gain	greater	assurance	of	salvation?
3
.	
Have	you	known	people,	perhaps	in	your	church,	whose	“fruit”	is	always
destructive	or	divisive	or	harmful	to	the	ministry	of	the	church	and	the
faith	of	others?	Do	they	have	very	much	influence,	perhaps	even
positions	of	leadership	in	the	church?	Do	you	think	that	an	evaluation	of
the	fruit	of	one’s	life	and	influence	on	others	should	be	a	qualification	for
church	leadership?	Is	it	possible	that	people	would	profess	agreement
with	every	true	Christian	doctrine	and	still	not	be	born	again?	What	are
some	more	reliable	evidences	of	genuine	conversion	other	than
intellectual	adherence	to	sound	doctrine?
SPECIAL	TERMS
assurance	of	salvation
eternal	security
perseverance	of	the	saints
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the
bibliography	to	chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be
found	in	
Appendix	4
.)
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systemati	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92			Litton,	345–51
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1847			Finney,	544–619
1875–76			Pope,	3:100–147
1892–94			Miley,	2:268–70,	339–54
1960			Purkiser,	298–304
3.			Baptist
1767			Gill,	2:151–78
1887			Boyce,	425–37
1907			Strong,	881–86
1917			Mullins,	432–38
1983–85			Erickson,	985–97
4.			Dispensational
1947			Chafer,	3:267–355
1949			Thiessen,	290–95
1986			Ryrie,	328–34
5.			Lutheran
1917–24			Pieper,	3:89–100
1934			Mueller,	436–40
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1559			Calvin,	2:968–76	(3.24.4–9)
1724–58			Edwards,	596–604
1861			Heppe,	581–89
1871–73			Hodge,	3:104–13
1878			Dabney,	687–713
1937–66			Murray,	
RAA,
151–60
1938			Berkhof,	545–54
7.			Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988–92			Williams,	2:119–36
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
(no	explicit	treatment)
Other	Works
Berkouwer,	G.	C.	
Faith	and	Perseverance.	
Trans.	by	Robert	D.	Knudsen.
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1958.
Carson,	D.	A.	“Reflections	on	Christian	Assurance.”	In	
WTJ	
54	(1992),
pp.	1–29.
Demarest,	B.	A.	“Assurance.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	91–92.
Grudem,	Wayne.	“The	Perseverance	of	the	Saints:	A	Case	Study	From
Heb.	6:4–6	and	the	Other	Warning	Passages	of	Hebrews.”	In	
The	Grace
of	God,	the	Bondage	of	the	Will.	
Vol.	1.	Ed.	Tom	Schreiner	and	Bruce
Ware.	Forthcoming:	Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1995.
Guthrie,	William.	
The	Christian’s	Great	Interest.	
London:	Banner	of
Truth,	1969.	See	esp.	Part	I,	
The	Trial	of	a	Saving	Interest	in	Christ,
which	was	first	published	as	a	separate	book	in	1658.
Hoekema,	Anthony	A.	“The	Perseverance	of	True	Believers.”	In	
Saved
by	Grace.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	and	Exeter:	Paternoster,	1989,	pp.
234–56.
Kearsley,	R.	“Perseverance.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	506–7.
Marshall,	I.	H.	
Kept	by	the	Power	of	God.	
Minneapolis:	Bethany,	1969.
McKnight,	Scot.	“The	Warning	Passages	of	Hebrews,”	
TrinJ	
13,	n.s.
(1992),	pp.	21–59.
Murray,	John.	“Perseverance.”	In	
Redemption	Accomplished	and
Applied.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1955,	pp.	151–60.
Shank,	Robert.	Life	in	the	Son.	2d	ed.	Minneapolis:	Bethany,	1989.
White,	R.	E.	O.	“Perseverance.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	844–45.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
John	10:27–28:	
My	sheep	hear	my	voice,	and	I	know	them,	and	they	follow
me;	and	I	give	them	eternal	life,	and	they	shall	never	perish,	and	no	one	shall
snatch	them	out	of	my	hand.
HYMN
“Call	Jehovah	Thy	Salvation”
(Use	tune	of	“Come,	Thou	Long	Expected	Jesus.”)
Call	Jehovah	thy	salvation,	rest	beneath	th’	Almighty’s	shade,
In	his	secret	habitation	dwell,	and	never	be	dismayed:
There	no	tumult	shall	alarm	thee,	thou	shalt	dread	no	hidden	snare:
Guile	nor	violence	can	harm	thee,	in	eternal	safeguard	there.
From	the	sword	at	noonday	wasting,	from	the	noisome	pestilence,
In	the	depth	of	midnight	blasting,	God	shall	be	thy	sure	defence:
He	shall	charge	his	angel	legions	watch	and	ward	o’er	thee	to	keep;
Though	thou	walk	through	hostile	regions,	though	in	desert	wilds
thou	sleep.
Since,	with	pure	and	firm	affection	thou	on	God	hast	set	thy	love,
With	the	wings	of	his	protection	he	will	shield	thee	from	above:
Thou	shalt	call	on	him	in	trouble,	he	will	hearken,	he	will	save;
Here	for	grief	reward	thee	double,	crown	with	life	beyond	the	grave.
AUTHOR:	JAMES	MONTGOMERY,	1822
NOTES
1
The	doctrine	of	the	perseverance	of	the	saints	is	represented	by	“P”	in	the	acronym	TULIP,	which	is	often	used	to	summarize	the
“five	points	of	Calvinism.”	(See	full	list	at	
chapter	32,	n.	11
.)
2
Grant	R.	Osborne,	“Exegetical	Notes	on	Calvinist	Texts,”	in	
Grace	Unlimited,	
pp.	170–71,	does	not	give	an	alternative
explanation	for	Jesus’	statement,	“I	will	raise	him	up	at	the	last	day,”	when	he	deals	with	this	passage.	But	he	does	say	that	in	this
context	v.	
35	emphasizes	the	fact	that	eternal	life	is	dependent	on	the	individual	person	“coming	and	believing”	in	Christ	(p.	
171)
and	that	the	present	tense	verbs	used	for	“believe”	in	these	passages	imply	not	merely	an	initial	decision	of	faith,	but	rather
continuing	in	that	state.
I	regret	having	to	differ	with	my	friend	and	colleague	on	this	question,	but	there	is	something	to	be	said	in	response:	while	no	one
would	deny	that	it	is	necessary	for	people	themselves	to	believe	in	Christ	for	eternal	life,	and	while	it	is	also	true	that	Jesus	here
speaks	not	just	of	initial	saving	faith	but	of	a	faith	that	continues	over	time,	the	verse	does	not	go	so	far	as	to	specify	that
“everyone	who	believes	continuously	
until	his	or	her	death	
will	have	eternal	life,”	but	rather	simply	says	that	“he	who	is	
presently
in	a	state	of	believing	
in	Christ”	will	have	eternal	life	and	Jesus	will	raise	him	up	at	the	last	day.	The	verse	speaks	about	all	who
presently	are	in	a	state	of	believing	in	Christ,	and	it	says	that	all	of	them	will	be	raised	up	by	Christ	at	the	last	day.	No	further
objections	to	this	specific	verse	are	given	in	Osborne’s	second	essay,	“Soteriology	in	the	Gospel	of	John,”	in	
The	Grace	of	God,
the	Will	of	Man,	
p.	248.
3
The	Greek	word	used	here	for	“perish”	is	
apollymi,	
the	same	term	John	uses	in	John	3:16	to	say	that	“whoever	believes	in	him
should	not	perish	but	have	eternal	life.”
Grant	Osborne,	in	“Exegetical	Notes	on	Calvinist	Texts,”	p.	
172,	says	that	this	verse	must	not	be	interpreted	apart	from	the
teaching	about	the	vine	and	the	branches	in	John	15:1–7,	but	he	gives	no	alternative	explanation	for	the	phrase	“they	shall	never
perish,”	and	gives	no	reason	why	we	should	fail	to	understand	it	to	mean	that	these	people	will	certainly	have	life	with	God
forever	in	heaven.	In	his	subsequent	article,	“Soteriology	in	the	Gospel	of	John,”	Osborne	again	mentions	John	10:28,	but	gives
no	alternative	explanation	for	it	other	than	to	say	that	this	passage	emphasizes	God’s	sovereignty,	but	other	passages	in	John
emphasize	the	faith-response	that	works	together	with	God’s	sovereignty.	These	articles	do	not	seem	to	provide	a	reason	why	we
should	not	understand	these	words	in	an	ordinary	sense,	indicating	that	one	who	believes	in	Christ	will	certainly	never	fall	away.
Of	course,	those	who	believe	in	the	doctrine	of	the	perseverance	of	the	saints	(such	as	myself)	would	affirm	that	the	
way	
God
keeps	us	safe	is	by	causing	us	to	continue	to	believe	in	Christ	(see	discussion	below),	so	to	say	that	Scripture	also	emphasizes	the
necessity	of	continuing	in	faith	is	not	to	object	to	the	doctrine	of	perseverance	of	the	saints	as	it	has	been	expressed	by	Reformed
theologians	frequently	in	the	history	of	the	church.	In	other	words,	there	is	a	way	to	believe	in	both	sets	of	texts	without
concluding	that	people	who	are	truly	born	again	can	lose	their	salvation.
4
BAGD,	
p.	28.
5
Ibid.,	p.	
109.
6
Osborne,	“Exegetical	Notes	on	Calvinist	Texts,”	p.	
181,	answers	this	verse	by	saying	that	Paul	also	teaches	personal
responsibility,	since	“the	Christian	is	warned	not	to	‘grieve’	the	Spirit	(cf.	1	Thess.	4:8)”	and	“the	danger	of	apostasy	is	real,	and
he	dare	not	‘grieve’	the	Spirit.”	But	once	again	this	objection	provides	no	alternative	interpretation	to	the	verse	at	hand,	but	simply
refers	to	other	verses	that	teach	personal	responsibility,	a	fact	that	a	Reformed	theologian	would	also	be	eager	to	affirm.
Arminian	theologians	frequently	assume	that	if	they	affirm	human	responsibility	and	the	need	for	continuing	in	faith	they	have
thereby	negated	the	idea	that	God’s	sovereign	keeping	and	protection	is	absolutely	certain	and	eternal	life	is	guaranteed.	But	they
often	to	do	this	without	providing	any	other	convincing	interpretations	for	the	texts	cited	to	demonstrate	the	doctrine	of
perseverance	of	the	saints,	or	any	explanation	that	would	show	why	we	should	not	take	these	words	as	absolute	guarantees	that
those	who	are	born	again	will	certainly	persevere	to	the	end.	Rather	than	assuming	that	passages	on	human	responsibility	negate
the	idea	of	God’s	sovereign	protection,	it	seems	better	to	adopt	the	Reformed	position	that	says	that	God’s	sovereign	protection	is
consistent	with	human	responsibility,	because	it	works	through	human	responsibility	and	guarantees	that	we	will	respond	by
maintaining	the	faith	that	is	necessary	to	persevere.
7
Osborne	rightly	rejects	the	idea	that	this	refers	only	to	the	fact	that	the	church	will	continue.	He	says,	“Paul	does	intend	that	the
promise	extend	to	the	individual.	He	will	be	kept	by	God	with	a	view	to	the	final	salvation,	but	this	does	not	obviate	the	need	for
perseverance”	(“Exegetical	Notes	on	Calvinist	Texts,”	p.	
182).
8
The	following	three	paragraphs	are	taken	from	W.	Grudem,	
The	First	Epistle	of	Peter	
(Leicester:	Inter-Varsity	Press,	and	Grand
Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1988),	pp.	58–59.
9
The	translation	by	J.	N.	D.	Kelly,	“as	a	result	of	.	.	.	faith,”	is	an	extremely	unlikely	rendering	of	the	very	common	construction
dia	
with	the	genitive	(the	few	examples	of	this	construction	meaning	“as	a	result	of”	which	are	suggested	in,	
BAGD,	
p.	180,	IV,
are	all	ambiguous,	and	Kelly	himself	gives	no	examples:	see	J.	N.	D.	Kelly,	
A	Commentary	on	the	Epistles	of	Peter	and	Jude,
Black’s	New	Testament	Commentaries	[London:	Black,	1969],	p.	52).
10
The	author	uses	the	perfect	tense	verb	
gegonamen,	
“we	have	become”	(at	some	time	in	the	past,	with	results	that	continue	into
the	present).
11
See	the	list	of	evidences	of	salvation	given	in	
section	D,	chapter	31
.
12
The	word	
enlightened	
translates	the	Greek	term	
phōtizō,	
which	refers	to	learning	in	general,	not	necessarily	a	learning	that
results	in	salvation—it	is	used	in	John	1:9	of	“enlightening”	every	man	that	comes	into	the	world,	in	1	Cor.	4:5	of	the	enlightening
that	comes	at	the	final	judgment,	and	in	Eph.	1:18	of	the	enlightening	that	accompanies	growth	in	the	Christian	life.	The	word	is
not	a	“technical	term”	that	means	that	the	people	in	question	were	saved.
After	completing	the	following	discussion	of	Hebrews	6:4–6,	I	wrote	a	much	more	extensive	study,	with	additional	analysis,
supporting	data,	and	interaction	with	other	literature:	see	Wayne	Grudem,	“Perseverance	of	the	Saints:	A	Case	Study	From	Heb.
6:4–6	and	the	Other	Warning	Passages	of	Hebrews,”	in	
The	Grace	of	God,	the	Bondage	of	the	Will,	
vol.	1,	ed.	Tom	Schreiner	and
Bruce	Ware	(Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	forthcoming	in	1995).
13
This	is	not	the	same	word	as	
ephapax,	
which	is	more	regularly	used	in	the	New	Testament	of	nonrepeatable	events	(Rom.	6:10;
Heb.	7:27;	9:12;	10:10).
14
BAGD,	
p.	157.	They	mention	other	examples	of	
geuomai	
(“taste”),	such	as	Herodotus	6.5,	where	the	people	of	Miletus	had
“tasted	of	freedom,”	but	it	was	certainly	not	their	own	possession.	They	also	cite	Dio	Chrysostom,	32.72,	where	he	speaks	of	the
people	of	Alexandria	in	a	time	when	they	“had	a	taste	of	warfare”	in	an	encounter	with	Roman	troops	who	were	simply	harassing
them	and	not	actually	engaging	in	genuine	war.	Josephus,	
The	Jewish	War,	
2.158,	speaks	about	the	theological	views	of	the
Essenes	“whereby	they	irresistibly	attract	all	who	have	once	
tasted	
their	philosophy.”	Here	again	Josephus	makes	it	clear	that
those	who	have	“once	tasted”	have	not	yet	made	the	Essene	philosophy	their	own,	but	are	simply	very	strongly	attracted	to	it.	By
analogy,	in	Heb.	6	those	who	have	“tasted”	the	heavenly	gift	and	the	word	of	God	and	the	powers	of	the	age	to	come	may	be
strongly	attracted	to	these	things,	or	they	may	not	be,	but	mere	tasting	does	not	mean	that	they	have	made	it	their	own—quite	the
contrary,	if	all	the	author	can	say	of	them	is	that	they	have	“tasted”	these	things,	it	suggests	that	they	have	not	made	what	they
tasted	to	be	their	own.
15
The	word	
tasted	
is	also	used	in	Heb.	2:9	to	say	that	Jesus	“tasted	death,”	indicating	that	he	came	to	know	it	by	experience	(but
“tasted”	is	an	apt	word	because	he	did	not	remain	dead).	The	same	could	be	true	of	those	who	had	some	experience	of	heavenly
gifts,	as	can	be	true	even	of	unbelievers	(cf.	Matt.	7:22;	1	Cor.	7:14;	2	Peter	2:20–22).	In	Heb.	6:4–5	these	people’s	experience	of
the	Holy	Spirit’s	power	and	of	the	Word	of	God	was	of	course	a	
genuine	experience	
(just	as	Jesus	
genuinely	
died),	but	that	by
itself	does	not	show	that	the	people	had	an	experience	of	regeneration.
16
The	same	Greek	word	
metochos	
is	used	in	Heb.	3:14,	even	though	the	English	text	of	the	RSV	says	“We	share	in	Christ.”
17
Heb.	1:9	also	uses	the	same	word	to	speak	of	“comrades”	(RSV)	or	“companions”	(NIV,	NASB).
18
The	other	uses	of	
metochos	
in	Hebrews	(3:1	and	12:8)	do	suggest	closer	association	or	participation,	but	even	12:8,	which	talks
about	people	becoming	partakers	in	discipline,	certainly	allows	for	the	fact	that	some	may	receive	that	discipline	but	not	be
transformed	by	it.	In	any	case,	the	evidence	is	not	strong	enough	to	make	us	think	that	the	author	of	Hebrews	used	this	word	as	a
“technical	term”	that	always	referred	to	a	saving	kind	of	participation	(it	did	not	in	Heb.	1:9	and	12:8),	and	our	understanding	of
the	sense	of	the	word	must	be	governed	by	an	examination	of	the	range	of	meaning	it	can	take	in	the	Greek	literature	of	the	New
Testament	and	in	other	literature	that	shares	a	similar	vocabulary	with	the	writers	of	the	New	Testament.
The	usage	of	the	Septuagint	is	also	instructive	with	respect	to	this	word,	since	in	several	instances	it	only	refers	to	companionship,
not	any	kind	of	regenerating	or	life-changing	experience	with	God	or	with	the	Holy	Spirit.	For	instance,	in	1	Kings	20:30,	Saul
accuses	Jonathan	of	being	a	“partner”	with	David.	In	Ps.	119:63,	the	psalmist	says	he	is	a	“companion”	of	all	those	who	fear	God.
Eccl.	4:10	says	that	two	are	better	than	one,	for	if	they	fall,	the	one	will	lift	up	his	“partner.”	Prov.	28:24,	in	the	translations	of
Aquila,	Symmachus,	and	Theodotian,	uses	this	word	to	say	that	a	man	who	rejects	his	father	or	mother	is	a	“companion”	of
ungodly	men.	Examples	of	somewhat	stronger	association	are	seen	in	Esth.	8:13;	Prov.	29:10;	Hos.	4:17;	3	Macc.	3:21.
The	conclusion	of	this	examination	of	the	term	
metochos	
is	that,	while	it	can	be	used	of	very	close	association	with	saving	results
in	a	person’s	life,	it	can	also	be	used	simply	of	associating	or	participating	with	someone	else.	Therefore	the	term	itself	does	not
require	that	the	people	in	Heb.	6:4–6	had	saving	participation	with	the	Holy	Spirit	or	had	been	regenerated.	It	simply	means	they
had	in	some	ways	been	associated	with	and	influenced	by	the	Holy	Spirit.
The	people	who	prophesied	and	cast	out	demons	and	did	many	mighty	works	in	Jesus’	name	in	Matt.	7:22	are	good	examples	of
people	who	certainly	did	have	some	sharing	in	the	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	or	who	had	become	“partakers”	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in
this	sense,	but	had	not	been	saved:	Jesus	says,	“I	never	knew	you”	(Matt.	7:23).
19
BAGD,	
p.	334,	III,	translates	the	middle	participle	of	
echō	
as	“hold	oneself	fast,	cling	to,”	and	lists	Heb.	6:9	as	the	only	New
Testament	example	of	this	form	used	“of	inner	belonging	and	close	association”	(cf.	
LSJ,	
p.	750,	C:	“hold	oneself	fast,	cling
closely”).	However,	even	if	we	translated	the	middle	voice	in	the	same	way	as	the	active,	the	phrase	would	mean,	“things	also
having	salvation,”	and	my	argument	in	this	section	would	not	be	affected.
20
The	NASB	translates,	“
and	
things	that	accompany	salvation.”
21
Someone	might	object	that	the	phrase	“better	things”	does	not	contrast	with	the	temporary	blessings	in	vv.	4–6,	but	with	the
judgment	mentioned	that	is	coming	to	the	thorns	and	thistles	who	are	about	to	be	“burned”	in	v.	
8.	But	it	is	unlikely	that	the	author
would	refer	to	not	being	cursed	simply	as	“better	things.”	The	comparative	“better”	(
kreisson
)	is	used	thirteen	times	in	Hebrews,
and	it	regularly	contrasts	something	
better	
with	something	
good	
(better	covenant,	better	sacrifice,	etc.);	similarly,	here	it	suggests
a	comparison	with	things	that	are	already	good	(such	as	the	blessings	in	vv.	4–6),	much	more	than	it	suggests	a	contrast	with	the
horrible	fate	of	eternal	judgment	in	v.	
8.
22
A.	H.	Strong,	
Systematic	Theology,	
p.	884.	Strong	mentions	an	appropriate	parallel	use	of	the	verb	“sanctify”	in	1	Cor.	7:14,
which	speaks	about	the	unbelieving	husband	being	“sanctified”	by	the	believing	wife	(1	Cor.	7:14,	where	the	same	Greek	word,
hagiazō,	
is	used).	Outward	ceremonial	sanctification	is	also	referred	in	Heb.	9:13;	cf.	Matt.	23:17,	19.
23
Ex.	24:7–8	speaks	of	the	blood	of	the	covenant	that	set	apart	the	people	as	God’s	people	even	though	not	all	were	truly	born
again.	In	the	context	of	Heb.	10,	such	imagery,	taken	from	the	Old	Testament	process	of	sanctifying	a	people	so	that	they	could
come	before	God	to	worship,	is	an	appropriate	background.
24
The	construction	uses	
ou	mē	
plus	the	aorist	subjunctive	to	express	emphatic	negation.
25
See	discussion	of	the	doctrine	of	purgatory	in	
chapter	41
.
26
A	different	kind	of	book	is	probably	in	view	in	Ex.	32:33,	where	God	says	to	Moses,	“Whoever	has	sinned	against	me,	him	will
I	blot	out	of	my	book.”	Here	the	New	Testament	idea	of	the	“book	of	life”	is	not	mentioned.	Rather,	the	image	is	one	of	God
keeping	a	record	of	those	currently	dwelling	among	his	people,	much	as	an	earthly	king	would	do.	To	“blot	out”	someone’s	name
from	such	a	book	would	imply	that	the	person	had	died.	Using	this	imagery,	Ex.	32:33	is	best	understood	to	mean	that	God	will
take	the	life	of	anyone	who	sins	against	him	(see	v.	35).	Eternal	destiny	is	not	in	view	in	this	passage.
27
We	should	give	a	similar	interpretation	to	David’s	prayer	in	Ps.	51:11:	“Take	not	your	holy	Spirit	from	me.”	David	is	praying
that	the	Holy	Spirit’s	anointing	for	kingship	would	not	be	removed	from	him,	and	that	the	presence	and	power	of	God	on	his	life
would	not	depart;	he	is	not	praying	against	a	loss	of	eternal	salvation.
28
Cf.	1	Tim.	3:13,	which	says,	that	those	who	have	“served	well”	as	deacons	gain	“great	assurance	in	their	faith	in	Christ	Jesus”
(NIV).
29
Of	course,	both	the	Calvinist	and	the	Arminian	would	allow	for	the	possibility	that	the	“backslidden”	person	is	truly	born	again
and	had	just	fallen	into	sin	and	doubt.	But	both	would	agree	that	it	is	pastorally	wise	to	assume	that	the	person	is	not	a	Christian
until	some	evidence	of	present	faith	is	forthcoming.
30
Of	course,	not	all	who	use	the	phrase	
eternal	security	
make	mistakes	of	this	sort,	but	the	phrase	is	certainly	open	to	such
misunderstanding.
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	41
Death	and	the	Intermediate	State
What	is	the	purpose	of	death	in	the	Christian	life?	What	happens
to	our	bodies	and	souls	when	we	die?
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
A.	Why	Do	Christians	Die?
Our	treatment	of	the	application	of	redemption	must	include	a
consideration	of	death	and	the	question	of	how	Christians	should
view	their	own	death	and	the	death	of	others.	We	also	must	ask
what	happens	to	us	between	the	time	that	we	die	and	the	time	that
Christ	returns	to	give	us	new	resurrection	bodies.
1.
	Death	Is	Not	a	Punishment	for	Christians.
	Paul	tells	us	clearly	that	there
is	“no	condemnation	for	those	who	are	in	Christ	Jesus”	(Rom.	8:1).	All	the
penalty	for	our	sins	has	been	paid.	Therefore,	even	though	we	know	that
Christians	die,	we	should	not	view	the	death	of	Christians	as	a	punishment
from	God	or	in	any	way	a	result	of	a	penalty	due	to	us	for	our	sins.
1
	It	is	true
that	the	penalty	for	sin	is	death,	but	that	penalty	no	longer	applies	to	us—not
in	terms	of	physical	death,	and	not	in	terms	of	spiritual	death	or	separation
from	God.	All	of	that	has	been	paid	for	by	Christ.	Therefore	there	must	be
another	reason	than	punishment	for	our	sins	if	we	are	to	understand	why
Christians	die.
2.	Death	Is	the	Final	Outcome	of	Living	in	a	Fallen	World.
	In	his	great
wisdom,	God	decided	that	he	would	not	apply	to	us	the	benefits	of	Christ’s
redemptive	work	all	at	once.	Rather,	he	has	chosen	to	apply	the	benefits	of
salvation	to	us	gradually	over	time	(as	we	have	seen	in	chapters	33–40).
Similarly,	he	has	not	chosen	to	remove	all	evil	from	the	world	immediately,
but	to	wait	until	the	final	judgment	and	the	establishment	of	the	new	heaven
and	new	earth	(see	
chapters	56
	and	
57
).	In	short,	we	still	live	in	a	fallen	world
and	our	experience	of	salvation	is	still	incomplete.
The	last	aspect	of	the	fallen	world	to	be	removed	will	be	death.	Paul
says:
Then	comes	the	end,	when	he	delivers	the	kingdom	to	God	the	Father
after	destroying	every	rule	and	every	authority	and	power.	For	he
must	reign	until	he	has	put	all	his	enemies	under	his	feet.	
The	last
enemy	to	be	destroyed	is	death.	
(1	Cor.	15:26)
When	Christ	returns,
then	shall	come	to	pass	the	saying	that	is	written:
“Death	is	swallowed	up	in	victory.”
“O	death,	where	is	your	victory?
O	death,	where	is	your	sting?”	(1	Cor.	15:54–55)
But	until	that	time	death	remains	a	reality	even	in	the	lives	of
Christians.	Although	death	does	not	come	to	us	as	a	penalty	for	our
individual	sins	(for	that	has	been	paid	by	Christ),	it	does	come	to	us
as	a	result	of	living	in	a	fallen	world,	where	the	effects	of	sin	have
not	all	been	removed.	Related	to	the	experience	of	death	are	other
results	of	the	fall	that	harm	our	physical	bodies	and	signal	the
presence	of	death	in	the	world—Christians	as	well	as	non-
Christians	experience	aging,	illnesses,	injuries,	and	natural	disasters
(such	as	floods,	violent	storms,	and	earthquakes).	Although	God
often	answers	prayers	to	deliver	Christians	(and	also	non-
Christians)	from	some	of	these	effects	of	the	fall	for	a	time	(and
thereby	indicates	the	nature	of	his	coming	kingdom),	nevertheless,
Christians	eventually	experience	all	of	these	things	to	some
measure,	and,	until	Christ	returns,	all	of	us	will	grow	old	and	die.
The	“last	enemy”	has	not	yet	been	destroyed.	And	God	has	chosen
to	allow	us	to	experience	death	before	we	gain	all	the	benefits	of
salvation	that	have	been	earned	for	us.
3.	God	Uses	the	Experience	of	Death	to	Complete	Our	Sanctification.
Throughout	our	Christian	lives	we	know	that	we	never	have	to	pay	any
penalty	for	sin,	for	that	has	all	been	taken	by	Christ	(Rom.	8:1).	Therefore,
when	we	do	experience	pain	and	suffering	in	this	life,	we	should	never	think
it	is	because	God	is	
punishing	
us	(for	our	harm).	Sometimes	suffering	is
simply	a	result	of	living	in	a	sinful,	fallen	world,	and	sometimes	it	is	because
God	is	
disciplining	
us	(for	our	good),	but	in	all	cases	we	are	assured	by
Romans	8:28	that	“God	causes	
all	things	
to	work	together	for	good	to	those
who	love	God,	to	those	who	are	called	according	to	His	purpose”	(NASB).
The	positive	purpose	for	God’s	discipline	is	clear	in	Hebrews	12,
where	we	read:
The	Lord	disciplines	him	whom	he	loves.	.	.	.	He	disciplines	us	for	our
good,	that	we	may	share	his	holiness.	For	the	moment	all	discipline
seems	painful	rather	than	pleasant;	later	it	yields	the	peaceful	fruit	of
righteousness	to	those	who	have	been	trained	by	it.	(Heb.	12:6,	10–
11)
Not	all	discipline	is	in	order	to	correct	us	from	sins	that	we	have
committed;	it	can	also	be	allowed	by	God	to	strengthen	us	in	order
that	we	may	gain	greater	ability	to	trust	God	and	resist	sin	in	the
challenging	path	of	obedience.	We	see	this	clearly	in	the	life	of
Jesus,	who,	though	he	was	without	sin,	yet	“learned	obedience
through	what	he	suffered”	
(Heb.	5:8).
2
	He	was	made	perfect
“through	suffering”	
(Heb.	2:10).	Therefore	we	should	see	all	the
hardship	and	suffering	that	comes	to	us	in	life	as	something	that
God	brings	to	us	
to	do	us	good,	
strengthening	our	trust	in	him	and
our	obedience,	and	ultimately	increasing	our	ability	to	glorify	him.
Consequently,	we	should	view	the	aging	and	weakness	and
sometimes	sickness	leading	up	to	death	as	another	kind	of
discipline	that	God	allows	us	to	go	through	in	order	that	through
this	process	our	sanctification	might	be	furthered	and	ultimately
completed	when	we	go	to	be	in	the	Lord’s	presence.	The	challenge
that	Jesus	gives	to	the	church	in	Smyrna	could	really	be	given	to
every	believer:	“
Be	faithful	unto	death,	
and	I	will	give	you	the
crown	of	life”	(Rev.	2:10).	Paul	says	his	goal	in	life	is	that	he	may
become	like	Christ:	“that	I	may	know	him	and	the	power	of	his
resurrection,	and	may	share	his	sufferings,	
becoming	like	him	in	his
death”	
(Phil.	3:10).	Paul	thought	about	the	way	in	which	Jesus
died,	and	made	it	his	goal	to	exemplify	the	same	characteristics	in
his	life	when	it	came	time	for	him	to	die—that	in	whatever
circumstances	he	found	himself,	he,	like	Christ,	would	continue
obeying	God,	trusting	God,	forgiving	others,	and	caring	for	the
needs	of	those	around	him,	thus	in	every	way	bringing	glory	to	God
even	in	his	death.	Therefore	when	in	prison,	without	knowing
whether	he	would	die	there	or	come	out	alive,	he	could	still	say,	“it
is	my	eager	expectation	and	hope	that	I	shall	not	be	at	all	ashamed,
but	that	with	full	courage	now	as	always	
Christ	will	be	honored	
in
my	body,	whether	by	life	
or	by	death”	
(Phil.	1:20).
The	understanding	that	death	is	not	in	any	way	a	punishment	for
sin,	but	simply	something	God	brings	us	through	in	order	to	make
us	more	like	Christ,	should	be	a	great	encouragement	to	us.	It
should	take	away	from	us	the	fear	of	death	that	haunts	the	minds	of
unbelievers	(cf.	Heb.	2:15).	Nevertheless,	although	God	will	bring
good	to	us	through	the	process	of	death,	we	must	still	remember
that	death	is	not	natural;	it	is	not	right;	and	in	a	world	created	by
God	it	is	something	that	ought	not	to	be.	It	is	an	enemy,	something
that	Christ	will	finally	destroy	(1	Cor.	15:26).
4.	Our	Experience	of	Death	Completes	Our	Union	With	Christ.
	Another
reason	why	God	allows	us	to	experience	death,	rather	than	taking	us
immediately	to	heaven	when	we	become	Christians,	is	that	through	death	we
imitate	Christ	in	what	he	did	and	thereby	experience	closer	union	with	him.
Paul	can	say	that	we	are	fellow	heirs	with	Christ	“provided	we	
suffer	with	him
in	order	that	we	may	also	be	glorified	with	him”	(Rom.	8:17).	And	Peter	tells
his	readers	not	to	be	surprised	at	the	fiery	testing	that	comes	on	them,	but
encourages	them,	“rejoice	in	so	far	as	
you	share	Christ’s	sufferings,	
that	you
may	also	rejoice	and	be	glad	when	his	glory	is	revealed”	(1	Peter	4:13).	As
we	noted	above,	such	union	with	Christ	in	suffering	includes	union	with	him
in	death	as	well	(see	Phil.	3:10).	Jesus	is	the	“pioneer	and	perfecter	of	our
faith”	(Heb.	12:2),	and	we	follow	after	him	as	we	run	the	race	of	life.	Peter
writes,	“Christ	also	suffered	for	you,	leaving	you	an	example,	that	you	should
follow	in	his	steps”	(1	Peter	2:21).
5.	Our	Obedience	to	God	Is	More	Important	Than	Preserving	Our	Own
Lives.
	If	God	uses	the	experience	of	death	to	deepen	our	trust	in	him	and	to
strengthen	our	obedience	to	him,	then	it	is	important	that	we	remember	that
the	world’s	goal	of	preserving	one’s	own	physical	life	at	all	costs	is	not	the
highest	goal	for	a	Christian:	obedience	to	God	and	faithfulness	to	him	in
every	circumstance	is	far	more	important.	This	is	why	Paul	could	say,	“I	am
ready	not	only	to	be	imprisoned	but	even	to	die	at	Jerusalem	for	the	name	of
the	Lord	Jesus”	(Acts	21:13;	cf.	25:11).	He	told	the	Ephesian	elders,	“I	do	not
account	my	life	of	any	value	nor	as	precious	to	myself,	if	only	I	may
accomplish	my	course	and	the	ministry	which	I	received	from	the	Lord	Jesus,
to	testify	to	the	gospel	of	the	grace	of	God”	(Acts	20:24).
It	was	this	conviction—that	obedience	to	God	is	far	more	important
than	the	preservation	of	life—that	gave	Paul	courage	to	go	back
into	the	city	of	Lystra	after	he	had	just	been	stoned	and	left	for	dead
(Acts	14:20),	and	then	return	there	again	shortly	thereafter	(Acts
14:21–22).	He	endured	many	sufferings	and	dangers	(2	Cor.	11:23–
27),	often	risking	his	life,	in	order	to	obey	Christ	fully.	Therefore	he
could	say	at	the	end	of	his	life,	with	a	note	of	great	triumph,	“The
time	of	my	departure	has	come.	
I	have	fought	the	good	fight,	
I	have
finished	the	race,	I	have	kept	the	faith”	(2	Tim.	4:6–7).	This	same
conviction	empowered	Old	Testament	saints	to	accept	martyrdom
rather	than	sin:	“Some	were	tortured,	refusing	to	accept	release,	that
they	might	rise	again	to	a	better	life”	(literally,	“that	they	might
obtain	a	better	resurrection,”	Heb.	11:35).	This	conviction	also	gave
Peter	and	the	other	apostles	courage,	when	facing	the	threat	of
death,	to	say,	“We	must	obey	God	rather	than	men”	(Acts	5:29).
Certainly	this	was	the	point	of	Jesus’	command	to	the	church	at
Smyrna,	“
Be	faithful	unto	death,	
and	I	will	give	you	the	crown	of
life”	(Rev.	2:10).	We	also	read	that	there	will	be	rejoicing	in	heaven
when	the	faithful	saints	have	conquered	the	devil	“by	the	blood	of
the	Lamb	and	by	the	word	of	their	testimony,	for	
they	loved	not
their	lives	even	unto	death”	
(Rev.	12:11).
The	persuasion	that	we	may	honor	the	Lord	even	in	our	death,	and
that	faithfulness	to	him	is	far	more	important	than	preserving	our
lives,	has	given	courage	and	motivation	to	martyrs	throughout	the
history	of	the	church.	When	faced	with	a	choice	of	preserving	their
own	lives	and	sinning,	or	giving	up	their	own	lives	and	being
faithful,	they	chose	to	give	up	their	own	lives—“they	loved	not
their	lives	even	unto	death”	(Rev.	12:11).	Even	in	times	where	there
is	little	persecution	and	little	likelihood	of	martyrdom,	it	would	be
good	for	us	to	fix	this	truth	in	our	minds	once	for	all,	for	if	we	are
willing	to	give	up	even	our	lives	for	faithfulness	to	God,	we	shall
find	it	much	easier	to	give	up	everything	else	for	the	sake	of	Christ
as	well.
B.	How	Should	We	Think	of	Our	Own	Death	
and	the	Death	of	Others?
1.
	Our	Own	Death.
	The	New	Testament	encourages	us	to	view	our	own
death	not	with	fear	but	with	joy	at	the	prospect	of	going	to	be	with	Christ.
Paul	says,	“We	would	rather	be	away	from	the	body	and	at	home	with	the
Lord”	(2	Cor.	5:8).	When	he	is	in	prison,	not	knowing	whether	he	will	be
executed	or	released,	he	can	say:
For	to	me	to	live	is	Christ,	and	
to	die	is	gain.	
If	it	is	to	be	life	in	the
flesh,	that	means	fruitful	labor	for	me.	Yet	which	I	shall	choose	I
cannot	tell.	I	am	hard	pressed	between	the	two.	
My	desire	is	to	depart
and	be	with	Christ,	
for	that	is	far	better.	(Phil.	1:21–23)
We	also	read	John’s	word	in	Revelation,	“And	I	heard	a	voice	from	heaven
saying,	‘Write	this:	Blessed	are	the	dead	who	die	in	the	Lord	henceforth.’
‘Blessed	indeed,’	says	the	Spirit,	‘that	they	may	rest	from	their	labors,	for
their	deeds	follow	them!’	”	(Rev.	14:13).
Believers	need	have	no	fear	of	death,	therefore,	for	Scripture
reassures	us	that	not	even	“death”	will	“separate	us	from	the	love	of
God	in	Christ	Jesus	our	Lord”	(Rom.	8:38–39;	cf.	Ps.	23:4).	In	fact,
Jesus	died	in	order	that	he	might	“deliver	all	those	who	through	fear
of	death	were	subject	to	lifelong	bondage”	(Heb.	2:15).
3
	This	verse
reminds	us	that	a	clear	testimony	to	our	lack	of	fear	of	death	will
provide	a	strong	witness	for	Christians	in	an	age	that	tries	to	avoid
talking	about	death	and	has	no	answer	for	it.
2.	The	Death	of	Christian	Friends	and	Relatives.
	While	we	can	look
forward	to	our	own	death	with	a	joyful	expectation	of	being	in	Christ’s
presence,	our	attitude	will	be	somewhat	different	when	we	experience	the
death	of	Christian	friends	and	relatives.	In	these	cases	we	will	experience
genuine	sorrow—but	mixed	with	joy	that	they	have	gone	to	be	with	the	Lord.
It	is	not	wrong	to	express	real	sorrow	at	the	loss	of	fellowship	with
loved	ones	who	have	died,	and	sorrow	also	for	the	suffering	and
hardship	that	they	may	have	gone	through	prior	to	death.
Sometimes	Christians	think	it	shows	lack	of	faith	if	they	mourn
deeply	for	a	brother	or	sister	Christian	who	has	died.	But	Scripture
does	not	support	that	view,	because	when	Stephen	was	stoned,	we
read	that	“Devout	men	buried	Stephen,	
and	made	great	lamentation
over	him”	
(Acts	8:2).	If	there	ever	was	certainty	that	someone	went
to	be	with	the	Lord,	it	occurred	in	the	case	of	Stephen.	As	he	died,
he	said,	“Behold,	I	see	the	heavens	opened,	and	the	Son	of	man
standing	at	the	right	hand	of	God”	(Acts	7:56).	Then	when	he	was
dying,	he	prayed,	“Lord	Jesus,	receive	my	spirit,”	and,	“Lord,	do
not	hold	this	sin	against	them”	(Acts	7:59–60).	And	this	occurred	in
Jerusalem,	with	all	the	apostles	still	present,	those	apostles	who	had
seen	Jesus	himself	after	he	had	been	raised	from	the	dead.	There
was	no	lack	of	faith	on	anyone’s	part	that	Stephen	was	in	heaven
experiencing	great	joy	in	the	presence	of	the	Lord.	Yet	in	spite	of
this,	“Devout	men	buried	Stephen,	
and	made	great	lamentation
over	him”	
(Acts	8:2).	Their	sorrow	showed	the	genuine	grief	that
they	felt	at	the	loss	of	fellowship	with	someone	whom	they	loved,
and	it	was	not	wrong	to	express	this	sorrow—it	was	right.	Even
Jesus,	at	the	tomb	of	Lazarus,	“wept”	(John	11:35),	experiencing
sorrow	at	the	fact	that	Lazarus	had	died,	that	his	sisters	and	others
were	experiencing	such	grief,	and	also,	no	doubt,	at	the	fact	that
there	was	death	in	the	world	at	all,	for	ultimately	it	is	unnatural	and
ought	not	to	be	in	a	world	created	by	God.
The	Ephesian	elders,	whom	Paul	had	taught	personally	for	three
years,	later	“
wept	
and	embraced	Paul	and	kissed	him,	sorrowing
most	of	all	because	of	the	word	he	had	spoken,	that	they	should	see
his	face	no	more”	(Acts	20:37–38).	And	Paul	himself,	in	the	same
letter	in	which	he	expressed	such	a	desire	to	depart	from	this	life
and	be	with	Christ,	said	that	if	Epaphroditus	had	died,	he	himself
would	have	had	
“sorrow	upon	sorrow”	
(Phil.	2:27).	Moreover,
King	David,	the	man	after	God’s	own	heart,	the	man	who	in	his
psalms	frequently	spoke	of	living	forever	with	God,	nonetheless
had	great	sorrow	when	he	learned	that	Saul	and	Jonathan	had	died
(2	Sam.	1:11–27).
Nevertheless,	the	sorrow	that	we	feel	is	clearly	mingled	with	hope
and	joy.	Paul	does	not	tell	the	Thessalonians	that	they	should	not
grieve	
at	all	
concerning	their	loved	ones	who	have	died,	but	he
writes,	“that	you	may	not	grieve	
as	others	do	
who	have	no	hope”	(1
Thess.	4:13)—they	should	not	grieve	in	the	same	way,	with	the
same	bitter	despair,	that	unbelievers	have.	But	certainly	they	should
grieve.	He	assures	them	that	Christ	“died	for	us	so	that	whether	we
wake	or	sleep	we	might	live	with	him”	(1	Thess.	5:10),	and	thereby
encourages	them	that	those	who	have	died	have	gone	to	be	with	the
Lord.	That	is	why	Scripture	can	say,	“Blessed	are	the	dead	who	die
in	the	Lord	henceforth	.	.	.	that	they	may	rest	from	their	labors”
(Rev.	14:13).	In	fact,	Scripture	even	tells	us,	“Precious	in	the	sight
of	the	L
ORD
	is	the	death	of	his	saints”	(Ps.	116:15).
Therefore,	though	we	have	genuine	sorrow	when	Christian	friends
and	relatives	die,	we	also	can	say	with	Scripture,	“O	death,	where	is
your	victory?	O	death,	where	is	your	sting?	
.	.	.	Thanks	be	to	God,
who	gives	us	the	victory	through	our	Lord	Jesus	Christ”	(1	Cor.
15:55–57).	Though	we	mourn,	our	mourning	should	be	mixed	with
worship	of	God	and	thanksgiving	for	the	life	of	the	loved	one	who
has	died.	Worship	is	especially	important	at	this	time,	as	we	see	in
the	examples	of	David	and	of	Job.	When	David’s	child	died,	he
stopped	praying	for	the	child’s	health,	and	worshiped	God:	“Then
David	arose	from	the	earth,	and	washed,	and	anointed	himself,	and
changed	his	clothes;	and	he	went	into	the	house	of	the	Lord,	
and
worshiped”	
(2	Sam.	12:20).
Similarly,	when	Job	heard	of	the	death	of	his	ten	children,
Then	Job	arose,	and	rent	his	robe,	and	shaved	his	head,	and	fell	upon
the	ground,	
and	worshiped.	
And	he	said,	“Naked	I	came	from	my
mother’s	womb,	and	naked	shall	I	return;	the	L
ORD
	gave,	and	the	L
ORD
has	taken	away;	blessed	be	the	name	of	the	L
ORD
.”	(Job	1:20–21)
3.	The	Death	of	Unbelievers.
	When	unbelievers	die,	the	sorrow	we	feel	is
not	mingled	with	the	joy	of	assurance	that	they	have	gone	to	be	with	the	Lord
forever.	This	sorrow,	especially	regarding	those	we	have	been	close	to,	is	very
deep	and	real.	Paul	himself,	when	thinking	about	some	of	his	Jewish	brothers
who	had	rejected	Christ,	said,	“I	am	speaking	the	truth	in	Christ,	I	am	not
lying;	my	conscience	bears	me	witness	in	the	Holy	Spirit,	that	
I	have	great
sorrow	and	unceasing	anguish	in	my	heart.	
For	I	could	wish	that	I	myself
were	accursed	and	cut	off	from	Christ	for	the	sake	of	my	brethren,	my
kinsmen	by	race”	(Rom.	9:1–3).
Yet	it	also	must	be	said	that	we	often	do	not	have	absolute	certainty
that	a	person	has	persisted	in	refusal	to	trust	in	Christ	all	the	way	to
the	point	of	death.	The	knowledge	of	one’s	impending	death	often
will	bring	about	genuine	heart	searching	on	the	part	of	the	dying
person,	and	sometimes	words	of	Scripture	or	words	of	Christian
testimony	that	have	been	heard	long	ago	will	be	recalled	and	the
person	may	come	to	genuine	repentance	and	faith.	Certainly,	we	do
not	have	any	assurance	that	this	has	happened	unless	there	is
explicit	evidence	for	it,	but	it	is	also	good	to	realize	that	in	many
cases	we	have	only	probable	but	not	absolute	knowledge	that	those
whom	we	have	known	as	unbelievers	have	persisted	in	their
unbelief	until	the	point	of	death.	In	some	cases	we	simply	do	not
know.
Nevertheless,	after	a	non-Christian	has	died,	it	would	be	wrong	to
give	any	indication	to	others	that	we	think	that	person	has	gone	to
heaven.	This	would	simply	be	to	give	misleading	information	and
false	assurance,	and	to	diminish	the	urgency	of	the	need	for	those
who	are	still	alive	to	trust	in	Christ.	It	is	much	better,	as	we	have
opportunity,	to	focus	on	the	fact	that	the	sorrow	that	we	feel	at	the
loss	of	someone	whom	we	love	causes	us	to	reflect	on	our	own	life
and	destiny	as	well.	In	fact,	the	times	when	we	are	able	to	talk	as	a
friend	to	the	loved	ones	of	an	unbeliever	who	has	died	are	often
times	when	the	Lord	will	open	up	opportunities	to	talk	about	the
gospel	with	those	who	are	still	living.
Moreover,	it	is	often	very	helpful	in	such	circumstances	to	speak
with	genuine	thankfulness	about	the	good	qualities	that	we	have
noticed	and	been	encouraged	by	in	the	life	of	the	person	who	has
died.
4
	A	good	example	of	that	is	seen	in	David’s	reaction	when
King	Saul	died.	Even	though	Saul	had	become	an	evil	king	and	had
pursued	David	and	tried	to	kill	him	many	times,	once	Saul	had	died,
David	spoke	freely	and	publicly	about	the	good	things	Saul	had
done:
Your	glory,	O	Israel,	is	slain	upon	your	high	places!	How	are	the
mighty	fallen!	
.	.	.	Saul	and	Jonathan	.	.	.	they	were	swifter	than	eagles,
they	were	stronger	than	lions.	You	daughters	of	Israel,	weep	over	Saul,
who	clothed	you	daintily	in	scarlet,	who	put	ornaments	of	gold	upon
your	apparel.	How	are	the	mighty	fallen	in	the	midst	of	battle!	(2	Sam.
1:19–25)
5
C.	What	Happens	When	People	Die?
1.
	The	Souls	of	Believers	Go	Immediately	Into	God’s	Presence.
	Death	is	a
temporary	cessation	of	bodily	life	and	a	separation	of	the	soul	from	the	body.
Once	a	believer	has	died,	though	his	or	her	physical	body	remains	on	the	earth
and	is	buried,	at	the	moment	of	death	the	soul	(or	spirit)	of	that	believer	goes
immediately	into	the	presence	of	God	with	rejoicing.	When	Paul	thinks	about
death	he	says,	“We	would	rather	be	
away	from	the	body	and	at	home	with	the
Lord”	
(2	Cor.	5:8).	To	be	away	from	the	body	is	to	be	at	home	with	the	Lord.
He	also	says	that	his	desire	is	“to	
depart	and	be	with	Christ,	
for	that	is	far
better”	(Phil.	1:23).	And	Jesus	said	to	the	thief	who	was	dying	on	the	cross
next	to	him,	“
Today	
you	will	be	with	me	in	Paradise”	(Luke	23:43).
6
	The
author	of	Hebrews	says	that	when	Christians	come	together	to	worship	they
come	not	only	into	the	presence	of	God	in	heaven,	but	also	into	the	presence
of	“the	spirits	of	just	men	made	perfect”	(Heb.	12:23).
7
	However,	as	we	shall
see	in	more	detail	in	the	next	chapter,	God	will	not	leave	our	dead	bodies	in
the	earth	forever,	for	when	Christ	returns	the	souls	of	believers	will	be
reunited	with	their	bodies,	their	bodies	will	be	raised	from	the	dead,	and	they
will	live	with	Christ	eternally.
a.	The	Bible	Does	Not	Teach	the	Doctrine	of	Purgatory:
	The	fact	that	the
souls	of	believers	go	immediately	into	God’s	presence	means	that	
there	is	no
such	thing	as	purgatory.	
In	Roman	Catholic	teaching,	purgatory	is	the	place
where	the	souls	of	believers	go	to	be	further	purified	from	sin	until	they	are
ready	to	be	admitted	into	heaven.	According	to	this	view,	the	sufferings	of
purgatory	are	given	to	God	in	substitute	for	the	punishment	for	sins	that
believers	should	have	received	in	time,	but	did	not.	Speaking	of	purgatory,	Ott
says:
Suffrages	operate	in	such	a	matter	that	the	satisfactory	value	of	the
good	works	is	offered	to	God	in	substitution	for	the	temporal
punishment	for	sins	which	the	poor	souls	still	have	to	render.	It
operates	by	way	of	remission	of	temporal	punishments	due	to	sins.
8
But	this	doctrine	is	not	taught	in	Scripture,	and	it	is	in	fact	contrary
to	the	verses	quoted	immediately	above.	The	Roman	Catholic
Church	has	found	support	for	this	doctrine,	not	in	the	pages	of
canonical	Scripture	as	we	defined	it	in	chapter	3	above,	and	as
Protestants	have	accepted	it	since	the	Reformation,	but	in	the
writings	of	the	Apocrypha,
9
	particularly	in	2	Maccabees	12:42–45:
[Judas	Maccabeus,	the	leader	of	the	Jewish	forces]	also	took	a
collection,	man	by	man,	to	the	amount	of	2,000	drachmas	of	silver,
and	sent	it	to	Jerusalem	to	provide	for	a	sin	offering.	In	doing	this	he
acted	very	well	and	honorably,	taking	into	account	the	resurrection.
For	if	he	were	not	expecting	that	those	who	had	fallen	would	rise
again,	it	would	have	been	superfluous	and	foolish	
to	pray	for	the
dead.	
But	if	he	was	looking	to	the	splendid	reward	that	is	laid	up	for
those	who	fall	asleep	in	godliness,	it	was	a	holy	and	pious	thought.
Therefore	
he	made	atonement	for	the	dead,	that	they	might	be
delivered	from	their	sin.
Here	it	is	clear	that	prayer	for	the	dead	is	approved,	and	also
making	an	offering	to	God	to	deliver	the	dead	from	their	sin.	But	in
response	it	must	be	said	that	this	literature	is	not	equal	to	Scripture
in	authority,	and	should	not	be	taken	as	an	authoritative	source	of
doctrine.	Moreover,	it	contradicts	the	clear	statements	about
departing	and	being	with	Christ	quoted	above,	and	thereby	opposes
the	clear	teaching	of	New	Testament	Scripture.	Furthermore,	when
it	talks	about	the	offering	of	Judas	making	“atonement	[Gk.
exilasmos	
(‘propitiation’)]	for	the	dead”	it	contradicts	the	explicit
teaching	of	the	New	Testament	that	Christ	alone	made	atonement
for	us.	Finally,	this	passage	in	2	Maccabees	is	difficult	to	square
even	with	Roman	Catholic	teaching,	because	it	teaches	that	soldiers
who	had	died	in	the	mortal	sin	of	idolatry	(which	cannot	be
forgiven,	according	to	Catholic	teaching)	should	have	prayers	and
sacrifices	offered	for	them	with	the	possibility	that	they	will	be
delivered	from	their	suffering.
Roman	Catholic	theology	finds	support	for	the	doctrine	of
purgatory	primarily	in	the	passage	from	2	Maccabees	quoted	above,
and	in	the	teaching	of	the	tradition	of	the	church.
10
	Other	passages
cited	by	Ott	in	support	of	the	doctrine	of	purgatory	are	2	Timothy
1:18;	Matthew	5:26;	1	Corinthians	3:15;	and	Matthew	12:32.	In	2
Timothy	1:18,	Paul	says,	concerning	Onesiphorus,	“When	he
arrived	in	Rome	he	searched	for	me	eagerly	and	found	me—may
the	Lord	grant	him	to	find	mercy	from	the	Lord	on	that	Day—and
you	well	know	all	the	service	he	rendered	at	Ephesus”	(2	Tim.
1:17–18).	The	claim	of	those	who	find	support	for	the	doctrine	of
purgatory	is	that	“Onesiphorus	.	.	.	apparently	was	no	longer	among
the	living	at	the	time	of	the	Second	Epistle	to	Timothy.”
11
	This
seems	to	be	based	on	the	fact	that	Paul	refers	not	to	Onesiphorus
himself	but	“the	household	of	Onesiphorus”	(2	Tim.	1:16);
however,	that	phrase	does	not	prove	that	Onesiphorus	had	died,	but
only	that	Paul	was	wishing	blessings	not	only	on	him	but	on	his
entire	household.	This	would	not	be	unusual	since	Onesiphorus	had
served	in	Ephesus	where	Paul	had	worked	for	three	years	(2	Tim.
1:18;	cf.	4:19).	To	build	support	for	purgatory	on	the	idea	that
Onesiphorus	had	already	died	is	simply	to	build	it	on	an	assumption
that	cannot	be	supported	with	clear	evidence.	(It	is	not	unusual	for
Paul	to	express	a	wish	that	some	Christians	would	be	blessed	in	the
Day	of	Judgment—see	1	Thess.	5:23.)
In	Matthew	12:32,	Jesus	says,	“Whoever	speaks	against	the	Holy
Spirit	will	not	be	forgiven,	either	in	this	age	or	in	the	age	to	come.”
Ott	says	that	this	sentence	“leaves	open	the	possibility	that	sins	are
forgiven	not	only	in	this	world	but	in	the	world	to	come.”
12
However,	this	is	simply	an	error	in	reasoning:	to	say	that	something
will	not	happen	in	the	age	to	come	does	not	imply	that	it	might
happen	in	the	age	to	come!
13
	What	is	needed	to	prove	the	doctrine
of	purgatory	is	not	a	negative	statement	such	as	this	but	a	positive
statement	that	says	that	people	suffer	for	the	purpose	of	continuing
purification	after	they	die.	But	Scripture	nowhere	says	this.
In	1	Corinthians	3:15	Paul	says	that	on	the	Day	of	Judgment,	the
work	that	everyone	has	done	will	be	judged	and	tested	by	fire,	and
then	says,	“
If	any	man’s	work	is	burned	up,	
he	will	suffer	loss,
though	he	himself	will	be	saved,	but	only	as	through	fire.”	But	this
does	not	speak	of	a	
person	
being	burned	or	suffering	punishment,
but	simply	of	
his	work	
as	being	tested	by	fire—that	which	is	good
will	be	like	gold,	silver,	and	precious	stones	that	will	last	forever	(v.
12).	Moreover,	Ott	himself	admits	that	this	is	something	that	occurs
not	during	this	age	but	during	the	day	of	“the	general	judgment,”
14
and	this	further	indicates	that	it	can	hardly	be	used	as	a	convincing
argument	for	purgatory.	Finally,	in	Matthew	5:26,	after	warning
people	to	make	friends	quickly	with	their	accusers	while	they	are
going	to	the	court,	lest	the	accuser	hand	them	to	the	judge	and	the
judge	to	the	guard	and	they	be	put	in	prison,	Jesus	then	says,	“You
will	never	get	out	till	you	have	paid	the	last	penny.”	Ott	understands
this	as	a	parable	teaching	a	“time-limited	condition	of	punishment
in	the	other	world.”
15
	But	surely	there	is	no	indication	in	context
that	this	is	a	parable—Jesus	is	giving	practical	teaching	about
reconciliation	of	human	conflicts	and	the	avoidance	of	situations
that	naturally	lead	to	anger	and	personal	injury	(see	Matt.	5:21–26).
Other	passages	of	Scripture	that	have	sometimes	been	referred	to	in
support	of	the	doctrine	of	purgatory
16
	simply	do	not	speak	directly
about	this	idea	at	all,	and	can	all	easily	be	understood	in	terms	of
punishment	and	deliverance	from	distress	in	this	life,	or	of	a	life	of
eternal	blessing	with	God	in	heaven	in	the	life	to	come.
An	even	more	serious	problem	with	this	doctrine	is	that	it	teaches
that	we	must	add	something	to	the	redemptive	work	of	Christ,	and
that	his	redemptive	work	for	us	was	not	enough	to	pay	the	penalty
for	all	our	sins.	But	this	is	certainly	contrary	to	the	teaching	of
Scripture.
17
	Moreover,	in	a	pastoral	sense,	the	doctrine	of	purgatory
robs	believers	of	the	great	comfort	that	should	be	theirs	in	knowing
that	those	who	have	died	have	immediately	gone	into	the	presence
of	the	Lord,	and	knowing	that	they	also,	when	they	die,	will	“depart
and	be	with	Christ,	for	that	is	far	better”	(Phil.	1:23).
b.	The	Bible	Does	Not	Teach	the	Doctrine	of	“Soul	Sleep”:
	The	fact	that
souls	of	believers	go	immediately	into	God’s	presence	also	means	that	
the
doctrine	of	soul	sleep	is	incorrect.	
This	doctrine	teaches	that	when	believers
die	they	go	into	a	state	of	unconscious	existence,	and	the	next	thing	that	they
are	conscious	of	will	be	when	Christ	returns	and	raises	them	to	eternal	life.
This	doctrine	has	been	taught	occasionally	by	one	person	or	another	in	the
history	of	the	church,	including	some	Anabaptists	at	the	Reformation,	and
some	of	the	Irvingites	in	England	in	the	nineteenth	century.	In	fact,	one	of
John	Calvin’s	first	writings	was	a	tract	against	this	doctrine,	a	doctrine	that
has	never	found	wide	acceptance	in	the	church.
Support	for	the	doctrine	of	soul	sleep	has	generally	been	found	in
the	fact	that	Scripture	several	times	speaks	of	the	state	of	death	as
“sleep”	or	“falling	asleep”	(Matt.	9:24;	27:52;	John	11:11;	Acts
7:60;	13:36;	1	Cor.	15:6,	18,	20,	51;	1	Thess.	4:13;	5:10).	Moreover,
certain	passages	seem	to	teach	that	the	dead	do	not	have	a
conscious	existence	(see	Ps.	6:5;	115:17	[but	see	v.	
18!];	Eccl.	9:10;
Isa.	38:19).	But	when	Scripture	represents	death	as	“sleep”	it	is
simply	a	metaphorical	expression	used	to	indicate	that	death	is	only
temporary	for	Christians,	just	as	sleep	is	temporary.	This	is	clearly
seen,	for	example,	when	Jesus	tells	his	disciples	about	the	death	of
Lazarus.	He	says,	“Our	friend	Lazarus	has	fallen	asleep,	but	I	go	to
awake	him	out	of	sleep”	(John	11:11).	We	should	notice	that	Jesus
does	not	here	say,	“The	soul	of	Lazarus	is	sleeping,”	nor,	in	fact,
does	any	passage	in	Scripture	say	that	the	soul	of	a	person	is
sleeping	or	unconscious	(a	statement	that	would	be	necessary	to
prove	the	doctrine	of	soul	sleep).	Rather	Jesus	simply	says	that
Lazarus	
has	fallen	asleep.	Then	John	explains,	“Now	Jesus	had
spoken	of	his	death,	but	they	thought	that	he	meant	taking	rest	in
sleep.	Then	Jesus	told	them	plainly,	‘Lazarus	is	dead’	”	(John
11:12–13).	The	other	passages	that	speak	about	people	sleeping
when	they	die	are	likewise	to	be	interpreted	as	simply	a
metaphorical	expression	to	teach	that	death	is	temporary.
As	for	the	passages	that	indicate	that	the	dead	do	not	praise	God,	or
that	there	is	a	ceasing	of	conscious	activity	when	people	die,	these
are	all	to	be	understood	from	the	perspective	of	life	in	this	world.
From	our	perspective	it	appears	that	once	people	die,	they	do	not
engage	in	these	activities	any	longer.	But	Psalm	115	presents	the
full	biblical	perspective	on	this	viewpoint.	It	says,	“The	dead	do	not
praise	the	L
ORD
,	nor	do	any	that	go	down	into	silence.”	But	then	it
continues	in	the	very	next	verse	with	a	contrast	indicating	that	those
who	believe	in	God	will	bless	the	L
ORD
	forever:	“
But	we	will	bless
the	L
ORD
	from	this	time	forth	and	for	evermore.	
Praise	the	L
ORD
!”
(Ps.	115:17–18).
Finally,	the	passages	quoted	above	demonstrating	that	the	souls	of
believers	go	immediately	into	God’s	presence	and	enjoy	fellowship
with	him	there	(2	Cor.	5:8;	Phil.	1:23;	Luke	23:43;	and	Heb.	12:23)
all	indicate	that	there	is	conscious	existence	and	fellowship	with
God	immediately	after	death	for	the	believer.	Jesus	did	not	say,
“Today	you	will	no	longer	have	consciousness	of	anything	that	is
going	on,”	but,	“Today	
you	will	be	with	me	in	Paradise”	
(Luke
23:43).	Certainly	the	conception	of	paradise	understood	at	that	time
was	not	one	of	unconscious	existence	but	one	of	great	blessing	and
joy	in	the	presence	of	God.
18
	Paul	did	not	say,	“My	desire	is	to
depart	and	be	unconscious	for	a	long	period	of	time,”	but	rather,
“My	desire	is	to	depart	
and	be	with	Christ”	
(Phil.	1:23)—and	he
certainly	knew	that	Christ	was	not	an	unconscious,	sleeping	Savior,
but	one	who	was	actively	living	and	reigning	in	heaven.	To	be	with
Christ	was	to	enjoy	the	blessing	of	fellowship	in	his	presence,	and
that	is	why	to	depart	and	be	with	him	was	“far	better”	(Phil.	1:23).
That	is	why	he	says,	“We	would	rather	be	away	from	the	body	and
at	home	with	the	Lord”	(2	Cor.	5:8).
The	fact	that	Hebrews	12:1	says,	“We	are	surrounded	by	so	great	a
cloud	of	witnesses,”	just	after	an	entire	chapter	spent	on	the
discussion	of	the	faith	of	Old	Testament	saints	who	had	died	(Heb.
11),	and	the	fact	that	the	author	encourages	us	to	run	the	race	of	life
with	perseverance	because	we	are	surrounded	by	this	great	cloud	of
witnesses,	both	suggest	that	those	who	have	died	and	gone	before
have	some	awareness	of	what	is	going	on	in	the	earth.	Scripture
says	very	little	about	this,	probably	because	it	does	not	want	us	to
speak	to	those	who	have	died	or	to	pray	to	them	or	to	contact	them
in	any	way	(note	Saul’s	great	sin	in	this	in	1	Sam.	28:7–25).
Nonetheless,	Hebrews	12:1–2	does	give	us	this	slight	hint,	probably
as	an	encouragement	to	us	to	continue	also	to	be	faithful	to	God	as
were	those	who	have	died	and	gone	to	heaven	before	us.	Similarly,
at	the	end	of	Hebrews	12,	the	author	tells	us	that	when	we	worship
we	come	into	the	presence	of	God	in	heaven,	and	we	come	not	to
“the	spirits	of	just	men	who	are	sleeping	in	an	unconscious	state”
but	“to	innumerable	angels	in	festal	gathering,	and	to	the	assembly
of	the	first-born	who	are	enrolled	in	heaven,	and	to	a	judge	who	is
God	of	all,	and	to	the	spirits	of	just	men	made	perfect,	and	to	Jesus,
the	mediator	of	a	new	covenant”	(Heb.	12:22–24).
19
Revelation	6:9–11	and	7:9–10	also	clearly	show	the	souls	or	spirits
of	those	who	have	died	and	who	have	gone	to	heaven	praying	and
worshiping,	for	they	cry	out	with	a	loud	voice,	“O	Sovereign	Lord,
holy	and	true,	how	long	before	you	will	judge	and	avenge	our	blood
on	those	who	dwell	upon	the	earth?”	(Rev.	6:10),	and	they	are	seen
“standing	before	the	throne	and	before	the	Lamb,	clothed	in	white
robes,	with	palm	branches	in	their	hands,	and	crying	out	with	a	loud
voice,	‘Salvation	belongs	to	our	God	who	sits	upon	the	throne,	and
to	the	Lamb!’	”	(Rev.	7:9–10).	All	of	these	passages	deny	the
doctrine	of	soul	sleep,	for	they	make	it	clear	that	the	souls	of
believers	experience	conscious	fellowship	with	God	in	heaven
immediately	upon	death.
c.	Did	Old	Testament	Believers	Enter	Immediately	Into	God’s	Presence?
Some	have	said	that,	although	the	souls	of	believers	
since	Christ’s
resurrection	
go	immediately	into	God’s	presence	in	heaven,	the	souls	of
believers	who	died	
before	Christ’s	resurrection	
did	not	enjoy	the	blessings	of
heaven	but	went	into	a	place	of	waiting	for	Christ’s	work	of	redemption	to	be
complete.	Sometimes	this	is	called	the	
limbus	patrum,	
or	simply	limbo.
20
	This
view	has	been	especially	common	in	Roman	Catholic	theology,	but	it	has	also
been	held	by	some	Lutherans.	Some	of	the	support	for	this	doctrine	comes
from	a	particular	view	of	the	idea	of	Christ’s	descent	into	hell,	which	we
discussed	in	an	earlier	chapter.
21
Not	many	Scripture	references	talk	about	the	state	of	Old	Testament
believers	after	they	had	died,	but	those	that	give	us	any	indication
of	their	state	all	point	in	the	direction	of	immediate	conscious
enjoyment	in	the	presence	of	God,	not	of	a	time	of	waiting	away
from	God’s	presence.	“Enoch	walked	with	God;	and	he	was	not,	for
God	took	him”	
(Gen.	5:24;	cf.	Heb.	11:5).	Elijah	was	not	taken	to	a
place	on	the	border	of	hell,	but	he	“went	up	by	a	whirlwind	
into
heaven”	
(2	Kings	2:11;	cf.	Matt.	17:3,	where	Moses	and	Elijah
appear,	talking	with	Jesus).	And	David	is	confident	that	he	will
“dwell	in	the	house	of	the	L
ORD
	for	ever”	
(Ps.	23:6;	cf.	16:10–11;
17:15;	1:15,	18).	Moreover,	when	Jesus	answers	the	Sadducees,	he
reminds	them	that	God	says,	“I	am	the	God	of	Abraham,	and	the
God	of	Isaac,	and	the	God	of	Jacob”	and	then	says,	“He	is	not	God
of	the	dead,	but	of	the	living”	(Matt.	22:32),	thus	implying	that
Abraham,	Isaac,	and	Jacob	were	living	even	at	that	very	moment,
and	that	God	was	their	God.	Moreover,	in	the	story	of	the	rich	man
and	Lazarus,	Jesus	does	not	say	that	Lazarus	is	unconscious,	but
reports	Abraham	as	saying	about	Lazarus,	“Now	he	is	comforted
here”	(Luke	16:25).	Abraham	himself	is	portrayed	as	dwelling
consciously	in	a	place	that	is	very	desirable—that	the	rich	man
longed	to	go	to—certainly	not	a	place	on	the	fringe	of	hell.	It	is
important	to	notice	that	since	this	is	before	Christ’s	resurrection,
Lazarus	was	in	the	same	situation	as	the	Old	Testament	saints.
Therefore	it	seems	likely	that	Old	Testament	believers	also	entered
immediately	into	heaven	and	enjoyed	a	time	of	fellowship	with	God
upon	their	death.	However,	it	may	well	have	been	true	that
additional	rich	blessings	and	much	greater	rejoining	came	to	them
when	Christ	returned	to	heaven	at	his	ascension.	But	this	does	not
mean	that	they	were	transported	to	heaven	for	the	first	time,	or	that
that	was	the	first	time	they	enjoyed	the	blessing	of	God’s	presence.
d.	Should	We	Pray	for	the	Dead?
	Finally,	the	fact	that	the	souls	of	believers
go	immediately	into	God’s	presence	means	that	
we	should	not	pray	for	the
dead.	
Although	this	idea	is	taught	in	2	Maccabees	12:42–45	(see	above),	it	is
nowhere	taught	in	the	Bible	itself.	Moreover,	there	is	no	indication	that	this
was	the	practice	of	any	Christians	at	the	time	of	the	New	Testament,	nor
should	it	have	been.	Once	
believers	
die	they	enter	into	God’s	presence	and
they	are	in	a	state	of	perfect	happiness	with	him.	What	good	would	it	do	to
pray	for	them	anymore?	Final	heavenly	reward	will	be	based	on	deeds	done	in
this	life,	as	Scripture	repeatedly	testifies	(1	Cor.	3:12–15;	2	Cor.	5:10;	et
al.).
22
	Further,	the	souls	of	
unbelievers	
who	die	go	to	a	place	of	punishment
and	eternal	separation	from	the	presence	of	God.	It	would	do	no	good	to	pray
for	them	either,	since	their	final	destiny	has	been	settled	by	their	sin	and	their
rebellion	against	God	in	this	life.	To	pray	for	the	dead	therefore	is	simply	to
pray	for	something	that	God	has	told	us	has	already	been	decided.
23
Moreover,	to	teach	that	we	should	pray	for	the	dead,	or	to	encourage	others	to
do	so,	would	be	to	encourage	false	hope	that	the	destinies	of	people	might	be
changed	after	they	die,	something	which	Scripture	nowhere	encourages	us	to
think.	It	may	lead	people	to	much	useless	anxiety	and	much	time	essentially
wasted	in	prayers	that	will	have	absolutely	no	results,	and	will	thereby	divert
attention	from	prayers	that	could	be	made	for	events	for	this	life	and	could
have	great	effect	in	advancing	the	work	of	the	kingdom.	We	should	spend
time	praying	according	to	God’s	will.
2.	The	Souls	of	Unbelievers	Go	Immediately	to	Eternal	Punishment.
Scripture	never	encourages	us	to	think	that	people	will	have	a	second	chance
to	trust	in	Christ	after	death.	In	fact,	the	situation	is	quite	the	contrary.	Jesus’
story	about	the	rich	man	and	Lazarus	gives	no	hope	that	people	can	cross
from	hell	to	heaven	after	they	have	died:	though	the	rich	man	in	hell	called
out,	“Father	Abraham,	have	mercy	upon	me,	and	send	Lazarus	to	dip	the	end
of	his	finger	in	water	and	cool	my	tongue;	for	I	am	in	anguish	in	this	flame,”
Abraham	replied	to	him,	“Between	us	and	you	a	great	chasm	has	been	fixed,
in	order	that	those	who	would	pass	from	here	to	you	may	not	be	able,	and
none	may	cross	from	there	to	us”	
(Luke	16:24–26).
The	book	of	Hebrews	connects	death	with	the	consequence	of
judgment	in	close	sequence:	“just	as	it	is	appointed	for	men	to	die
once,	and	after	that	comes	judgment	.	.	.”	(Heb.	9:27).	Moreover,
Scripture	never	represents	the	final	judgment	as	depending	on
anything	done	after	we	die,	but	only	on	what	has	happened	in	this
life	(Matt.	25:31–46;	Rom.	2:5–10;	cf.	2	Cor.	5:10).	Some	have
argued	for	a	second	chance	to	believe	in	the	gospel	on	the	basis	of
Christ’s	preaching	to	the	spirits	in	prison	in	1	Peter	3:18–20	and	the
preaching	of	the	gospel	“even	to	the	dead”	in	1	Peter	4:6,	but	those
are	inadequate	interpretations	of	the	verses	in	question,	and,	on
closer	inspection,	do	not	support	such	a	view.
24
We	should	also	realize	that	the	idea	that	there	will	be	a	second
chance	to	accept	Christ	after	death	is	based	on	the	assumption	that
everyone	deserves	a	chance	to	accept	Christ	and	that	eternal
punishment	only	comes	to	those	who	consciously	decide	to	reject
him.	But	certainly	that	idea	is	not	supported	by	Scripture:	we	all	are
sinners	by	nature	and	choice,	and	no	one	actually	deserves	any	of
God’s	grace	or	deserves	any	opportunity	to	hear	the	gospel	of
Christ—those	come	only	because	of	God’s	unmerited	favor.
Condemnation	comes	not	only	because	of	a	willful	rejection	of
Christ,	but	also	because	of	the	sins	that	we	have	committed	and	the
rebellion	against	God	that	those	sins	represent	(see	John	3:18).
The	idea	that	people	have	a	second	chance	to	accept	Christ	after
death	would	also	destroy	most	motivation	for	evangelism	and
missionary	activity	today,	and	is	not	consistent	with	the	intense
missionary	zeal	that	was	felt	by	the	New	Testament	church	as	a
whole,	and	that	was	especially	exemplified	in	the	missionary	travels
of	the	apostle	Paul.
The	fact	that	there	is	conscious	punishment	for	unbelievers	after
they	die	and	that	this	punishment	goes	on	forever	is	certainly	a
difficult	doctrine	for	us	to	contemplate.	But	the	passages	teaching	it
appear	so	clear	that	it	seems	that	we	must	affirm	it	if	we	are	to
affirm	what	Scripture	teaches.	Jesus	says	that	at	the	day	of	final
judgment	he	will	say	to	those	at	his	left	hand,	“Depart	from	me,	you
cursed,	into	the	
eternal	fire	
prepared	for	the	devil	and	his	angels,”
and	he	says	that	“they	will	go	away	into	
eternal	punishment,	
but	the
righteous	into	eternal	life”	(Matt.	25:41,	46).
25
These	passages	show	that	we	cannot	accept	as	faithful	to	Scripture
the	doctrine	of	
annihilationism.	
This	is	a	doctrine	that	says	that
unbelievers,	either	immediately	upon	death,	or	else	after	suffering
for	a	period	of	time,	will	simply	cease	to	exist—God	will
“annihilate”	them	and	they	will	no	longer	be.	Although	the	idea
initially	sounds	attractive	to	us,	and	it	avoids	the	emotional
difficulty	connected	with	affirming	eternal	conscious	punishment
for	the	wicked,	such	an	idea	is	not	explicitly	affirmed	in	any
passages	of	Scripture,	and	seems	so	clearly	to	be	contradicted	by
those	passages	that	connect	the	eternal	blessing	of	the	righteous
with	the	eternal	punishment	of	the	wicked	(Matt.	25:46)	and	that
talk	about	punishment	extending	to	the	wicked	day	and	night
forever	(Rev.	14:11;	20:10).
26
Although	unbelievers	pass	into	a	state	of	eternal	punishment
immediately	upon	death,	their	bodies	will	not	be	raised	until	the	day
of	final	judgment.	On	that	day,	their	bodies	will	be	raised	and
reunited	with	their	souls,	and	they	will	stand	before	God’s	throne
for	final	judgment	to	be	pronounced	upon	them	in	the	body	(see
Matt.	25:31–46;	John	5:28–29;	Acts	24:15;	and	Rev.	20:12,	15).
27
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
Have	you	thought	very	much	about	the	possibility	of	your	own	death?
Has	there	been	an	element	of	fear	connected	with	those	thoughts?	What,
if	anything,	do	you	fear	about	death?	Do	you	think	that	these	fears	have
come	from	the	influence	of	the	world	around	you	or	from	Scripture?
How	would	the	teachings	of	Scripture	encourage	you	to	deal	with	these
fears?
2
.	
Has	this	chapter	changed	your	feelings	about	your	own	death	in	any
way?	Can	you	honestly	contemplate	it	now	as	something	that	will	bring
you	nearer	to	Christ	and	increase	your	own	trust	in	God	and	faithfulness
to	him?	How	would	you	express	your	hopes	regarding	your	own	death?
3
.	
Do	you	think	you	would	have	the	courage	to	refuse	to	sin	even	if	it
meant	being	thrown	to	the	lions	in	a	Roman	coliseum,	or	burned	at	the
stake	during	the	Reformation,	or	thrown	in	prison	for	years	in	some
foreign	country	today?	Do	you	think	the	Christian	martyrs	throughout
history	had	thought	that	they	would	have	enough	courage	when	put	to
the	test?	What	happened	to	them	to	equip	them	for	this	suffering	(read	1
Cor.	10:13)?	If	you	can	obtain	a	copy,	you	may	wish	to	read	the	account
of	the	martyrdom	of	Polycarp,	a	stirring	testimony	of	faith	in	God	and	of
God’s	faithfulness	in	the	second	century	A.D.
28
	Have	you	settled	in	your
own	mind	that	obedience	to	Christ	is	more	important	than	preserving
your	own	life?	What	would	make	you	hesitant	to	believe	this	or	act	on
this	conviction?
4
.	
If	you	have	experienced	the	death	of	a	believer	who	was	close	to	you,	do
you	think	that	your	reaction	to	that	death	was	one	of	sorrow	mingled
with	joy?	How	has	this	chapter	influenced	the	way	you	feel	about	that
situation,	if	at	all?
5
.	
Have	you	previously	believed	in	the	doctrine	of	purgatory?	If	you	no
longer	believe	in	it	now,	can	you	describe	the	way	the	doctrine	made	you
feel,	and	the	way	you	now	feel	emotionally	about	the	fact	that	that
doctrine	is	not	true	and	there	is	no	such	place	as	purgatory?
6
.	
If	death	itself	is	viewed	as	part	of	the	process	of	sanctification,	then	how
should	we	view	the	process	of	growing	older	and	weaker	in	this	world?
Is	that	the	way	the	world	views	aging?	What	about	you?
SPECIAL	TERMS
annihilationism
	
	
limbus	patrum
communion	of	saints
	
	
purgatory
death
	
	
soul	sleep
limbo
	
	
	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the
bibliography	to	chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be
found	in	
Appendix	4
.)
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92			Litton,	543–78
1930			Thomas,	298–310,	508–21
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1875–76			Pope,	3:371–86
1892–94			Miley,	2:430–39
1940			Wiley,	3:211–42
1983			Carter,	2:1109–13
3.			Baptist
1767			Gill,	2:179–211
1887			Boyce,	437–51
1907			Strong,	982–1003
1917			Mullins,	458–62
1983–85			Erickson,	1167–84
4.			Dispensational
1947			Chafer,	4:413–15
1949			Thiessen,	333–36
1986			Ryrie,	518–20
5.			Lutheran
1917–24			Pieper,	3:507–15
1934			Mueller,	613–19
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1724–58			Edwards,	2:26–36
1871–73			Hodge,	3:713–70
1878			Dabney,	817–29
1889			Shedd,	2b:591–640
1937–66			Murray,	
CW,	
2:401–3;	
CW,	
3:242–46
1938			Berkhof,	668–94
1962			Buswell,	2:304–23
7.			Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988–92			Williams,	3:400–401,	450
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955			Ott,	445–50,	473–76,	482–85
2.			Roman	Catholic:	Post-Vatican	II
1980			McBrien,	2:1135–47
Other	Works
Beckwith,	Roger	T.	“Purgatory.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	549–50.
Cooper,	John	W.	
Body,	Soul	and	Life	Everlasting:	Biblical	Anthropology
and	the	Monism-Dualism	Debate.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1989,	pp.
81–103,	121–253.
Davids,	P.	H.	“Death.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	299–300.
Feinberg,	John	S.	“1	Peter	3:18–20,	Ancient	Mythology,	and	the
Intermediate	State.”	
WTJ.	
Vol.	48,	no.	2	(Fall	1986),	pp.	303–36.
Grudem,	Wayne.	“Christ	Preaching	Through	Noah:	1	Peter	3:19–20	in
the	Light	of	Dominant	Themes	in	Jewish	Literature.”	In	
The	First	Epistle
of	Peter.	
Tyndale	New	Testament	Commentaries.	Leicester:	Inter-Varsity
Press,	and	Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1988,	pp.	203–39.
Harris,	Murray	J.	“Death.”	In	
NDT,	
p.	188.
_____.	“Intermediate	State.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	339–40.
Hoekema,	Anthony	A.	
The	Bible	and	the	Future.	
Grand	Rapids:
Eerdmans,	1979,	pp.	79–108.
Smith,	S.	M.	“Intermediate	State.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	562–64.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
Philippians	1:20–24:	
As	it	is	my	eager	expectation	and	hope	that	I	shall	not
be	at	all	ashamed,	but	that	with	full	courage	now	as	always	Christ	will	be
honored	in	my	body,	whether	by	life	or	by	death.	For	to	me	to	live	is	Christ,
and	to	die	is	gain.	If	it	is	to	be	life	in	the	flesh,	that	means	fruitful	labor	for
me.	Yet	which	I	shall	choose	I	cannot	tell.	I	am	hard	pressed	between	the	two.
My	desire	is	to	depart	and	be	with	Christ,	for	that	is	far	better.	But	to	remain
in	the	flesh	is	more	necessary	on	your	account.
HYMN
“My	Jesus	I	Love	Thee”
My	Jesus,	I	love	thee,	I	know	thou	art	mine;
For	thee	all	the	follies	of	sin	I	resign.
My	gracious	Redeemer,	my	Savior	art	thou;
If	ever	I	loved	thee,	my	Jesus	’tis	now.
I	love	thee	because	thou	hast	first	loved	me,
And	purchased	my	pardon	on	Calvary’s	tree.
I	love	thee	for	wearing	the	thorns	on	thy	brow;
If	ever	I	loved	thee,	my	Jesus,	’tis	now.
I’ll	love	thee	in	life,	I	will	love	thee	in	death;
And	praise	thee	as	long	as	thou	lendest	me	breath;
And	say,	when	the	death-dew	lies	cold	on	my	brow:
If	ever	I	loved	thee,	my	Jesus,	’tis	now.
In	mansions	of	glory	and	endless	delight,
I’ll	ever	adore	thee	in	heaven	so	bright;
I’ll	sing	with	the	glittering	crown	on	my	brow:
If	ever	I	loved	thee,	my	Jesus,	’tis	now.
AUTHOR:	WILLIAM	R.	FEATHERSTONE,	1864
NOTES
1
Even	the	death	of	some	Corinthian	Christians	who	had	been	abusing	the	Lord’s	Supper	(1	Cor.	11:30)	is	viewed	by	Paul	as	a
disciplining	or	chastening	process,	not	as	a	result	of	condemnation:	he	says,	“When	we	are	judged	by	the	Lord,	we	are	being
disciplined	so	that	we	will	not	be	condemned	with	the	world”	(v.	
32	NIV).
(In	this	discussion	I	am	using	the	word	
punishment	
to	mean	retribution	from	God	which	is	intended	to	do	us	harm,	and	
discipline
to	mean	hardship	through	which	God	intends	to	do	us	good.)
2
For	a	discussion	of	how	Jesus	learned	obedience	through	what	he	suffered,	see	
chapter	26
.
3
Berkhof	is	certainly	correct	to	say	that	the	burial	of	Jesus	“did	not	merely	serve	to	prove	that	Jesus	was	really	dead,	but	also	to
remove	the	terrors	of	the	grave	for	the	redeemed	and	to	sanctify	the	grave	for	them”	(
Systematic	Theology,	
p.	340).
4
It	is	right	to	thank	God	for	the	benefits	of	common	grace	in	the	lives	of	unbelievers;	see	the	discussion	of	common	grace	in
chapter	31
.
5
Even	this	requires	honesty	and	mature	judgment,	however,	for	if	we	are	called	upon	to	perform	a	funeral	service	for	someone
whose	life	has	been	widely	known	as	evil	and	destructive,	we	do	not	want	to	give	people	the	impression	that	what	a	person	does	in
this	life	makes	no	difference,	or	that	we	are	ignorant	of	the	noticeably	bad	qualities	of	such	a	person,	or	we	will	lose	credibility
with	those	who	hear	us.	As	an	example	of	the	inevitable	reaction	of	people	to	the	death	of	someone	clearly	evil,	such	as	Adolf
Hitler,	note	Prov.	11:10,	“When	the	wicked	perish	there	are	shouts	of	gladness.”
6
Paradise	is	simply	another	name	for	heaven:	see	
chapter	27
.
7
It	must	be	said,	however,	that	the	fact	that	we	go	to	be	with	Christ	immediately	when	we	die	should	not	be	taken	as	an
encouragement	to	anyone	to	think	that	suicide	would	be	right.	God	says,	“You	shall	not	murder”	(Ex.	20:13	NIV),	and	that	means
that	we	must	not	murder	ourselves	any	more	than	we	should	murder	others.
On	the	other	hand,	there	are	many	faithful	Christians	who	in	wartime	or	shipwrecks	or	other	trying	circumstances	have	laid	down
their	own	lives	for	the	sake	of	others,	thus	fulfilling	Jesus’	teaching,	“Greater	love	has	no	man	than	this,	that	a	man	lay	down	his
life	for	his	friends”	(John	15:13).
The	larger	principle	is	that	as	long	as	we	remain	in	this	life	we	are	to	be	faithful	to	Christ	in	serving	him	and	in	prayer,	for	he	calls
us	to	be	“faithful	unto	death”	(Rev.	2:10).	And	though	Paul,	in	thinking	about	his	own	personal	desires,	wanted	to	go	to	be	with
Christ,	he	realized	that	for	the	sake	of	the	Philippians	and	for	others	that	he	ministered	to,	to	stay	alive	would	be	“more	necessary”
on	their	behalf	(Phil.	1:24).
8
Ludwig	Ott,	
Fundamentals	of	Catholic	Dogma,	
p.	322.
9
See	
chapter	3
,	for	a	discussion	of	the	reasons	why	the	Apocrypha	should	not	be	accepted	as	part	of	Scripture.
10
Ott,	
Fundamentals	of	Catholic	Dogma,	
pp.	321–22,	482–85.
11
Ibid.,	p.	
321.
12
Ibid.,	p.	
483.
13
This	is	a	similar	mistake	to	the	one	made	by	those	who	argue	that,	since	Jesus	says	he	will	not	blot	someone’s	name	out	of	the
book	of	life	(Rev.	3:5),	it	implies	that	he	might	blot	the	names	of	others	out	of	the	book	of	life	(see	
chapter	40
).
14
Ott,	
Fundamentals	of	Catholic	Dogma,	
p.	483.
15
Ibid.	p.	
484.
16
Berkhof	mentions	that	Roman	Catholics	have	sometimes	referred	to	Isa.	4:4;	Mic.	7:8;	Zech.	9:11;	Mal.	3:2–3;	and	1	Cor.
15:29.
17
See	
chapter	27
,	on	the	fact	that	Christ’s	death	completely	paid	the	penalty	for	all	our	sins.
18
See	the	other	uses	of	the	word	
Paradise	
in	2	Cor.	12:3	and	Rev.	2:7,	where	the	word	clearly	refers	to	heaven	itself	where	God	is
and	lives	and	reigns;	see	also	the	discussion	of	this	word	in	
chapter	27
.
19
The	phrase	“the	communion	of	saints”	in	the	Apostles’	Creed	refers	to	the	fact	that	we	have	in	some	sense	a	communion	or
fellowship	with	those	who	have	died	and	gone	before	into	heaven,	an	idea	that	is	affirmed	in	Heb.	12:23.	This	does	not	imply	that
we	can	be	aware	of	them,	but	simply	that	when	we	worship	we	join	in	worship	that	is	already	going	on	in	heaven	(see	
chapter	51
,
on	the	fact	that	our	worship	now	is	also	worship	in	heaven).
20
Strictly	speaking,	Roman	Catholic	theologians	have	held	that	there	are	two	limbos,	a	place	where	unbaptized	infants	go	when
they	die	called	
limbus	infantum,	
and	a	place	where	Old	Testament	believers	went	when	they	died	called	
limbus	patrum.	
The	Latin
word	
limbus	
means	“border”;	these	were	thought	to	be	places	on	the	border	of	hell	where	people	were	excluded	from	the	presence
of	God	but	also	did	not	experience	conscious	suffering.	There	is	no	explicit	support	in	Scripture	for	either	doctrine.
21
See	the	discussion	of	the	idea	that	Christ	descended	into	hell	when	he	died	in	
chapter	27
.
22
See	
chapter	56
,	on	degrees	of	reward	in	heaven.
23
Further	indication	that	it	is	not	right	to	pray	for	the	dead	is	seen	in	the	fact	that	David	prayed	intensely	for	his	little	son	before
that	son	died,	but	after	he	had	died,	David	rose	from	prayer	and	washed	and	changed	his	clothes	and	“went	into	the	house	of	the
Lord	and	worshiped	.	.	.	and	he	ate”	(2	Sam.	12:20;	cf.	v.	23).	David	realized	that	once	the	child	had	died	his	task	of	praying	for
him	was	done.	When	I	speak	of	“praying	for	the	dead”	in	this	section,	I	mean	praying	that	God	would	change	their	status	or
destiny.	Of	course	there	is	nothing	wrong	with	
thanking	God	
for	the	lives	of	people	after	they	have	died.
24
See	the	discussion	of	these	verses	in	
chapter	27
	see	also	W.	Grudem,	
The	First	Epistle	of	Peter,	
pp.	155–62,	170–72,	203–39.
25
See	
chapter	56
,	for	a	discussion	of	the	final	judgment	and	the	doctrine	of	hell.
26
See	
chapter	56
,	for	a	more	extended	discussion	of	annihilationism.
27
See	the	beginning	of	
chapter	56
.
28
One	version	of	
The	Martyrdom	of	Polycarp	
is	available	in	
The	Apostolic	Fathers,	
2	vols.,	ed.	Kirsopp	Lake,	Loeb	Classical
Library	(Cambridge,	Mass.:	Harvard	University	Press,	1913),	pp.	307–45.	It	is	also	available	in	
The	Ante-Nicene	Fathers,	
ed.	A.
Roberts	and	J.	Donaldson	(10	vols.;	Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1979	[reprint]).
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	42
Glorification	
(Receiving	a	Resurrection	Body)
When	will	we	receive	resurrection	bodies?	What	will	they	be	like?
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
When	Christ	redeemed	us	he	did	not	just	redeem	our	spirits	(or
souls)—he	redeemed	us	as	whole	persons,	and	this	includes	the
redemption	of	our	bodies.	Therefore	the	application	of	Christ’s
work	of	redemption	to	us	will	not	be	complete	until	our	bodies	are
entirely	set	free	from	the	effects	of	the	fall	and	brought	to	that	state
of	perfection	for	which	God	created	them.	In	fact,	the	redemption
of	our	bodies	will	only	occur	when	Christ	returns	and	raises	our
bodies	from	the	dead.	But	at	this	present	time,	Paul	says	that	we
wait	for	
“the	redemption	of	our	bodies,”	
and	then	adds,	“for	in	this
hope	we	were	saved”	(Rom.	8:23–24).	The	stage	in	the	application
of	redemption	when	we	receive	resurrection	bodies	is	called
glorification.	
Referring	to	that	future	day	Paul	says	that	we	will	be
“
glorified	
with	him”	(Rom.	8:17).	Moreover,	when	Paul	traces	the
steps	in	the	application	of	redemption,	the	last	one	he	names	is
glorification:	“And	those	whom	he	predestined	he	also	called;	and
those	whom	he	called	he	also	justified;	and	those	whom	he	justified
he	also	
glorified”	
(Rom.	8:30).
The	day	we	are	glorified	will	be	a	day	of	great	victory	because	on
that	day	the	last	enemy,	death,	will	be	destroyed,	just	as	Scripture
predicts:	“For	he	must	reign	until	he	has	put	all	his	enemies	under
his	feet.	The	last	enemy	to	be	destroyed	is	death”	(1	Cor.	15:25–
26).	In	the	context	of	a	discussion	of	the	resurrection	of	our	bodies
when	Christ	returns,	Paul	says,	“Then	shall	come	to	pass	the	saying
that	is	written:	‘Death	is	swallowed	up	in	victory.’	‘O	death,	where
is	your	victory?	O	death,	where	is	your	sting?’	”	(1	Cor.	15:54–55).
When	our	bodies	are	raised	from	the	dead	we	will	experience
complete	victory	over	the	death	that	came	as	a	result	of	the	fall	of
Adam	and	Eve.	Then	our	redemption	will	be	complete.
We	may	therefore	define	
glorification	
as	follows:	
Glorification	is
the	final	step	in	the	application	of	redemption.	It	will	happen	when
Christ	returns	and	raises	from	the	dead	the	bodies	of	all	believers
for	all	time	who	have	died,	and	reunites	them	with	their	souls,	and
changes	the	bodies	of	all	believers	who	remain	alive,	thereby	giving
all	believers	at	the	same	time	perfect	resurrection	bodies	like	his
own.
A.	New	Testament	Evidence	for	Glorification
The	primary	New	Testament	passage	on	glorification	or	the
resurrection	of	the	body	is	1	Corinthians	15:12–58.	Paul	says,	“So
also	in	Christ	shall	all	be	made	alive.	But	each	in	his	own	order:
Christ	the	first	fruits,	then	
at	his	coming	
those	who	belong	to
Christ”	(vv.	22–23).
1
	Paul	discusses	the	nature	of	the	resurrection
body	in	some	detail	in	verses	35–50,	which	we	will	examine	in
section	C	below.	He	then	concludes	the	passage	by	saying	that	not
all	Christians	will	die,	but	some	who	remain	alive	when	Christ
returns	will	simply	have	their	bodies	instantaneously	changed	into
new,	resurrection	bodies	that	can	never	grow	old	or	weak	and	can
never	die:
Lo!	I	tell	you	a	mystery.	We	shall	not	all	sleep,	but	
we	shall	all	be
changed,	
in	a	moment,	in	the	twinkling	of	an	eye,	at	the	last	trumpet.
For	the	trumpet	will	sound,	and	the	dead	will	be	raised	imperishable,
and	we	shall	be	changed.	(1	Cor.	15:51–52)
Paul	further	explains	in	1	Thessalonians	that	the	souls	of	those	who
have	died	and	gone	to	be	with	Christ	will	come	back	and	be	joined
with	their	bodies	on	that	day,	for	Christ	will	bring	them	with	him:
“For	since	we	believe	that	Jesus	died	and	rose	again,	even	so,
through	Jesus,	
God	will	bring	with	him	those	who	have	fallen
asleep”	
(1	Thess.	4:14).	But	here	Paul	affirms	not	only	that	God
will	bring	with	Christ	those	who	have	died;	he	also	affirms	that
“the	dead	in	Christ	will	rise	first”	
(1	Thess.	4:16).	So	these
believers	who	have	died	with	Christ	are	also	raised	up	to	meet
Christ	(Paul	says	in	v.	
17,	“We	.	.	.	shall	be	caught	up	together	with
them	in	the	clouds	to	meet	the	Lord	in	the	air”).	This	only	makes
sense	if	it	is	the	
souls	
of	believers	who	have	gone	into	Christ’s
presence	who	return	with	him,	and	if	it	is	their	
bodies	
that	are	raised
from	the	dead	to	be	joined	together	with	their	souls,	and	then	to
ascend	to	be	with	Christ.
In	addition	to	these	passages	in	1	Corinthians	15	and	1
Thessalonians	4,	several	other	New	Testament	passages	affirm	the
reality	of	the	doctrine	of	glorification.	Jesus	says,	“The	hour	is
coming	when	all	who	are	in	the	tombs	will	hear	his	voice	and	come
forth,	those	who	have	done	good	
to	the	resurrection	of	life,	
and
those	who	have	done	evil	to	the	resurrection	of	judgment”	(John
5:28–29).
2
	Jesus	also	says,	“This	is	the	will	of	him	who	sent	me,
that	I	should	lose	nothing	of	all	that	he	has	given	me,	but	
raise	it	up
at	the	last	day.	
For	this	is	the	will	of	my	Father,	that	every	one	who
sees	the	Son	and	believes	in	him	should	have	eternal	life;	and	
I	will
raise	him	up	at	the	last	day”	
(John	6:39–40;	cf.	vv.	44,	54).
Paul	says,	“He	who	raised	Christ	Jesus	from	the	dead	will	
give	life
to	your	mortal	bodies	
also	through	his	Spirit	which	dwells	in	you”
(Rom.	8:11;	cf.	2	Cor.	5:1–10).	He	realizes	that	Christians	should
live	in	eager	expectation	of	Christ’s	return	and	of	the	change	in	our
bodies	to	be	like	his	own	perfect	body.	He	says,	“But	our
commonwealth	is	in	heaven,	and	from	it	we	await	a	Savior,	the
Lord	Jesus	Christ,	
who	will	change	our	lowly	body	to	be	like	his
glorious	body,	
by	the	power	which	enables	him	even	to	subject	all
things	to	himself”	(Phil.	3:20).
B.	Old	Testament	Support	for	Glorification
Sometimes	people	have	claimed	that	the	Old	Testament	has	little	if
any	evidence	of	hope	in	a	future	resurrection	of	the	body,	but	there
is	in	fact	more	Old	Testament	evidence	for	this	than	we	might
realize.	First,	even	before	Jesus	was	raised	from	the	dead,	the	New
Testament	indicates	that	many	Jewish	people	living	at	the	time	of
Christ	had	some	hope	of	a	future	bodily	resurrection.	When	Jesus
comes	to	the	home	of	Lazarus	after	he	had	died	and	says	to	Martha,
“Your	brother	will	rise	again,”	Martha	responds,	“I	know	that	he
will	rise	again	
in	the	resurrection	at	the	last	day”	
(John	11:23–24).
Moreover,	when	Paul	was	on	trial,	he	said	to	Felix	that	he	had	a
“hope	in	God	which	these	themselves	[his	Jewish	accusers]	accept,
that	
there	will	be	a	resurrection	
of	both	the	just	and	the	unjust”
(Acts	24:15).
As	for	the	beliefs	of	those	living	in	the	time	of	the	Old	Testament,
Hebrews	11	tells	us	that	Abraham	“looked	forward	to	the	city
which	has	foundations,	whose	builder	and	maker	is	God”	(Heb.
11:10).	We	also	read	that	many	Old	Testament	saints	“all	died	in
faith,	not	having	received	what	was	promised,	but	having	seen	it
and	greeted	it	from	afar,	and	having	acknowledged	that	they	were
strangers	and	exiles	on	the	earth.	.	.	.	But	as	it	is,	
they	desire	a	better
country,	that	is,	a	heavenly	one.	
Therefore	God	is	not	ashamed	to
be	called	their	God,	for	he	has	prepared	for	them	a	city”	(Heb.
11:13–16).	The	author	even	says	that	Abraham	“considered	that
God	was	able	to	raise	men	even	from	the	dead”	(Heb.	11:19).
When	we	look	at	the	actual	teachings	of	the	Old	Testament	itself,
there	are	indications	that	Old	Testament	authors	had	a	strong
expectation	of	the	resurrection	to	come	in	the	future.	Job	says:	“I
know	that	my	Redeemer	lives,	and	that	in	the	end	he	will	stand
upon	the	earth.	And	after	my	skin	has	been	destroyed,	
yet	in	my
flesh	I	will	see	God;	
I	myself	will	see	him	with	my	own	eyes—I,
and	not	another”	(Job	19:25–26	NIV).
3
We	read	in	the	Psalms,	“But	God	will	redeem	my	soul	from	the
grave;	he	will	surely	take	me	to	himself”	(Ps.	49:15	NIV;	cf.	73:24–
25).	And	we	read	in	Proverbs,	“Do	not	withhold	discipline	from	a
child.	.	.	.	If	you	beat	him	with	the	rod	you	will	save	his	life	from
Sheol”	(Prov.	23:13–14).	Isaiah	says,	
“Your	dead	shall	live,	their
bodies	shall	rise”	
(Isa.	26:19).	Daniel	has	a	very	explicit	prophecy
that	“
many	of	those	who	sleep	in	the	dust	of	the	earth	shall	awake,
some	to	everlasting	life,	and	some	to	shame	and	everlasting
contempt”	(Dan.	12:2).	(Cf.	also	Ezekiel’s	vision	of	the	dry	bones
in	Ezek.	37:1–14.)
Although	Old	Testament	believers	certainly	did	not	have	as	much
detail	about	the	nature	of	the	resurrection	or	the	way	it	would	come
about	through	the	resurrection	of	the	Messiah,	and	although	they
did	not	have	as	clear	a	basis	for	confidence	in	the	resurrection	as	we
do	in	the	actual	event	of	the	bodily	resurrection	of	Christ,
nonetheless	there	was	certainly,	as	we	have	seen,	an	expectation	of
a	future	day	of	bodily	resurrection.	People	who	for	years	had
meditated	on	and	believed	these	statements	of	Scripture	(such	as
Martha	in	John	11:24)	were	prepared	to	receive	the	full-fledged
New	Testament	teaching	on	the	resurrection	eagerly,	for	it	simply
provided	more	detail	and	more	assurance	for	what	they	already	had
believed.
C.	What	Will	Our	Resurrection	Bodies	Be	Like?
If	Christ	will	raise	our	bodies	from	the	dead	when	he	returns,	and	if
our	bodies	will	be	like	his	resurrection	body	(1	Cor.	15:20,	23,	49;
Phil.	3:21),	then	what	will	our	resurrection	bodies	be	like?
Using	the	example	of	sowing	a	seed	in	the	ground	and	then
watching	it	grow	into	something	much	more	wonderful,	Paul	goes
on	to	explain	in	more	detail	what	our	resurrection	bodies	will	be
like:
What	is	sown	is	perishable,	what	is	raised	is	
imperishable.	
It	is	sown
in	dishonor,	it	is	raised	
in	glory.	
It	is	sown	in	weakness,	it	is	raised	
in
power.	
It	is	sown	a	physical	body,	it	is	raised	a	
spiritual	body.	.	.	.	
Just
as	we	have	borne	the	image	of	the	man	of	dust,	we	shall	also	bear	the
image	of	the	man	of	heaven.	(1	Cor.	15:42–44,	49)
The	fact	that	our	new	bodies	will	be	“imperishable”	means	that	they
will	not	wear	out	or	grow	old	or	ever	be	subject	to	any	kind	of
sickness	or	disease.	They	will	be	completely	healthy	and	strong
forever.	Moreover,	since	the	gradual	process	of	aging	is	part	of	the
process	by	which	our	bodies	now	are	subject	to	“corruption,”	it	is
appropriate	to	think	that	our	resurrection	bodies	will	have	no	sign
of	aging,	but	will	have	the	characteristics	of	youthful	but	mature
manhood	or	womanhood	forever.	There	will	be	no	evidence	of
disease	or	injury,	for	all	will	be	made	perfect.
4
	Our	resurrection
bodies	will	show	the	fulfillment	of	God’s	perfect	wisdom	in
creating	us	as	human	beings	who	are	the	pinnacle	of	his	creation
and	the	appropriate	bearers	of	his	likeness	and	image.	In	these
resurrection	bodies	we	will	clearly	see	humanity	as	God	intended	it
to	be.
Paul	also	says	our	bodies	will	be	raised	“in	glory.”	When	this	term
is	contrasted	with	“dishonor,”	as	it	is	here,	there	is	a	suggestion	of
the	beauty	or	the	attractiveness	of	appearance	that	our	bodies	will
have.	They	will	no	longer	be	“dishonorable”	or	unattractive,	but
will	look	“glorious”	in	their	beauty.	Moreover,	because	the	word
“glory”	is	so	frequently	used	in	Scripture	of	the	bright	shining
radiance	that	surrounds	the	presence	of	God	himself,	this	term
suggests	that	there	will	also	be	a	kind	of	brightness	or	radiance
surrounding	our	bodies	that	will	be	an	appropriate	outward
evidence	of	the	position	of	exaltation	and	rule	over	all	creation	that
God	has	given	to	us.	This	is	also	suggested	in	Matthew	13:43,
where	Jesus	says,	“Then	
the	righteous	will	shine	like	the	sun	
in	the
kingdom	of	their	Father.”	Similarly,	we	read	in	Daniel’s	vision,
“And	
those	who	are	wise	shall	shine	like	the	brightness	of	the
firmament;	
and	those	who	turn	many	to	righteousness,	like	the	stars
for	ever	and	ever”	(Dan.	12:3,	in	a	passage	talking	about	the	final
resurrection).	Now	both	of	these	statements	might	possibly	be
understood	metaphorically,	and	in	that	case	they	would	not	indicate
that	an	actual	brightness	or	radiance	will	surround	our	resurrection
bodies.	But	there	is	no	reason	in	the	context	of	either	of	them	that
would	cause	us	to	see	them	as	metaphorical,	and	other	pieces	of
evidence	argue	against	doing	so.	The	hints	of	the	age	to	come	that
were	seen	in	the	shining	of	the	glory	of	God	from	the	face	of	Moses
(Ex.	34:35),	and,	in	a	much	greater	way,	the	bright	light	that	shone
from	Jesus	at	the	transfiguration	(Matt.	17:2),	together	with	the	fact
that	we	will	bear	the	image	of	Christ	and	be	like	him	(1	Cor.	15:49),
combine	to	suggest	that	there	will	actually	be	a	visible	brightness	or
radiance	that	surrounds	us	when	we	are	in	our	resurrection	bodies.
5
Our	bodies	will	also	be	raised	“in	power”	(1	Cor.	15:43).	This	is	in
contrast	to	the	“weakness”	which	we	see	in	our	bodies	now.	Our
resurrection	bodies	will	not	only	be	free	from	disease	and	aging,
they	will	also	be	given	fullness	of	strength	and	power—not	infinite
power	like	God,	of	course,	and	probably	not	what	we	would	think
of	as	“superhuman”	power	in	the	sense	possessed	by	the
“superheroes”	in	modern	fictional	children’s	writing,	for	example,
but	nonetheless	full	and	complete	human	power	and	strength,	the
strength	that	God	intended	human	beings	to	have	in	their	bodies
when	he	created	them.	It	will	therefore	be	strength	that	is	sufficient
to	do	all	that	we	desire	to	do	in	conformity	with	the	will	of	God.
Finally,	Paul	says	that	the	body	is	raised	a	“spiritual	body”	(1	Cor.
15:44).	In	the	Pauline	epistles,	the	word	“spiritual”	(Gk.
pneumatikos
)	never	means	“nonphysical”	but	rather	“consistent
with	the	character	and	activity	of	the	Holy	Spirit”	(see,	for	example,
Rom.	1:11;	7:14;	1	Cor.	2:13,	15;	3:1;	14:37;	Gal.	6:1	[“you	who
are	spiritual”];	Eph.	5:19).	The	RSV	translation,	“It	is	sown	a
physical	
body,	it	is	raised	a	
spiritual	
body,”	is	misleading,
6
	and	a
more	clear	paraphrase	would	be,	“It	is	sown	a	
natural	
body	subject
to	the	characteristics	and	desires	of	this	age,	and	governed	by	its
own	sinful	will,	but	it	is	raised	a	
spiritual	
body,	completely	subject
to	the	will	of	the	Holy	Spirit	and	responsive	to	the	Holy	Spirit’s
guidance.”	Such	a	body	is	not	at	all	“nonphysical,”	but	it	is	a
physical	body	raised	to	the	degree	of	perfection	for	which	God
originally	intended	it.
In	conclusion,	when	Christ	returns	he	will	give	us	new	resurrection
bodies	to	be	like	his	resurrection	body.	“When	he	appears	
we	shall
be	like	him”	
(1	John	3:2;	this	statement	is	true	not	only	in	an	ethical
sense	but	also	in	terms	of	our	physical	bodies;	cf.	1	Cor.	15:49;	also
Rom.	8:29).
In	spite	of	this	strong	New	Testament	emphasis	on	the	similarity
between	our	bodies	and	Jesus’	body	after	the	resurrection,	some
have	objected	that	we	will	not	have	physical	bodies	because	Paul
says,	“
Flesh	and	blood	cannot	inherit	the	kingdom	of	God,	
nor	does
the	perishable	inherit	the	imperishable”	(1	Cor.	15:50).	This	is	in
the	very	section	in	which	he	has	been	discussing	the	resurrection	of
the	dead.	But	it	is	surely	a	misunderstanding	to	say	that	this	verse
implies	that	we	shall	not	have	physical	bodies.	When	Paul	says,
“flesh	and	blood	cannot	inherit	the	kingdom	of	God,”	what	he
means	by	“flesh	and	blood”	is	
our	present	human	nature,
particularly	our	physical	bodies,	as	they	are	now	existing	in	the
likeness	of	Adam	after	the	fall—that	is,	subject	to	weakness,	decay,
and	ultimate	death.	This	is	the	point	he	has	made	in	the	previous
four	verses	(1	Cor.	15:45–49),	in	which	he	has	been	contrasting
Adam	with	Christ.	He	explains,	“As	was	the	man	of	dust,	so	are
those	who	are	of	the	dust”	(that	is,	we	ourselves	in	this	present	age,
1	Cor.	15:48).	Then	he	explains,	“Just	as	we	have	borne	the	image
of	the	man	of	dust,	we	shall	also	bear	the	image	of	the	man	of
heaven”	(1	Cor.	15:49).	By	“flesh	and	blood”	here	Paul	means
“
flesh	and	blood	in	the	present	state	of	existence	
with	a	body	like
Adam’s	after	the	fall,	a	body	that	is	subject	to	decay	and	death.”	He
does	not	mean	that	we	shall	exist	in	a	nonphysical	state,	for	the
entire	heaven	and	earth	will	be	made	new	and	renewed	for	us	to
live	in	(Rom.	8:18–25),	and	we	ourselves	“shall	all	be	changed,	in	a
moment,	in	the	twinkling	of	an	eye,	at	the	last	trumpet”	(1	Cor.
15:51–52).	We	will	not	cease	to	exist	in	physical	bodies,	but	we
will	be	changed	and	we	will	have	an	imperishable	body,	“For	this
perishable	nature	must	put	on	the	imperishable,	and	this	mortal
nature	must	put	on	immortality”	(1	Cor.	15:53).
Moreover,	the	repeated	instances	in	which	Jesus	demonstrated	to
the	
disciples	that	he	had	a	physical	body	that	was	able	to	be	touched,
that	had	flesh	and	bones	(Luke	24:39),	and	that	could	eat	food,
show	that	Jesus’	body,	which	is	our	pattern,	was	clearly	a	physical
body	that	had	been	made	perfect.
7
What	kind	of	continuity	will	there	be	between	our	present	bodies
and	our	future	resurrection	bodies?	Will	our	bodies	look	exactly	the
same	and	have	exactly	the	same	characteristics,	or	will	they	be
somewhat	different,	or	will	they	be	almost	entirely	different?
Moreover,	will	our	resurrection	bodies	be	made	of	the	same
molecules	of	which	our	earthly	bodies	consist,	or	will	they	be	an
entirely	new	creation	from	God,	or	will	they	be	some	combination
of	old	and	new?
Several	passages	indicate	that	Paul	expected	a	considerable
measure	of	continuity	between	our	present	earthly	bodies	and	our
future	resurrection	bodies.	Paul	said,	“He	who	raised	Christ	Jesus
from	the	dead	will	give	life	to	
your	mortal	bodies	
also	through	his
Spirit	which	dwells	in	you”	(Rom.	8:11).	He	said	that	Jesus	“will
change	
our	lowly	body	
to	be	like	his	glorious	body”	(Phil.	3:21).
And	when	Paul	spoke	about	the	nature	of	the	resurrection	body	he
gave	an	example	of	a	seed	sown	in	the	ground:	“What	you	sow	is
not	the	body	which	is	to	be,	but	a	bare	kernel,	perhaps	of	wheat	or
of	some	other	grain.	But	God	gives	it	a	body	as	he	has	chosen,	and
to	each	kind	of	seed	its	own	body”	(1	Cor.	15:37–38).	In	this
example,	he	draws	on	common	human	knowledge	that	there	are
differences	between	what	is	sown	and	what	is	raised	(vv.	42–44),
but	there	is	also	continuity—just	as	a	seed	grows	into	a	larger	plant,
retaining	the	matter	that	was	in	it	but	taking	to	itself	other	materials
from	the	ground	as	well,	so	we	will	have	continuity	and	differences
as	well.	On	this	analogy	we	can	say	that	
whatever	remains	in	the
grave	from	our	own	physical	bodies	
will	be	taken	by	God	and
transformed	and	used	to	make	a	new	resurrection	body.	But	the
details	of	how	that	will	happen	remain	unclear	to	us,	since	Scripture
does	not	specify	them—we	are	to	affirm	this	because	Scripture
teaches	it,	even	if	we	cannot	fully	explain	how	it	can	happen.
8
Another	indication	of	significant	continuity	between	our	present
bodies	and	the	bodies	that	we	will	have	is	seen	in	the	fact	that	those
believers	who	remain	alive	on	the	day	Christ	returns	will	“be
changed”—yet	their	bodies	will	not	be	replaced:	“We	shall	not	all
sleep,	but	we	shall	all	be	
changed,	
in	a	moment,	in	the	twinkling	of
an	eye,	at	the	last	trumpet.	For	the	trumpet	will	sound,	and	the	dead
will	be	raised	imperishable,	and	we	shall	be	changed.	For	this
perishable	nature	must	put	on	the	imperishable,	and	this	mortal
nature	must	put	on	immortality”	(1	Cor.	15:51–53).
We	must	also	clearly	note	that	Christ’s	own	resurrection	body,
though	it	differed	somewhat	from	the	body	he	had	before	he	died,
so	that	the	disciples	did	not	immediately	recognize	him	in	every
situation,	was	similar	enough	in	appearance	for	the	disciples	to
know	who	it	was	rather	quickly.	There	were	some	instances	when
they	did	not	immediately	recognize	him,	but	this	may	in	part	be
accounted	for	by	the	fact	that	during	his	earthly	life	and	ministry	he
had	no	doubt	aged	considerably,	since	he	was	“a	man	of	sorrows
and	acquainted	with	grief”	(Isa.	53:3).	After	his	resurrection,	Jesus
would	have	been	restored	to	full	and	perfect	strength	and
youthfulness	of	appearance.	Just	as	we	sometimes	do	not
immediately	recognize	a	friend	who	has	aged	considerably	since
the	last	time	we	saw	him	or	her,	so	the	disciples	may	have	had
initial	difficulty	in	recognizing	Christ	because	the	opposite	of	aging
had	occurred.
9
	On	the	other	hand,	significant	continuity	between
Jesus’	body	before	and	after	the	resurrection	is	seen	in	the	fact	that
even	the	nail	prints	in	his	hands	and	feet	and	the	wound	in	his	side
remained	in	his	resurrection	body	(John	20:20,	27).
Another	piece	of	evidence	indicating	continuity	between	our	earthly
and	heavenly	bodies	is	the	fact	that	apparently	people	will
recognize	and	know	one	another	in	heaven.	Jesus	says	that	people
will	come	from	east	and	west	and	“sit	at	the	table	with	Abraham,
Isaac,	and	Jacob	in	the	kingdom	of	heaven”	(Matt.	8:11).	Moreover,
Elijah,	who	had	been	taken	up	to	heaven	in	his	earthly	body,	was
somehow	recognizable	to	the	disciples	on	the	Mount	of
Transfiguration	(Luke	9:30,	33)—of	course,	the	disciples	had	not
known	Elijah	or	Moses	in	the	flesh,	but	somehow	these	men
retained	their	personal	identities	in	such	a	way	that	the	disciples
believed	that	they	were	there	and	that	they	were	just	as	real	as	Jesus
was	(see	Luke	9:33).	Finally,	Matthew	tells	us	that	when	Jesus	died,
“the	tombs	also	were	opened,	and	many	
bodies	
of	the	saints	who
had	fallen	asleep	were	raised,	and	coming	out	of	the	tombs	after	his
resurrection	they	went	into	the	holy	city	and	appeared	to	many”
(Matt.	27:52–53).	The	fact	that	these	people’s	actual	bodies	were
raised,	and	the	fact	that	they	appeared	to	many	in	Jerusalem,
indicates	again	that	there	was	some	continuity	between	their	dead
bodies	that	were	in	the	graves	and	the	bodies	that	were	raised	up.
Since	they	came	out	of	the	tombs	“after	his	resurrection”	we	may
assume	that	these	also	were	saints	who	had	received	resurrection
bodies	as	a	kind	of	foretaste	of	the	final	day	of	glorification	when
Christ	returns.
10
	The	fact	that	these	people	“appeared	to	many”
suggests	that	they	were	recognizable—that	people	knew	who	they
were.	Again	the	evidence	is	suggestive	rather	than	conclusive,	yet	it
points	in	the	direction	of	continuity	between	the	body	that	existed
before	the	resurrection	and	the	one	that	existed	after	it.
There	is	today	some	hesitancy	on	the	part	of	many	evangelicals	to
affirm	clearly	that	there	will	be	a	“resurrection	of	the	body,”	or	at
least	that	the	body	that	is	raised	will	be	a	material,	physical	body
that	is	in	some	way	continuous	with	the	body	that	was	placed	in	the
grave.	To	some	measure,	this	may	be	due	to	a	sense	of	inability	to
understand	how	God	could	raise	the	same	bodies	from	the	grave,
especially	when	some	of	those	bodies	had	been	dead	for	many
centuries.	Yet	some	of	this	hesitancy	is	probably	also	due	to	the
continuing	skepticism	of	unbelievers	who	challenge	the	Christian
view	with	exactly	the	kind	of	problems	just	presented—does	this
not	seem	like	a	fantastic,	unbelievable	position?	How	could	God
bring	about	such	a	thing?
In	both	cases—whether	the	hesitancy	comes	from	the	honest
questioning	of	the	believer	or	from	the	hostile	skepticism	of	the
unbeliever—we	should	realize	that	our	inability	to	understand	or
explain	something	should	never	be	a	reason	for	rejecting	it	if	it	is
clearly	taught	in	Scripture.	The	many	passages	cited	above
indicating	that	God	will	raise	
our	mortal	bodies	from	the	grave,	
just
as	he	raised	Jesus’	body	from	the	grave,	indicate	quite	conclusively
that	there	will	be	a	definite	continuity	between	our	present	bodies
and	the	bodies	we	have	in	the	resurrection.	And	if	that	is	what
Scripture	teaches,	then,	even	though	we	may	not	understand	exactly
how	
God	will	bring	this	about	in	every	case,	we	should	still	believe
it.	The	God	who	created	the	universe	and	created	each	one	of	us,
and	who	sovereignly	rules	over	every	bit	of	this	creation	at	every
moment,	and	who	carries	along	all	things	by	his	word	of	power,	can
certainly	keep	track	of	the	parts	of	our	physical	bodies	that	he
wishes	to	preserve	and	use	as	the	“seed”	from	which	a	new	body
will	be	made.
It	is	important	to	insist	on	the	resurrection	of	a	real,	physical	body,
not	only	for	the	reasons	above,	but	also	because	this	provides	a
clear	affirmation	of	the	goodness	of	God’s	physical	creation.	We
will	live	in	bodies	that	have	all	the	excellent	qualities	God	created
us	to	have,	and	thereby	we	will	forever	be	living	proof	of	the
wisdom	of	God	in	making	a	material	creation	that	from	the
beginning	was	“very	good”	(Gen.	1:31).	We	will	live	as	resurrected
believers	in	those	new	bodies,	and	they	will	be	suitable	for
inhabiting	the	“new	heavens	and	a	new	earth	in	which
righteousness	dwells”	(2	Peter	3:13).
D.	The	Entire	Creation	Will	Be	Renewed	As	Well
When	Adam	sinned	God	cursed	the	ground	because	of	him	(Gen.
3:17–19),	so	that	it	brought	forth	thorns	and	thistles	and	would	only
yield	food	useful	for	mankind	by	painful	toil.	But	Paul	says	that
“the	creation	itself	will	be	set	free	from	its	bondage	to	decay	and
obtain	the	glorious	liberty	of	the	children	of	God”	(Rom.	8:21).	He
explains	that	this	will	happen	when	we	receive	our	resurrection
bodies—in	fact,	he	says	that	the	creation	is	somehow	longing	for
that	day:	“For	the	creation	waits	with	eager	longing	for	the
revealing	of	the	sons	of	God.	.	.	.	We	know	that	the	whole	creation
has	been	groaning	in	travail	together	until	now;	and	not	only	the
creation,	but	we	ourselves,	who	have	the	first	fruits	of	the	Spirit,
groan	inwardly	as	we	wait	for	adoption	as	sons,	the	redemption	of
our	bodies”	(Rom.	8:19,	22–23).	In	this	renewed	creation,	there	will
be	no	more	thorns	or	thistles,	no	more	floods	or	droughts,	no	more
deserts	or	uninhabitable	jungles,	no	more	earthquakes	or	tornadoes,
no	more	poisonous	snakes	or	bees	that	sting	or	mushrooms	that	kill.
There	will	be	a	productive	earth,	an	earth	that	will	blossom	and
produce	food	abundantly	for	our	enjoyment.	(See	
chapter	57
	for
further	discussion	of	the	renewed	earth.)
E.	The	Unbelieving	Dead	Will	Be	Raised	for	Judgment	
on	the	Day	of	Final	Judgment
Although	the	emphasis	of	Scripture	is	on	the	fact	that	believers	will
experience	a	bodily	resurrection,	there	are	some	passages	that	state
that	
unbelievers	
will	also	be	raised	from	the	dead,	but	that	they	will
face	the	final	judgment	at	the	time	they	are	raised.	Jesus	clearly
teaches	that	“those	who	have	done	evil”	will	come	forth	“to	
the
resurrection	of	judgment”	
(John	5:29);	Paul	also	said	that	he
believed	“that	there	will	be	a	resurrection	of	both	the	just	
and	the
unjust”	
(Acts	24:15;	cf.	Matt.	25:31–46;	Dan.	12:2).	(See	chapter
56	for	further	discussion	of	the	final	judgment	of	unbelievers.)
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
Paul	says	that	the	expectation	of	a	future	bodily	resurrection	is	the
“hope”	in	which	we	were	saved	(Rom.	8:24).	Is	the	hope	of	a	future
resurrection	of	your	body	one	of	the	major	things	you	look	forward	to	in
the	future?	If	not,	why	not?	What	could	increase	your	hope	in	the	future
resurrection	of	the	body?
2
.	
So	strong	was	Paul’s	longing	for	the	future	day	of	resurrection,	and	so
aware	was	he	of	the	hardships	that	we	still	suffer	in	this	life,	that	he
could	say,	“If	for	this	life	only	we	have	hoped	in	Christ,	we	are	of	all
men	most	to	be	pitied”	(1	Cor.	15:19),	and,	“If	the	dead	are	not	raised,
‘Let	us	eat	and	drink,	for	tomorrow	we	die’	”	(1	Cor.	15:32).	Do	you
have	a	great	longing	for	the	future	resurrection	that	gives	you	this	kind	of
sentiment	in	your	heart	as	well?	If	not,	why	do	you	not	have	the	same
perspective	on	the	resurrection	of	the	body	that	Paul	did?
3
.	
What	do	you	think	might	occur	in	your	life	to	give	you	a	greater	longing
for	the	resurrection	of	your	body?	If	you	have	a	grandfather	or
grandmother	or	other	older	friend	or	relative	who	has	died	and	gone	to
be	with	Christ,	what	do	you	think	that	person	will	look	like	on	the	day	of
resurrection?	Can	you	imagine	what	it	will	be	like	meeting	that	person
and	becoming	acquainted	again?	How	will	your	relationship	be	different
from	what	it	was	in	this	life?
SPECIAL	TERMS
glorification
	
spiritual	body
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	
the
bibliography	to	chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be
found	in	
Appendix	4
.)
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92			Litton,	585–91
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1875–76			Pope,	3:401–11
1892–94			Miley,	2:448–58
1940			Wiley,	3:320–38
1960			Purkiser,	561–67
1983			Carter,	2:1116–18
3.			Baptist
1767			Gill,	2:211–30
1887			Boyce,	454–61
1907			Strong,	1015–23
1917			Mullins,	472–78
1983–85			Erickson,	997–1002,	1194–1200
4.			Dispensational
1947			Chafer,	3:366–69
1949			Thiessen,	376–83
1986			Ryrie,	517–18
5.			Lutheran
1917–24			Pieper,	3:534–39
1934			Mueller,	625–30
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1559			Calvin,	2:987–1008	(3.25)
1861			Heppe,	695–712
1871–73			Hodge,	3:771–89
1878			Dabney,	829–41
1889			Shedd,	2b:647–58
1937–66			Murray,	
CW,	
2:403–13;	
RAA,	
174–81
1938			Berkhof,	720–27
1962			Buswell,	2:324–46
7.			Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988–92			Williams,	3:397–413
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955			Ott,	488–92
2.			Roman	Catholic:	Post-Vatican	II
1980			McBrien,	2:1147–50
Other	Works
Gaffin,	Richard	B.,	Jr.	
Resurrection	and	Redemption:	A	Study	in	Paul’s
Soteriology.	
Formerly,	
The	Centrality	of	the	Resurrection:	A	Study	in
Paul’s	Soteriology.	
Phillipsburg,	N.J.:	Presbyterian	and	Reformed,	1978.
Grider,	J.	K.	“Glorification.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	442–43.
Gundry,	Robert	N.	
Sōma	in	Biblical	Theology.	
Cambridge:	Cambridge
University	Press,	1975.
Harris,	Murray	J.	
From	Grave	to	Glory:	Resurrection	in	the	New
Testament,	Including	a	Response	to	Norman	L.	Geisler.	
Grand	Rapids:
Zondervan,	1990,	pp.	185–287.
_____.	
Raised	Immortal:	Resurrection	and	Immortality	in	the	New
Testament.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1983.
_____.	“Resurrection,	General.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	581–82.
Hoekema,	Anthony	A.	“The	Resurrection	of	the	Body.”	In	
The	Bible	and
the	Future.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1979,	pp.	239–52.
Murray,	John.	“Glorification.”	In	
Redemption	Accomplished	and	Applied.
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1955,	pp.	174–81.
Schep,	J.	A.	
The	Nature	of	the	Resurrection	Body.	
Grand	Rapids:
Eerdmans,	1964.
White,	R.	E.	O.	“Resurrection	of	the	Dead.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	941–44.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
1
	Corinthians	15:42–44:	
So	is	it	with	the	resurrection	of	the	dead.	What	is
sown	is	perishable,	what	is	raised	is	imperishable.	It	is	sown	in	dishonor,	it	is
raised	in	glory.	It	is	sown	in	weakness,	it	is	raised	in	power.	It	is	sown	a
physical	body,	it	is	raised	a	spiritual	body.	If	there	is	a	physical	body,	there	is
also	a	spiritual	body.
HYMN
“Ten	Thousand	Times	Ten	Thousand”
This	hymn	was	written	by	Henry	Alford,	a	New	Testament
professor	at	Cambridge	University,	England,	and	one	of	the	greatest
Greek	scholars	of	the	nineteenth	century.	The	hymn	pictures
thousands	of	glorified	believers	streaming	through	the	gates	of
heaven	on	the	day	of	Christ’s	return,	and	ends	with	a	prayer	that
Christ	would	come	back	quickly.
Ten	thousand	times	ten	thousand	in	sparkling	raiment	bright,
The	armies	of	the	ransomed	saints	throng	up	the	steeps	of	light:
’Tis	finished,	all	is	finished,	their	fight	with	death	and	sin:
Fling	open	wide	the	golden	gates,	and	let	the	victors	in.
What	rush	of	alleluias	fills	all	the	earth	and	sky!
What	ringing	of	a	thousand	harps	bespeaks	the	triumph	nigh!
O	day,	for	which	creation	and	all	its	tribes	were	made;
O	joy,	for	all	its	former	woes	a	thousand-fold	repaid!
O	then	what	raptured	greetings	on	Canaan’s	happy	shore;
What	knitting	severed	friendships	up	where	partings	are	no	more!
Then	eyes	with	joy	shall	sparkle,	that	brimmed	with	tears	of	late;
Orphans	no	longer	fatherless,	nor	widows	desolate.
Bring	near	thy	great	salvation,	thou	Lamb	for	sinners	slain;
Fill	up	the	roll	of	thine	elect,	then	take	thy	pow’r,	and	reign:
Appear,	desire	of	nations,	thine	exiles	long	for	home;
Show	in	the	heav’n	thy	promised	sign;	thou	Prince	and	Saviour,
come.
AUTHOR:	HENRY	ALFORD,	1867
NOTES
1
Murray	J.	Harris	argues	for	the	possibility	of	an	alternative	view,	based	on	his	understanding	of	2	Cor.	5:1–10:	that	Christians
receive	their	resurrection	bodies	immediately	after	they	die.	See	Harris,	
From	Grave	to	Glory:	Resurrection	in	the	New	Testament,
pp.	207–10.	But	this	view	is	exceptionally	difficult	to	reconcile	with	1	Cor.	15	and	1	Thess.	4:	see	the	discussion	in	D.	A.	Carson,
“Unity	and	Diversity	in	the	New	Testament:	The	Possibility	of	Systematic	Theology,”	in	
Scripture	and	Truth,	
pp.	85–86.
2
Some	evangelical	Christians	hold	that	believers	and	unbelievers	will	be	resurrected	at	the	same	time	(this	is	the	position	taken	by
amillennialists).	Others	(especially	premillennialists)	hold	that	the	resurrection	of	believers	occurs	before	the	millennium	and	the
resurrection	of	the	unbelievers	for	judgment	occurs	1,000	years	later,	after	the	millennium.	See	
chapter	55
	for	a	discussion	of	the
issues	involved,	and	of	this	particular	verse.
3
Several	words	in	this	passage	are	difficult	to	interpret,	and	there	is	scholarly	debate	over	the	question	of	whether	Job	is	looking
forward	to	seeing	God	in	this	life	(as	he	does	in	42:5)	or	after	his	death	(note	that	Job	expects	his	Redeemer	to	stand	upon	the
earth	“in	the	end,”	and	expects	to	see	God	“in	my	flesh”	but	this	will	be	“after	my	skin	has	been	destroyed”).	For	a	summary	of
the	exegetical	issues	and	a	persuasive	defense	of	the	view	that	Job	is	looking	forward	to	a	physical	resurrection	after	he	dies,	see
Francis	L.	Andersen,	
Job,	
TOTC	(Leicester:	Inter-Varsity	Press,	1976),	pp.	193–94.	The	view	that	this	passage	looks	forward	to
seeing	God	in	this	life	only	is	largely	based	on	some	scholars’	convictions	that	the	idea	of	a	future	bodily	resurrection	was	not
found	in	Judaism	until	long	after	Job	was	written	(but	see	Heb.	11:10,	19,	commenting	on	Abraham’s	faith	in	the	resurrection).
4
The	fact	that	the	scars	of	Jesus’	nail	prints	remained	on	his	hands	is	a	special	case	to	remind	us	of	the	price	he	paid	for	our
redemption,	and	it	should	not	be	taken	as	an	indication	that	any	of	our	scars	from	physical	injuries	will	remain:	see	
chapter	28
.
5
Jesus’	body	did	not	have	a	bright	radiance	surrounding	it	immediately	after	his	resurrection,	but	when	he	returned	to	heaven	and
received	from	God	the	Father	the	glory	that	was	rightfully	his,	then	“his	face	was	like	the	sun	shining	in	full	strength”	(Rev.	1:16).
Jesus	at	his	transfiguration	gave	his	disciples	only	a	brief	glimpse	of	the	glory	that	was	rightfully	his	and	would	be	his	again	in
heaven.
6
See	the	discussion	of	the	RSV’s	use	of	“physical”	in	1	Cor.	15:44	in	
chapter	28,	n.	3
.
7
See	
chapter	28
,	for	a	discussion	of	the	nature	of	Christ’s	resurrection	body.
8
Someone	may	object	that	some	bodies	completely	decay,	are	absorbed	into	plants,	and	then	eventually	into	other	bodies,	so	that
nothing	of	the	first	body	can	be	found.	But	in	response	we	must	simply	say	that	God	can	keep	track	of	enough	of	the	elements
from	each	body	to	form	a	“seed”	from	which	to	form	a	new	body	(see	Gen.	50:25;	Job	19:26;	Ezek.	37:1–14;	Heb.	11:22).
9
See	discussion	on	the	failure	of	disciples	to	recognize	Christ	at	once	after	his	resurrection	in	
chapter	28
.
10
See	discussion	of	this	passage	in	D.	A.	Carson,	
Matthew,	
in	EBC,	8:581–82.
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	43
Union	With	Christ
What	does	it	mean	to	be	“in	Christ”	or	“united	with	Christ”?
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
1
Although	we	have	now	completed	our	study	of	the	steps	in	the
application	of	redemption,	one	other	subject	is	so	frequently
mentioned	in	Scripture	and	so	wide-ranging	in	its	application	to	our
lives	that	it	deserves	a	separate	treatment	here.	That	is	the	concept
of	union	with	Christ.	As	we	shall	see	below,	
every	aspect	
of	God’s
relationship	to	believers	is	in	some	way	connected	to	our
relationship	with	Christ.	From	God’s	counsels	in	eternity	past
before	the	world	was	created,	to	our	fellowship	with	God	in	heaven
in	eternity	future,	and	including	every	aspect	of	our	relationship
with	God	in	this	life—all	has	occurred	in	union	with	Christ.	So	in
one	sense	the	entire	study	of	the	application	of	redemption	could	be
included	in	this	subject.	However,	in	this	chapter	we	can	simply
summarize	the	incredible	richness	of	the	scriptural	idea	of	union
with	Christ.	John	Murray	says:
Union	with	Christ	has	its	source	in	the	election	of	God	the	Father
before	the	foundation	of	the	world	and	has	its	fruition	in	the
glorification	of	the	sons	of	God.	The	perspective	of	God’s	people	is
not	narrow;	it	is	broad	and	it	is	long.	It	is	not	confined	to	space	and
time;	it	has	the	expanse	of	eternity.	Its	orbit	has	two	foci,	one	the
electing	love	of	God	the	Father	in	the	counsels	of	eternity;	the	other
glorification	with	Christ	in	the	manifestation	of	his	glory.	The	former
has	no	beginning,	the	latter	has	no	end.	.	.	.	Why	does	the	believer
entertain	the	thought	of	God’s	determinate	counsel	with	such	joy?
Why	can	he	have	patience	in	the	perplexities	and	adversities	of	the
present?	Why	can	he	have	confident	assurance	with	reference	to	the
future	and	rejoice	in	hope	of	the	glory	of	God?	It	is	because	he	cannot
think	of	past,	present,	or	future	apart	from	union	with	Christ.
2
We	may	define	
union	with	Christ	
as	follows:	
Union	with	Christ	is	a
phrase	used	to	summarize	several	different	relationships	between
believers	and	Christ,	through	which	Christians	receive	every	benefit
of	salvation.	These	relationships	include	the	fact	that	we	are	in
Christ,	Christ	is	in	us,	we	are	like	Christ,	and	we	are	with	Christ.
As	this	definition	indicates,	four	different	aspects	of	our	union	with
Christ	may	be	specified	from	the	biblical	material.	We	will	look	at
each	of	these	four	in	turn:
1.	We	are	in	Christ.
2.	Christ	is	in	us.
3.	We	are	like	Christ.
4.	We	are	with	Christ.
3
A.	We	Are	in	Christ
The	phrase	“in	Christ”	does	not	have	one	single	sense,	but	refers	to
a	variety	of	relationships,	as	indicated	below.
1.
	In	God’s	Eternal	Plan.
	Ephesians	1:4	tells	us	that,	God	
chose	us	in	Christ
“before	the	foundation	of	the	world.”	It	was	“in	Christ”	that	we	were
“destined	and	appointed	to	live	for	the	praise	of	his	glory”	(vv.	1:11–12).
Later	he	“saved	us	and	called	us”	because	of	“his	own	purpose”	and	because
of	the	grace	which	he	gave	us	“
in	Christ	Jesus	before	the	beginning	of	time”
(2	Tim.	1:9	NIV).
Since	we	did	not	exist	before	the	foundation	of	the	world,	these
verses	indicate	that	God,	looking	into	the	future	and	knowing	that
we	would	exist,	thought	of	us	being	in	a	special	relationship	with
Christ.	He	did	not	first	choose	us	and	later	decide	to	relate	us	to
Christ.	Rather,	while	choosing	us,	he	at	the	same	time	thought
about	us	as	belonging	to	Christ	in	a	special	way,	as	being	“in
Christ.”	Therefore,	he	thought	about	us	as	eventually	having	the
right	to	share	in	the	blessings	of	Christ’s	work.
2.	During	Christ’s	Life	on	Earth.
	Throughout	Christ’s	entire	life	on	earth,
from	the	time	of	his	birth	to	the	time	of	his	ascension	into	heaven,	God
thought	of	us	as	being	“in	Christ.”	That	is,	whatever	Christ	did	as	our
representative,	God	counted	it	as	being	something	we	did,	too.	Of	course,
believers	were	not	consciously	present	in	Christ,	since	most	believers	did	not
even	exist	yet	when	Christ	was	on	earth.	Nor	were	believers	present	in	Christ
in	some	mysterious,	spiritual	way	(as	if,	for	example,	the	souls	of	thousands
of	believers	were	somehow	present	in	Christ’s	body	during	his	earthly	life).
Rather,	believers	were	present	in	Christ	
only	in	God’s	thoughts.	
God	
thought
of	us	
as	going	through	everything	that	Christ	went	through,	because	he	was
our	representative.
When	Jesus	perfectly	obeyed	God	for	his	whole	life,	God	thought
of	us	as	having	obeyed,	too.	“By	one	man’s	obedience	many	will	be
made	righteous”	(Rom.	5:19).	So	Christ	is	our	source	of
righteousness	(1	Cor.	1:30;	Phil.	3:9).
Because	God	thought	of	us	as	being	“in”	Christ,	he	also	could	think
of	our	sins	as	belonging	to	Christ:	“God	made	him	who	had	no	sin
to	be	sin	for	us”	(2	Cor.	5:21	NIV),	and	“the	L
ORD
	has	laid	on	him
the	iniquity	of	us	all”	(Isa.	53:6).	These	were	sins	we	had	not	yet
committed,	but	God	knew	about	them	in	advance,	and	thought	of
them	as	belonging	to	Christ.	Thus,	it	was	right	that	Christ	should
die	for	our	sins.	“He	himself	bore	our	sins	in	his	body	on	the	tree”
(1	Peter	2:24;	see	also	Rom.	4:25;	1	Cor.	15:3;	Col.	2:14;	Heb.
9:28).
But	it	was	not	just	our	sins	that	God	thought	of	as	belonging	to
Christ:	it	was	we	ourselves.	When	Christ	died,	God	thought	of	us	as
having	died.	Our	old	self	was	“
crucified	with	him”	
(Rom.	6:6).	“I
have	been	crucified	with	Christ”	(Gal.	2:20).	“One	has	died	for	all;
therefore	all	have	died”	(2	Cor.	5:14;	see	also	Rom.	6:4–5,	8;	7:4;
Col.	1:22;	2:12,	20;	3:3;	2	Tim.	2:11).
In	the	same	way,	God	thought	of	us	as	having	been	
buried	
with
Christ,	
raised	
with	him,	and	
taken	up	to	heaven	
with	him	in	glory.
“God	
raised	us	up	with	Christ	
and	
seated	us	with	him	
in	the
heavenly	realms	in	Christ	Jesus”	(Eph.	2:6	NIV;	see	also	Rom.	6:4–
11;	1	Cor.	15:22;	Col.	2:12–13).
When	Christ	returned	to	heaven,	therefore,	all	the	blessings	of
salvation	were	earned	for	us.	God	thought	of	these	blessings	as
being	rightfully	ours,	just	as	if	we	had	earned	them	ourselves.
Nevertheless,	they	were	stored	up	for	us	in	heaven—in	God’s	mind,
actually,	and	in	Christ,	our	representative—waiting	to	be	applied	to
us	personally	(1	Peter	1:3–5;	Col.	3:3–4;	Eph.	1:3).
3.	During	Our	Lives	Now.
	Once	we	have	been	born	and	exist	as	real	people
in	the	world,	our	union	with	Christ	can	no	longer	be	something	just	in	God’s
mind.	We	also	must	be	brought	into	an	actual	relationship	with	Christ	through
which	the	benefits	of	salvation	can	be	applied	to	our	lives	by	the	Holy	Spirit.
The	richness	of	our	present	life	in	Christ	can	be	viewed	from	four	slightly
different	perspectives:
1.	We	have	died	and	been	raised	with	Christ.
2.	We	have	new	life	in	Christ.
3.	All	our	actions	can	be	done	in	Christ.
4.	All	Christians	together	are	one	body	in	Christ.
a.	Dying	and	Rising	With	Christ:
	The	death,	burial,	and	resurrection	of
Jesus	now	have	real	effects	in	our	lives.	“You	were	
buried	with	him	
in
baptism,	in	which	you	were	also	
raised	with	him	
through	faith	in	the	working
of	God,	who	raised	him	from	the	dead”	(Col.	2:12).	Here	Paul’s	references	to
baptism	and	faith	indicate	that	our	dying	and	rising	with	Christ	occur	in	this
present	life,	at	the	time	we	become	Christians.
Paul	sees	this	present	death	and	resurrection	with	Christ	as	a	way	of
describing	and	explaining	the	change	that	the	Holy	Spirit	brings
about	in	our	character	and	personality	when	we	become	Christians.
It	is	as	if	the	Holy	Spirit	reproduces	Jesus’	death	and	resurrection	in
our	lives	when	we	believe	in	Christ.	We	become	so	unresponsive	to
the	pressures,	demands	and	attractions	of	our	previous,	sinful	way
of	life,	that	Paul	can	say	we	are	“dead”	to	these	influences,	because
we	have	died	with	Christ	(Rom.	7:6;	Gal.	2:20;	5:24;	6:14;	Col.
2:20).	On	the	other	hand,	we	find	ourselves	wanting	to	serve	God
much	more,	and	able	to	serve	him	with	greater	power	and	success,
so	much	so	that	Paul	says	we	are	“alive”	to	God,	because	we	have
been	raised	up	with	Christ:	“We	were	buried	therefore	with	him	by
baptism	into	death,	so	that	as	Christ	was	raised	from	the	dead	by	the
glory	of	the	Father,	we	too	might	
walk	in	newness	of	life”	
(Rom.
6:4).	“So	you	also	must	consider	yourselves	dead	to	sin	and	
alive	to
God	
in	Christ	Jesus”	(Rom.	6:11;	see	also	1	Peter	1:3;	2:24).
Because	we	died	and	rose	with	Christ,	we	have	power	to	overcome
personal	sin	more	and	more	(Rom.	6:12–14,	19);	we	have	come	to
“fullness	of	life”	in	Christ	(Col.	2:10–13);	in	fact,	we	have	become
a	“new	creation”	in	him	(2	Cor.	5:17,	with	vv.	14–15),	and	should
therefore	set	our	minds	on	things	that	are	above,	where	Christ	is
(Col.	3:1–3).
b.	New	Life	in	Christ:
	These	last	verses	suggest	a	second	perspective	on	our
being	“in	Christ.”	We	can	think	not	only	in	terms	of	Christ’s	past	work	of
redemption,	but	also	in	terms	of	his	present	life	in	heaven,	and	his	continuing
possession	of	all	the	spiritual	resources	we	need	to	live	the	Christian	life.
Since	every	spiritual	blessing	was	earned	by	him	and	belongs	to	him,	the	New
Testament	can	say	that	these	blessings	are	“in	him.”	Thus,	they	are	available
only	to	those	who	are	“in	Christ,”	and	if	we	are	in	Christ,	these	blessings	are
ours.
John	writes,	“God	gave	us	eternal	life,	and	this	life	is	
in	his	Son”
(1John	5:11),	and	Paul	speaks	of	“the	promise	of	the	life	which	is	
in
Christ	Jesus”	
(2	Tim.	1:1).	We	read	that	
“in	Christ”	
are	“faith	and
love”	(1	Tim.	1:14;	2	Tim.	1:13),	“grace”	(2	Tim.	2:1),	“salvation”
(2	Tim.	2:10),	“all	the	treasures	of	wisdom	and	knowledge”	(Col.
2:3)	and	God’s	“riches	in	glory”	(Phil.	4:19).	Paul	says	that	it	is
because	of	God’s	work	that	Christians	are	“in	Christ	Jesus,	whom
God	made	our	wisdom,	our	righteousness	and	sanctification	and
redemption”	(1	Cor.	1:30),	and	that	“God	.	.	.	has	blessed	us	in	the
heavenly	realms	with	
every	spiritual	blessing	in	Christ”	
(Eph.	1:3).
In	fact,	every	stage	of	the	application	of	redemption	is	given	to	us
because	we	are	“in	Christ.”	It	is	“in	Christ”	that	we	are	
called	
to
salvation	(1	Cor.	7:22),	
regenerated	
(Eph.	1:3;	2:10),	and	
justified
(Rom.	8:1;	2	Cor.	5:21;	Gal.	2:17;	Eph.	1:7;	Phil.	3:9;	Col.	1:14).
“In	Christ”	we	
die	
(1	Thess.	4:16;	Rev.	14:13)	and	“in	him”	our
bodies	
will	be	raised	
up	again	(1	Cor.	15:22).	These	passages
suggest	that	because	our	lives	are	inseparably	connected	to	Christ
himself,	the	Holy	Spirit	gives	us	all	the	blessings	that	Christ	has
earned.
c.	All	Our	Actions	Can	Be	Done	in	Christ:
	The	foregoing	changes	within
our	individual	lives	are	accompanied	by	a	dramatic	change	in	the	realm	in
which	we	live.	To	become	a	Christian	is	to	enter	the	newness	of	the	age	to
come,	and	to	experience	to	some	degree	the	new	powers	of	the	kingdom	of
God	affecting	every	part	of	our	lives.	To	be	“in	Christ”	is	to	be	in	that	new
realm	that	Christ	controls.
This	means	that	every	action	in	our	lives	can	be	done	“in	Christ,”	if
it	is	done	in	the	power	of	his	kingdom	and	in	a	way	that	brings
honor	to	him.	Paul	
speaks	
the	truth	“in	Christ”	(Rom.	9:1;	2	Cor.
2:17;	12:19),	
is	proud	
of	his	work	“in	Christ”	(Rom.	15:17;	1	Cor.
15:31),	reminds	the	Corinthians	of	his	
ways	
“in	Christ”	(1	Cor.
4:17),	
hopes	
“in	the	Lord	Jesus”	to	send	Timothy	to	Philippi	(Phil.
2:19),	
rejoices	
greatly	“in	the	Lord”	(Phil.	4:10),	and	“in	the	Lord”
commands,	beseeches,	
and	
exhorts	
other	Christians	(1	Thess.	4:1;	2
Thess.	3:12;	Philem.	8).	He	says,	“I	can	
do	all	things	
in	him	who
strengthens	me”	(Phil.	4:13).
Paul	also	writes	to	believers	about	their	actions	“in	Christ.”	He
reminds	the	Corinthians,	“in	the	Lord	your	
labor	
is	not	in	vain”	(1
Cor.	15:58).	It	is	“in	the	Lord”	that	children	are	to	
obey	
their
parents	(Eph.	6:1),	wives	are	to	
submit	
to	their	husbands	(Col.
3:18),	and	all	believers	are	to	
be	strong	
(Eph.	6:10),	
be	encouraged
(Phil.	2:1),	
rejoice	
(Phil.	3:10;	4:4),	
agree	
(Phil.	4:2),	
stand	firm
(Phil.	4:1;	1	Thess.	3:8),	
live	a	godly	life	
(2	Tim.	3:12)	and	have
good	behavior	
(1	Peter	3:16).	“In	the	Lord”	they	
work	hard	
(Rom.
16:12),	
are	made	confident	
(Phil.	1:14)	and	
are	approved	
(Rom.
16:10).	Paul’s	hope	for	Christians	is	that	they	
live	
in	Christ:	“Just	as
you	received	Christ	Jesus	as	Lord,	continue	to	live	in	him,	rooted
and	built	up	in	him”	(Col.	2:6–7	NIV).	Then	Paul	will	achieve	his
life’s	goal,	to	“present	every	man	
mature	
in	Christ”	(Col.	1:28).
John	similarly	encourages	believers	to	“
abide	
in	him”	(1	John	2:28;
3:6,	24),	echoing	Jesus’	words,	“He	who	abides	in	me,	and	I	in	him,
he	it	is	that	bears	much	fruit”	(John	15:5).
d.	One	Body	in	Christ:
	We	are	not	simply	in	Christ	as	isolated	individual
persons.	Since	Christ	is	the	head	of	the	body,	which	is	the	church	(Eph.	5:23),
all	who	are	in	union	with	Christ	are	also	related	to	one	another	in	his	body.
This	joining	together	makes	us	“one	body	in	Christ,	and	individually	
members
one	of	another”	
(Rom.	12:5;	1	Cor.	10:17;	12:12–27).	Thus,	“If	one	member
suffers,	all	suffer	together;	if	one	member	is	honored,	all	rejoice	together”	(1
Cor.	12:26).	The	ties	of	fellowship	are	so	strong	that	Christians	may	only
marry	“in	the	Lord”	(1	Cor.	7:39).	In	this	body	of	Christ	old	hostilities
disappear,	sinful	divisions	among	people	are	broken	down,	and	worldly
criteria	of	status	no	longer	apply,	for	“There	is	neither	Jew	nor	Greek,	there	is
neither	slave	nor	free,	there	is	neither	male	nor	female;	for	you	are	all	one	in
Christ	Jesus”	(Gal.	3:28;	cf.	Eph.	2:13–22).
Because	we	are	one	body	in	Christ,	entire	churches	can	be	“in
Christ”	(Gal.	1:22;	1	Thess.	2:14).	And	the	church	universal,	the
church	made	up	of	all	true	believers,	is	collectively	united	to	Christ
as	a	husband	is	united	to	his	wife	(Eph.	5:31–32;	1	Cor.	6:17).
Christ’s	purpose	is	to	perfect	and	cleanse	and	purify	the	church,	so
that	it	might	more	completely	reflect	what	he	is	like	and	thereby
bring	glory	to	him	(Eph.	5:25–27).
Yet	another	metaphor	is	used	in	1	Peter	2:4–5,	where	believers,	in
coming	to	Christ,	are	said	to	be	like	living	stones,	built	into	a
spiritual	house	(see	also	Eph.	2:20–22).	Thus,	they	are	unified	and
forever	dependent	on	one	another,	just	as	the	stones	of	a	building
are	united	to	each	other	and	depend	upon	each	other.
But	the	boldest	analogy	of	all	is	used	by	Jesus,	who	prays	for
believers	“
that	they	may	all	be	one;	
even	as	you,	Father,	are	in	me,
and	I	in	you,	that	they	also	may	be	in	us”	(John	17:21).	Here	Jesus
prays	that	our	unity	would	be	like	the	perfect	unity	between	the
Father	and	the	Son	in	the	Trinity.	This	is	a	reminder	to	us	that	our
unity	should	be	eternal	and	perfectly	harmonious	(as	God’s	unity
is).
But	this	analogy	with	the	members	of	the	Trinity	is	very	important
for	another	reason:	it	warns	us	against	thinking	that	union	with
Christ	will	ever	swallow	up	our	individual	personalities.	Even
though	the	Father,	Son,	and	Holy	Spirit	have	perfect	and	eternal
unity,	yet	they	remain	distinct	persons.	In	the	same	way,	even
though	we	shall	someday	attain	
perfect	unity	
with	other	believers
and	with	Christ,	yet	we	shall	forever	remain	
distinct	persons	
as
well,	with	our	own	individual	gifts,	abilities,	interests,
responsibilities,	circles	of	personal	relationships,	preferences,	and
desires.
B.	Christ	Is	in	Us
Jesus	spoke	of	a	second	kind	of	relationship	when	he	said,	“He	who
abides	in	me,	and	
I	in	him,	
he	it	is	that	bears	much	fruit”	(John
15:5).	It	is	not	only	true	that	we	are	in	Christ;	he	is	also	in	us,	to
give	us	power	to	live	the	Christian	life.	“I	have	been	crucified	with
Christ;	it	is	no	longer	I	who	live,	but	
Christ	who	lives	in	me”	
(Gal.
2:20).	The	factor	that	determines	whether	someone	is	a	Christian	is
whether	Christ	is	in	him	(Rom.	8:10;	2	Cor.	13:5;	Rev.	3:20).	God’s
wise	plan,	hidden	as	a	mystery	for	generations,	was	to	save	Gentiles
as	well	as	Jews.	Therefore,	Paul	can	tell	his	Gentile	readers	that
God’s	mystery	is	“
Christ	in	you,	
the	hope	of	glory”	(Col.	1:27).
It	is	important	to	maintain,	on	the	basis	of	these	verses,	that	there	is
a	real,	personal	dwelling	of	Christ	in	us,	and	that	this	does	not	mean
that	we	merely	agree	with	Christ	or	that	his	ideas	are	in	us.	Rather,
he	
is	in	us	and	remains	in	us	through	faith	(Eph.	3:17;	2	Cor.	13:5).
4
To	overlook	this	truth	would	be	to	neglect	the	great	source	of
spiritual	strength	that	we	have	within	us	(1	John	4:4).	To	remember
it	destroys	our	pride,	gives	us	a	constant	feeling	of	deep	dependence
on	Christ,	and	gives	us	great	confidence,	not	in	self,	but	in	Christ
working	in	us	(Gal.	2:20;	Rom.	15:18;	Phil.	4:13).
This	indwelling	of	Christ	affects	our	response	to	those	in	need.
Whatever	we	do	to	help	a	Christian	brother	or	sister,	we	do	to
Christ	(Matt.	25:40).	Keeping	Jesus’	commandments	is	an
indication	that	he	is	in	us,	and	the	Holy	Spirit	also	bears	witness	to
us	that	Christ	is	in	us	(1	John	3:24).
C.	We	Are	Like	Christ
A	third	aspect	of	union	with	Christ	is	our	
imitation	of	him.	
“Be
imitators	of	me,	as	I	am	of	Christ,”	writes	Paul	(1	Cor.	11:1).	John
reminds	us,	“He	who	says	he	abides	in	him	ought	to	walk	in	the
same	way	in	which	he	walked”	(1	John	2:6).	So	union	with	Christ
implies	that	we	should	imitate	Christ.	Our	lives	ought	so	to	reflect
what	his	life	was	like	that	we	bring	honor	to	him	in	everything	we
do	(Phil.	1:20).
Thus,	the	New	Testament	pictures	the	Christian	life	as	one	of
striving	to	imitate	Christ	in	all	our	actions.	“Welcome	one	another,
therefore,	
as	Christ	has	welcomed	you”	
(Rom.	15:7).	“Husbands,
love	your	wives,	
as	Christ	loved	the	church”	
(Eph.	5:25).	“
As	the
Lord	has	forgiven	you,	
so	you	also	must	forgive”	(Col.	3:13).	“He
laid	down	his	life	for	us;	and	we	ought	to	lay	down	our	lives	for	the
brethren”	(1	John	3:16).	Throughout	our	lives,	we	are	to	run	the
race	before	us,	“looking	to	Jesus,	the	pioneer	and	perfecter	of	our
faith”	(Heb.	13:2;	see	also	Eph.	5:2;	Phil.	2:5–11;	1	Thess.	1:6;	1
John	3:7;	4:17).	By	contrast,	disobedience	to	Christ	holds	him	up	in
contempt	(Heb.	6:6).
Our	imitation	of	Christ	is	especially	evident	in	suffering.	Christians
are	called	to	take	suffering	patiently,	“because	Christ	also	suffered
for	you,	leaving	you	an	example,	that	you	should	
follow	in	his
steps”	
(1	Peter	2:21).	Paul’s	goal	is	to	“share	his	[Christ’s]
sufferings,	becoming	
like	him	in	his	death”	
(Phil.	3:10;	see	also	2
Cor.	1:5;	4:8–11;	Heb.	12:3;	1	Peter	4:13).
Furthermore,	our	suffering	is	connected	with	sharing	in	Christ’s
glory	when	he	returns:	“we	suffer	with	him	in	order	that	we	may
also	be	glorified	with	him”	(Rom.	8:17).	This	is	probably	because	it
is	through	suffering	and	difficulty	that	God	makes	us	more	Christ-
like	and	causes	us	to	grow	to	maturity	in	Christ	(James	1:2–4;	Heb.
5:8–9).	Also,	since	Christ	perfectly	obeyed	his	Father	even	in	the
face	of	great	suffering,	so	our	obedience,	trust,	and	patience	in
suffering	more	fully	portray	what	Christ	was	like,	and	so	bring
more	honor	to	him.	It	gives	us	great	comfort	to	know	that	we	are
only	experiencing	what	he	has	already	experienced,	and	that	he
therefore	understands	what	we	are	going	through,	and	listens
sympathetically	to	our	prayers	(Heb.	2:18;	4:15–16;	12:11).	As	the
outcome	of	a	life	of	obedience,	we	are	able	to	share	in	Christ’s
glory:	“He	who	conquers,	I	will	grant	him	to	sit	with	me	on	my
throne,	as	I	myself	conquered	and	sat	down	with	my	Father	on	his
throne”	(Rev.	3:21).
Our	imitation	of	Christ	should	not	be	thought	of	as	a	mere
mimicking	of	Jesus’	actions,	however.	The	far	deeper	purpose	is
that	in	imitating	him	we	are	becoming	more	and	more	like	him:
when	we	act	like	Christ	we	become	like	Christ.	
We	grow	up	to
maturity	in	Christ	(Eph.	4:13,	15)	as	we	are	“being	changed	into	his
likeness	from	one	degree	of	glory	to	another”	(2	Cor.	3:18).	The
final	result	is	that	we	shall	become	perfectly	like	Christ,	for	God
has	predestined	us	“to	be	conformed	to	the	image	of	his	Son”
(Rom.	8:29;	1	Cor.	15:49),	and	“when	he	appears,	
we	shall	be	like
him”	
(1	John	3:2).	When	this	happens,	Christ	will	be	fully	glorified
in	us	(2	Thess.	1:10–12;	John	17:10).
Yet	in	all	of	this	we	never	lose	our	individual	personhood.	We
become	perfectly	
like	
Christ,	but	
we	do	not	become	Christ,	
and	we
are	not	absorbed	into	Christ	or	lost	forever	as	individuals.	Rather,	it
is	we	as	real	individuals	who	shall	still	know	as	we	are	known	(1
Cor.	13:12);	it	is	we	who	shall	see	him	as	he	is	(1	John	3:2);	it	is	we
who	shall	worship	him,	and	see	his	face,	and	have	his	name	on	our
foreheads,	and	reign	with	him	for	ever	and	ever	(Rev.	22:3–5).
Just	as	the	Father,	Son,	and	Holy	Spirit	are	exactly	like	one	another
in	character	(John	14:7,	9),	yet	remain	distinct	persons,	so	we	can
become	more	and	more	like	Christ	and	still	be	distinct	individuals
with	different	gifts	and	different	functions	(Eph.	4:15–16;	1	Cor.
12:4–27).	In	fact,	the	more	like	Christ	we	become,	the	more	truly
ourselves	we	become	(Matt.	10:39;	John	10:3;	Rev.	2:17;	Ps.	37:4).
If	we	forget	this,	we	will	tend	to	neglect	the	diversity	of	gifts	in	the
church	and	will	want	to	make	everyone	like	ourselves.	We	will	also
tend	to	deny	any	ultimate	importance	for	ourselves	as	individuals.
A	proper	biblical	perspective	will	allow	each	believer	to	say	not
only,	“We	Christians	are	important	to	Christ,”	but	also,	“
I	
am
important	to	Christ:	he	knows	my	name,	he	calls	me	by	name,	he
gives	me	a	new	name	which	is	mine	alone”	(John	10:3;	Rev.	2:17).
D.	We	Are	With	Christ
1.
	Personal	Fellowship	With	Christ.
	Another	aspect	of	union	with	Christ
concerns	our	personal	fellowship	with	him.	It	makes	little	difference	whether
we	say	that	we	are	with	Christ	or	that	Christ	is	with	us,	for	both	phrases
represent	the	same	truth.	Christ	promised,	“Where	two	or	three	are	gathered
in	my	name,	there	am	I	in	the	midst	of	them”	(Matt.	18:20),	and,	“I	am	
with
you	
always,	to	the	close	of	the	age”	(Matt.	28:20).	Once	again,	since	Jesus’
human	body	ascended	to	heaven	(John	16:7;	17:11;	Acts	1:9–11),	these	verses
must	speak	of	his	divine	nature	being	present	with	us.	Yet	it	is	still	a	very
personal	presence,	in	which	we	
work	
together	with	Christ	(2	Cor.	6:1),	we
know	
him	(Phil.	3:8,	10),	we	are	
comforted	
by	him	(2	Thess.	2:16–17),	we	are
taught	
by	him	(Matt.	11:29),	and	we	live	our	whole	lives	
in	his	presence	
(2
Cor.	2:10;	1	Tim.	5:21;	6:13–14;	2	Tim.	4:1).	To	become	a	Christian	is	to	be
“called	into	the	
fellowship	
of	[God’s]	Son,	Jesus	Christ	our	Lord”	(1	Cor.	1:9).
Yet	this	fellowship	can	vary	in	intensity,	since	Paul’s	benediction	on
Christians,	“The	Lord	be	with	you	all”	(2	Thess.	3:16;	cf.	2	Tim.	4:22)	can
only	express	a	hope	for	still	closer	fellowship	with	Christ	and	a	deeper
awareness	of	his	presence.
Furthermore,	in	some	sense	yet	imperceptible	to	us,	when	we	come
to	worship	we	now	come	into	heaven	itself,	to	“innumerable	angels
in	festal	gathering,	and	to	the	assembly	of	the	first-born	who	are
enrolled	in	heaven,	and	to	a	judge	who	is	God	of	all,	and	to	the
spirits	of	just	men	made	perfect,	
and	to	Jesus,	
the	mediator	of	a
new	covenant”	(Heb.	12:22–24).	This	participation	in	heavenly
worship	is	what	the	Apostles’	Creed	calls	the	“communion	of
saints,”	and	what	a	familiar	hymn	calls	“mystic,	sweet	communion
with	those	whose	rest	is	won.”
5
	Hebrews	12	does	not	seem	to
suggest	that	we	have	a	conscious	awareness	of	being	in	the
presence	of	this	heavenly	assembly,	but	it	may	indicate	that	those
now	in	heaven	witness	our	worship	and	rejoice	in	it,	and	it	certainly
implies	that	we	can	have	a	joyful	awareness	that	our	praise	is	being
heard	in	God’s	temple	in	heaven.
In	all	our	prayers	now	we	are	heard	by	Jesus	and	have	fellowship
with	him	(1	John	1:3),	our	great	high	priest,	who	has	entered	“into
heaven	itself,	now	to	appear	in	the	presence	of	God	on	our	behalf”
(Heb.	9:24;	4:16).	Our	fellowship	with	him	will	be	greater	yet	when
we	die	(2	Cor.	5:8;	Phil.	1:23;	1	Thess.	5:10),	and	even	greater	still
once	Jesus	returns	(1	Thess.	4:17;	1	John	3:1).	It	gives	us	great	joy
to	know	that	Christ	actually	desires	to	have	us	with	him	(John
17:24).
Our	fellowship	with	Christ	also	brings	us	into	fellowship	with	each
other.	John	writes,	“That	which	we	have	seen	and	heard	we
proclaim	also	to	you,	
so	that	you	may	have	fellowship	with	us;	
and
our	fellowship	is	with	the	Father	and	with	his	Son	Jesus	Christ”	(1
John	1:3).
2.	Union	With	the	Father	and	With	the	Holy	Spirit.
	This	last	verse
suggests	a	final	aspect	of	union	with	Christ.	Because	we	are	in	union	with
Christ	in	these	several	relationships,	we	also	are	brought	into	union	with	the
Father	and	with	the	Holy	Spirit.	We	are	
in	the	Father	
(John	17:21;	1	Thess.
1:1;	2	Thess.	1:1;	1	John	2:24;	4:15–16;	5:20)	and	
in	the	Holy	Spirit	
(Rom.
8:9;	1	Cor.	3:16;	6:19;	2	Tim.	1:14).	
The	Father	is	in	us	
(John	14:23)	and	
the
Holy	Spirit	is	in	us	
(Rom.	8:9,	11).	We	are	
like	the	Father	
(Matt.	5:44–45,	48;
Eph.	4:32;	Col.	3:10;	1	Peter	1:15–16)	and	
like	the	Holy	Spirit	
(Rom.	8:4–6;
Gal.	5:22–23;	John	16:13).	We	have	fellowship	
with	the	Father	
(1	John	1:3;
Matt.	6:9;	2	Cor.	6:16–18)	and	
with	the	Holy	Spirit	
(Rom.	8:16;	Acts	15:28;	2
Cor.	13:14;	Eph.	4:30).
These	additional	relationships	are	not	blurred	into	a	distinctionless,
mystical	ecstasy,	however.	Both	now	and	in	eternity	we	relate	to	the
Father	in	his	distinct	role	as	our	heavenly	Father,	to	the	Son	in	his
distinct	role	as	our	Savior	and	Lord,	and	to	the	Holy	Spirit	in	his
distinct	role	as	the	Spirit	who	empowers	us	and	continually	applies
to	us	all	the	benefits	of	our	salvation.
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
Before	reading	this	chapter,	had	you	thought	of	yourself	as	being	united
with	Christ	from	the	point	of	God’s	choosing	you	before	the	foundation
of	the	world	to	the	point	of	going	to	be	with	him	in	heaven	forever?	How
does	this	idea	change	the	way	you	think	of	yourself	and	your	own	life?
How	does	it	affect	the	way	you	think	of	difficulties	that	you	may	be
experiencing	at	this	time?	In	what	ways	can	the	ideas	of	having	died	with
Christ	and	having	been	raised	with	him	be	an	encouragement	in	your
present	efforts	to	overcome	sin	that	remains	in	your	life?
2
.	
Have	you	previously	thought	of	doing	the	actions	that	you	do	each	day
“in	Christ”	(see	Phil.	4:13)?	If	you	thought	of	doing	the	reading	that	you
are	presently	doing	“in	Christ,”	how	would	it	change	your	attitude	or
perspective?	What	difference	would	it	make	to	think	of	doing	your	daily
work	“in	Christ”?	What	about	carrying	on	conversations	with	friends	or
family	members?	Or	eating,	or	even	sleeping?
3
.	
How	can	the	idea	of	union	with	Christ	increase	your	love	and	fellowship
for	other	Christians,	both	those	in	your	church	and	those	in	other
churches?
4
.	
Do	you	have	any	awareness	in	your	day-to-day	life	of	Christ	living	in
you	(Gal.	2:20)?	What	would	change	in	your	life	if	you	had	a	stronger
awareness	of	Christ	living	in	you	throughout	the	day?
5
.	
For	one	or	two	days,	try	reading	some	section	of	the	gospels	and	asking
how	you	might	better	imitate	Christ	in	your	own	life.	What	effect	will
the	idea	of	following	in	Christ’s	steps	(1	Peter	1:21)	and	walking	as	he
walked	(1	John	2:6)	have	in	your	life?
6
.	
Can	you	name	some	times	in	your	life	when	you	have	sensed	an
especially	close	personal	fellowship	with	Christ?	What	have	those	times
been	like?	Can	you	think	of	anything	that	brought	about	that	close
fellowship	with	Christ?	What	can	we	do	to	increase	the	intensity	of	our
daily	fellowship	with	Christ?
7
.	
In	your	personal	experience,	do	you	relate	differently	to	God	the	Father,
to	Jesus	Christ,	and	to	the	Holy	Spirit?	Can	you	describe	those
differences,	if	there	are	any?
SPECIAL	TERMS
being	raised	with	Christ
	
	
	
one	body	in	Christ
dying	with	Christ
	
	
	
communion	of	saints
in	Christ
	
	
	
union	with	Christ
mystical	union
	
	
	
	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the
bibliography	to	chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be
found	in	
Appendix	4
.)
Note:	This	topic	has	not	received	explicit	treatment	in	many
systematic	theologies,	but	the	subjects	mentioned	in	this	chapter
have	been	treated	in	a	variety	of	ways	under	different	topics.
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92			Litton,	328–30
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
	(no	explicit	treatment)
3.			Baptist
1907			Strong,	795–809
1917			Mullins,	409–16
1983–85			Erickson,	948–54
4.			Dispensational
1949			Thiessen,	278–82
5.			Lutheran
	(no	explicit	treatment)
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1878			Dabney,	612–17
1937–66			Murray,	
RAA,	
161–73
1938			Berkhof,	447–53
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
(no	explicit	treatment)
Other	Works
Baker,	J.	P.	“Union	With	Christ.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	697–99.
Gordon,	Adoniram	Judson.	
In	Christ;	or	the	Believer’s	Union	with	His
Lord.	
1872;	reprint,	Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1964.	(first	published	in	1872.)
Murray,	John.	“Union	with	Christ.”	In	
Redemption	Accomplished	and
Applied.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1955,	pp.	161–73.
Poythress,	Vern.	“Using	Multiple	Thematic	Centers	in	Theological
Synthesis:	Holiness	as	a	Test	Case	in	Developing	a	Pauline	Theology.”
Unpublished	manuscript	available	from	the	Campus	Bookstore,
Westminster	Theological	Seminary,	P.O.	Box	27009,	Philadelphia,	PA
19118.
Smedes,	Lewis	B.	
Union	With	Christ:	A	Biblical	View	of	the	New	Life	in
Jesus	Christ.	
2d	ed.	Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1983.
Walvoord,	J.	F.	“Identification	With	Christ.”	In	
EDT,	
p.	542.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
Galatians	2:20:	
I	have	been	crucified	with	Christ;	it	is	no	longer	I	who	live,
but	Christ	who	lives	in	me;	and	the	life	I	now	live	in	the	flesh	I	live	by	faith	in
the	Son	of	God,	who	loved	me	and	gave	himself	for	me.
HYMN
“Jesus,	Thou	Joy	of	Loving	Hearts”
This	hymn	has	been	attributed	to	Bernard	of	Clairvaux	(1090–
1153),	a	monk	known	for	his	love	of	God	and	deep	piety.	Other
hymns	attributed	to	him	are	“Jesus,	the	Very	Thought	of	Thee”	and
“O	Sacred	Head	Now	Wounded.”	Though	written	eight	hundred
years	ago,	this	hymn	remains	one	of	the	most	beautiful	expressions
of	love	for	Christ	in	the	history	of	the	church.
Jesus,	thou	joy	of	loving	hearts,
Thou	fount	of	life,	thou	light	of	men,
From	the	best	bliss	that	earth	imparts
We	turn	unfilled	to	thee	again.
Thy	truth	unchanged	hath	ever	stood;
Thou	savest	those	that	on	thee	call;
To	them	that	seek	thee	thou	art	good,
To	them	that	find	thee	all	in	all.
We	taste	thee,	O	thou	living	bread,
And	long	to	feast	upon	thee	still;
We	drink	of	thee,	the	fountain-head,
And	thirst	our	souls	from	thee	to	fill.
Our	restless	spirits	yearn	for	thee,
Where’er	our	changeful	lot	is	cast;
Glad	when	thy	gracious	smile	we	see,
Blest	when	our	faith	can	hold	thee	fast.
O	Jesus,	ever	with	us	stay,
Make	all	our	moments	calm	and	bright;
Chase	the	dark	night	of	sin	away,
Shed	o’er	the	world	thy	holy	light.
AUTHOR:	BERNARD	OF	CLAIRVAUX,	C.	1150
NOTES
1
The	material	in	this	chapter	is	taken	from	an	essay	written	for	Tyndale	House	Publishers	(Wheaton,	Ill.).	Used	by	permission.
2
John	Murray,	
Redemption	Accomplished	and	Applied,	
p.	164.
3
Union	with	Christ	is	also	sometimes	referred	to	as	the	“mystical	union.”	This	is	because	we	do	not	fully	understand	the	workings
of	these	relationships	with	Christ,	and	because	we	know	about	them	only	through	God’s	revelation	in	Scripture.
4
See	
chapter	26
,	on	the	way	in	which	Christ’s	divine	nature	is	omnipresent	but	his	human	nature	is	not.
5
This	phrase	is	taken	from	the	hymn,	“The	Church’s	One	Foundation,”	written	in	1866	by	Samuel	J.	Stone.
OceanofPDF.com
Part	6
The	Doctrine	of	the	Church
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	44
The	Church:	Its	Nature,	Its	Marks,	and	Its
Purposes
What	is	necessary	to	make	a	church?	How	can	we	recognize	a	true
church?	The	purposes	of	the	church.
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
A.	The	Nature	of	the	Church
1.
	Definition:	The	church	is	the	community	of	all	true	believers	for	all
time.
	This	definition	understands	the	church	to	be	made	of	all	those	who	are
truly	saved.	Paul	says,	“Christ	loved	
the	church	
and	gave	himself	up	for	her”
(Eph.	5:25).	Here	the	term	“the	church”	is	used	to	apply	to	all	those	whom
Christ	died	to	redeem,	all	those	who	are	saved	by	the	death	of	Christ.	But	that
must	include	all	true	believers	for	all	time,	both	believers	in	the	New
Testament	age	and	believers	in	the	Old	Testament	age	as	well.
1
	So	great	is
God’s	plan	for	the	church	that	he	has	exalted	Christ	to	a	position	of	highest
authority	for	the	sake	of	the	church:	“He	has	put	all	things	under	his	feet	and
has	made	him	the	head	over	all	things	
for	the	church,	
which	is	his	body,	the
fulness	of	him	who	fills	all	in	all”	(Eph.	1:22–23).
Jesus	Christ	himself	builds	the	church	by	calling	his	people	to
himself.	He	promised,	“I	will	build	my	church”	(Matt.	16:18).	And
Luke	is	careful	to	tell	us	that	the	growth	of	the	church	came	not	by
human	effort	alone,	but	that	“
the	Lord	
added	to	their	number	day	by
day	those	who	were	being	saved”	(Acts	2:47).	But	this	process
whereby	Christ	builds	the	church	is	just	a	continuation	of	the
pattern	established	by	God	in	the	Old	Testament	whereby	he	called
people	to	himself	to	be	a	worshiping	assembly	before	him.	There
are	several	indications	
in	the	Old	Testament	
that	God	thought	of	his
people	as	a	“church,”	a	people	assembled	for	the	purpose	of
worshiping	God.	When	Moses	tells	the	people	that	the	Lord	said	to
him,	
“Gather	the	people	to	me,	
that	I	may	let	them	hear	my	words,
so	that	they	may	learn	to	fear	me	all	the	days	that	they	live	upon	the
earth	.	.	.”	(Deut.	4:10),	the	Septuagint	translates	the	word	for
“gather”	(Heb.	
qāhal
)	with	the	Greek	term	
ekklēsiazō,	
“to	summon
an	assembly,”	the	verb	that	is	cognate	to	the	New	Testament	noun
ekklēsia,	
“church.”
2
It	is	not	surprising,	then,	that	the	New	Testament	authors	can	speak
of	the	Old	Testament	people	of	Israel	as	a	“church”	(
ekklēsia
).	For
example,	Stephen	speaks	of	the	people	of	Israel	in	the	wilderness	as
“the	
church	
(
ekklēsia
)	in	the	wilderness”	(Acts	7:38,	author’s
translation).	And	the	author	of	Hebrews	quotes	Christ	as	saying	that
he	would	sing	praise	to	God	in	the	midst	of	the	great	assembly	of
God’s	people	in	heaven:	“In	the	midst	of	the	church	(
ekklēsia
)	I	will
sing	praise	to	you”	(Heb.	2:12,	author’s	translation,	quoting	Ps.
22:22).
Therefore	the	author	of	Hebrews	understands	the	present-day
Christians	who	constitute	the	church	on	earth	to	be	surrounded	by	a
great	“cloud	of	witnesses”	(Heb.	12:1)	that	reaches	back	into	the
earliest	eras	of	the	Old	Testament	and	includes	Abel,	Enoch,	Noah,
Abraham,	Sarah,	Gideon,	Barak,	Samson,	Jephthah,	David,	Samuel,
and	the	prophets	(Heb.	11:4–32).	All	these	“witnesses”	surround	the
present-day	people	of	God,	and	it	seems	only	appropriate	that	they,
together	with	the	New	Testament	people	of	God,	should	be	thought
of	as	God’s	great	spiritual	“assembly”	or	“church.”
3
	Moreover,	later
in	chapter	12	the	author	of	Hebrews	says	that	when	New	Testament
Christians	worship	we	come	into	the	presence	of	“the	
assembly	
(lit.
“church,”	Gk.	
ekklēsia
)	of	the	first-born	who	are	enrolled	in
heaven.”	This	emphasis	is	not	surprising	in	light	of	the	fact	that	the
New	Testament	authors	see	Jewish	believers	and	Gentile	believers
alike	to	be	now	united	in	the	church.	Together	they	have	been	made
“one”	(Eph.	2:14),	they	are	“one	new	man”	(v.	
15)	and	“fellow
citizens”	(v.	
19),	and	“members	of	the	household	of	God”	(v.	
19).
Therefore,	even	though	there	are	certainly	new	privileges	and	new
blessings	that	are	given	to	the	people	of	God	in	the	New	Testament,
both	the	usage	of	the	term	“church”	in	Scripture	and	the	fact	that
throughout	Scripture	God	has	always	called	his	people	to	assemble
to	worship	himself,	indicate	that	it	is	appropriate	to	think	of	the
church	as	constituting	all	the	people	of	God	for	all	time,	both	Old
Testament	believers	and	New	Testament	believers.
4
2.	The	Church	Is	Invisible,	Yet	Visible.
	In	its	true	spiritual	reality	as	the
fellowship	of	all	genuine	believers,	the	church	is	invisible.	This	is	because	we
cannot	see	the	spiritual	condition	of	people’s	hearts.	We	can	see	those	who
outwardly	attend	the	church,	and	we	can	see	outward	evidences	of	inward
spiritual	change,	but	we	cannot	actually	see	into	people’s	hearts	and	view
their	spiritual	state—only	God	can	do	that.	This	is	why	Paul	says,	
“The	Lord
knows	those	who	are	his”	
(2	Tim.	2:19).	Even	in	our	own	churches	and	our
own	neighborhoods,	only	God	knows	who	are	true	believers	with	certainty
and	without	error.	In	speaking	of	the	church	as	invisible	the	author	of
Hebrews	speaks	of	the	“assembly	(literally,	“church”)	of	the	first-born	who
are	enrolled	in	heaven”	(Heb.	12:23),	and	says	that	present-day	Christians	join
with	that	assembly	in	worship.
We	can	give	the	following	definition:	
The	invisible	church	is	the
church	as	God	sees	it.
Both	Martin	Luther	and	John	Calvin	were	eager	to	affirm	this
invisible	aspect	of	the	church	over	against	the	Roman	Catholic
teaching	that	the	church	was	the	one	visible	organization	that	had
descended	from	the	apostles	in	an	unbroken	line	of	succession
(through	the	bishops	of	the	church).	The	Roman	Catholic	Church
had	argued	that	only	in	the	visible	organization	of	the	Roman
Church	could	we	find	the	one	true	church,	the	only	true	church.
Even	today	such	a	view	is	held	by	the	Roman	Catholic	Church.	In
their	“Pastoral	Statement	for	Catholics	on	Biblical
Fundamentalism”	issued	March	25,	1987,	the	(United	States)
National	Conference	of	Catholic	Bishops	Ad	Hoc	Committee	on
Biblical	Fundamentalism	criticized	evangelical	Christianity	(which
it	called	“biblical	fundamentalism”)	primarily	because	it	took
people	away	from	the	one	true	church:
The	basic	characteristic	of	biblical	fundamentalism	is	that	it
eliminates	from	Christianity	the	church	as	the	Lord	Jesus	founded
it.	.	.	.	There	is	no	mention	of	the	historic,	authoritative	church	in
continuity	with	Peter	and	the	other	apostles.	.	.	.	A	study	of	the	New
Testament	.	.	.	demonstrates	the	importance	of	belonging	to	the	church
started	by	Jesus	Christ.	Christ	chose	Peter	and	the	other	apostles	as
foundations	of	his	church.	.	.	.	Peter	and	the	other	apostles	have	been
succeeded	by	the	bishop	of	Rome	and	the	other	bishops,	and	.	.	.	the
flock	of	Christ	still	has,	under	Christ,	a	universal	shepherd.
5
In	response	to	that	kind	of	teaching	both	Luther	and	Calvin
disagreed.	They	said	that	the	Roman	Catholic	Church	had	the
outward	form,	the	organization,	but	it	was	just	a	shell.	Calvin
argued	that	just	as	Caiaphas	(the	high	priest	at	the	time	of	Christ)
was	descended	from	Aaron	but	was	no	true	priest,	so	the	Roman
Catholic	bishops	had	“descended”	from	the	apostles	in	a	line	of
succession	but	they	were	not	true	bishops	in	Christ’s	church.
Because	they	had	departed	from	the	true	preaching	of	the	gospel,
their	visible	organization	was	not	the	true	church.	Calvin	said,
“This	pretense	of	succession	is	vain	unless	their	descendants
conserve	safe	and	uncorrupted	the	truth	of	Christ	which	they	have
received	at	their	fathers’	hands,	and	abide	in	it.	.	.	.	See	what	value
this	succession	has,	unless	it	also	include	a	true	and	uninterrupted
emulation	on	the	part	of	the	successors!”
6
On	the	other	hand,	the	true	church	of	Christ	certainly	has	a	visible
aspect	as	well.	We	may	use	the	following	definition:	
The	visible
church	is	the	church	as	Christians	on	earth	see	it.	
In	this	sense	the
visible	church	includes	all	who	profess	faith	in	Christ	and	give
evidence	of	that	faith	in	their	lives.
7
In	this	definition	we	do	not	say	that	the	visible	church	is	the	church
as	any	person	in	the	world	(such	as	an	unbeliever	or	someone	who
held	heretical	teachings)	might	see	it,	but	we	mean	to	speak	of	the
church	as	it	is	perceived	by	those	who	are	genuine	believers	and
have	an	understanding	of	the	difference	between	believers	and
unbelievers.
When	Paul	writes	his	epistles	he	writes	to	the	visible	church	in	each
community:	“To	the	
church	
of	God	which	is	at	Corinth”	(1	Cor.
1:2);	“To	the	
church	
of	the	Thessalonians”	(1	Thess.	1:1);	“To
Philemon	.	.	.	and	Apphia	.	.	.	and	Archippus	.	.	.	and	the	
church	
in
your	house”	(Philem.	1–2).	Paul	certainly	realized	that	there	were
unbelievers	in	some	of	those	churches,	some	who	had	made	a
profession	of	faith	that	was	not	genuine,	who	appeared	to	be
Christians	but	would	eventually	fall	away.	Yet	neither	Paul	nor
anyone	else	could	tell	with	certainty	who	those	people	were.	Paul
simply	wrote	to	the	entire	church	that	met	together	in	any	one
place.	In	this	sense,	we	could	say	today	that	the	visible	church	is	the
group	of	people	who	come	together	each	week	to	worship	as	a
church	and	profess	faith	in	Christ.
The	visible	church	throughout	the	world	will	always	include	some
unbelievers,	and	individual	congregations	will	usually	include	some
unbelievers,	because	we	cannot	see	hearts	as	God	sees	them.	Paul
speaks	of	“Hymenaeus	and	Philetus,	who	have	swerved	from	the
truth”	and	who	“are	upsetting	the	faith	of	some”	(2	Tim.	2:17–18).
But	he	is	confident	that	“The	Lord	knows	those	who	are	his”	(2
Tim.	2:19).	Paul	says	with	sorrow,	“Demas,	in	love	with	this
present	world,	has	deserted	me	and	gone	to	Thessalonica”	(2	Tim.
4:10).
Similarly,	Paul	warns	the	Ephesian	elders	that	after	his	departure
“fierce	wolves	will	come	in	among	you,	not	sparing	the	flock;	and
from	among	your	own	selves	
will	arise	men	speaking	perverse
things,	to	draw	away	the	disciples	after	them”	(Acts	20:29–30).
Jesus	himself	warned,	“Beware	of	false	prophets,	
who	come	to	you
in	sheep’s	clothing	
but	inwardly	are	ravenous	wolves.	You	will
know	them	by	their	fruits”	(Matt.	7:15–16).	Realizing	this
distinction	between	the	church	invisible	and	the	church	visible,
Augustine	said	of	the	visible	church,	“Many	sheep	are	without	and
many	wolves	are	within.”
8
When	we	recognize	that	there	are	unbelievers	in	the	visible	church,
there	is	a	danger	that	we	may	become	overly	suspicious.	We	may
begin	to	doubt	the	salvation	of	many	true	believers	and	thereby
bring	great	confusion	into	the	church.	Calvin	warned	against	this
danger	by	saying	that	we	must	make	a	“charitable	judgment”
whereby	we	recognize	as	members	of	the	church	all	who	“by
confession	of	faith,	by	example	of	life,	and	by	partaking	of	the
sacraments,	profess	the	same	God	and	Christ	with	us.”
9
	We	should
not	try	to	exclude	people	from	the	fellowship	of	the	church	until
they	by	public	sin	bring	discipline	upon	themselves.	On	the	other
hand,	of	course,	the	church	should	not	tolerate	in	its	membership
“public	unbelievers”	who	by	profession	or	life	clearly	proclaim
themselves	to	be	outside	the	true	church.
3.	The	Church	Is	Local	and	Universal.
	In	the	New	Testament	the	word
“church”	may	be	applied	to	a	group	of	believers	at	any	level,	ranging	from	a
very	small	group	meeting	in	a	private	home	all	the	way	to	the	group	of	all	true
believers	in	the	universal	church.	A	“house	church”	is	called	a	“church”	in
Romans	16:5	(“greet	also	
the	church	in	their	house”
),	1	Corinthians	16:19
(“Aquila	and	Prisca,	together	with	
the	church	in	their	house,	
send	you	hearty
greetings	in	the	Lord”).	The	church	in	an	entire	city	is	also	called	“a	church”
(1	Cor.	1:2;	2	Cor.	1:1;	and	1	Thess.	1:1).	The	church	in	a	region	is	referred	to
as	a	“church”	in	Acts	9:31:	“So	
the	church	throughout	all	Judea	and	Galilee
and	Samaria	
had	peace	and	was	built	up.”
10
	Finally,	the	church	throughout
the	entire	world	can	be	referred	to	as	“the	church.”	Paul	says,	“Christ	loved
the	church	
and	gave	himself	up	for	her”	(Eph.	5:25)	and	says,	“God	has
appointed	
in	the	church	
first	apostles,	second	prophets,	third	teachers	.	.	.”	(1
Cor.	12:28).	In	this	latter	verse	the	mention	of	“apostles,”	who	were	not	given
to	any	individual	church,	guarantees	that	the	reference	is	to	the	church
universal.
We	may	conclude	that	the	group	of	God’s	people	considered	at	any
level	from	local	to	universal	may	rightly	be	called	“a	church.”	We
should	not	make	the	mistake	of	saying	that	only	a	church	meeting
in	houses	expresses	the	true	nature	of	the	church,	or	only	a	church
considered	at	a	city-wide	level	can	rightly	be	called	a	church,	or
only	the	church	universal	can	rightly	be	called	by	the	name
“church.”	Rather,	the	community	of	God’s	people	considered	at	any
level	can	be	rightly	called	a	church.
4.	Metaphors	for	the	Church.
11
	To	help	us	understand	the	nature	of	the
church,	Scripture	uses	a	wide	range	of	metaphors	and	images	to	describe	to	us
what	the	church	is	like.
12
	There	are	several	family	images—for	example,	Paul
views	the	church	as	a	
family	
when	he	tells	Timothy	to	act	as	if	all	the	church
members	were	members	of	a	larger	family:	“Do	not	rebuke	an	older	man	but
exhort	him	as	you	would	a	father;	treat	younger	men	like	brothers,	older
women	like	mothers,	younger	women	like	sisters,	in	all	purity”	(1	Tim.	5:1–
2).	God	is	our	heavenly	Father	(Eph.	3:14),	and	we	are	his	sons	and
daughters,	for	God	says	to	us,	“I	will	be	a	father	to	you,	and	you	shall	be	my
sons	and	daughters,	says	the	Lord	Almighty”	(2	Cor.	6:18).	We	are	therefore
brothers	and	sisters	with	each	other	in	God’s	family	(Matt.	12:49–50;	1	John
3:14–18).	A	somewhat	different	family	metaphor	is	seen	when	Paul	refers	to
the	church	as	the	
bride	of	Christ.	
He	says	that	the	relationship	between	a
husband	and	wife	“refers	to	Christ	and	the	church”	(Eph.	5:32),	and	he	says
that	he	brought	about	the	engagement	between	Christ	and	the	church	at
Corinth	and	that	it	resembles	an	engagement	between	a	bride	and	her
husband-to-be:	“I	betrothed	you	to	one	husband,	that	to	Christ	I	might	present
you	as	a	pure	virgin”	(2	Cor.	11:2	NASB)—here	Paul	is	looking	forward	to
the	time	of	Christ’s	return	as	the	time	when	the	church	will	be	presented	to
him	as	his	bride.
In	other	metaphors	Scripture	compares	the	church	to	
branches	on	a
vine	
(John	15:5),	
an	olive	tree	
(Rom.	11:17–24),	
a	field	of	crops	
(1
Cor.	3:6–9),	
a	building	
(1	Cor.	3:9),	and	
a	harvest	
(Matt.	13:1–30;
John	4:35).	The	church	is	also	viewed	as	
a	new	temple	
not	built
with	literal	stones	but	built	with	Christian	people	who	are	“living
stones”	(1	Peter	2:5)	built	up	on	the	“cornerstone”	who	is	Christ
Jesus	(1	Peter	2:4–8).	Yet	the	church	is	not	only	a	new	temple	for
worship	of	God;	it	is	also	
a	new	group	of	priests,	
a	“holy
priesthood”	that	can	offer	“spiritual	sacrifices	acceptable	to	God”	(1
Pet.	2:5).	We	are	also	viewed	as	
God’s	house:	
“And	we	are	his
house”	(Heb.	3:6),	with	Jesus	Christ	himself	viewed	as	the
“builder”	of	the	house	(Heb.	3:3).	The	church	is	also	viewed	as	“
the
pillar	
and	
bulwark	of	the	truth”	
(1	Tim.	3:15).
Finally,	another	familiar	metaphor	views	the	church	as	
the	body	of
Christ	
(1	Cor.	12:12–27).	We	should	recognize	that	Paul	in	fact	uses
two	different	metaphors	of	the	human	body	when	he	speaks	of	the
church.	In	1	Corinthians	12	
the	whole	body	
is	taken	as	a	metaphor
for	the	church,	because	Paul	speaks	of	the	“ear”	and	the	“eye”	and
the	“sense	of	smell”	(1	Cor.	12:16–17).	In	this	metaphor,	Christ	is
not	viewed	as	the	head	joined	to	the	body,	because	the	individual
members	are	themselves	the	individual	parts	of	the	head.	Christ	is
in	this	metaphor	the	Lord	who	is	“outside”	of	that	body	that
represents	the	church	and	is	the	one	whom	the	church	serves	and
worships.
But	in	Ephesians	1:22–23;	4:15–16,	and	in	Colossians	2:19,	Paul
uses	a	different	body	metaphor	to	refer	to	the	church.	In	these
passages	Paul	says	that	Christ	is	the	head	and	the	church	is	like	
the
rest	of	the	body,	as	distinguished	from	the	head:	
“We	are	to	grow	up
in	every	way	into	him	who	is	the	head,	into	Christ,	from	whom	the
whole	body,	joined	and	knit	together	by	every	joint	with	which	it	is
supplied,	when	each	part	is	working	properly,	makes	bodily	growth
and	upbuilds	itself	in	love”	(Eph.	4:15–16).
13
	We	should	not
confuse	these	two	metaphors	in	1	Corinthians	12	and	Ephesians	4,
but	keep	them	distinct.
The	wide	range	of	metaphors	used	for	the	church	in	the	New
Testament	should	remind	us	not	to	focus	exclusively	on	any	one.
For	example,	while	it	is	true	that	the	church	is	the	body	of	Christ,
we	must	remember	that	this	is	only	one	metaphor	among	many.	If
we	focus	exclusively	on	that	metaphor	we	will	be	likely	to	forget
that	Christ	is	our	Lord	reigning	in	heaven	as	well	as	the	one	who
dwells	among	us.	Certainly	we	should	not	agree	to	the	Roman
Catholic	view	that	the	church	is	the	“continuing	incarnation”	of	the
Son	of	God	on	earth	today.	The	church	is	not	the	Son	of	God	in	the
flesh,	for	Christ	rose	in	his	human	body,	he	ascended	in	his	human
body	into	heaven,	and	he	now	reigns	as	the	incarnate	Christ	in
heaven,	one	who	is	clearly	distinct	from	the	church	here	on	earth.
Each	of	the	metaphors	used	for	the	church	can	help	us	to	appreciate
more	of	the	richness	of	privilege	that	God	has	given	us	by
incorporating	us	into	the	church.	The	fact	that	the	church	is	like	a
family	should	increase	our	love	and	fellowship	with	one	another.
The	thought	that	the	church	is	like	the	bride	of	Christ	should
stimulate	us	to	strive	for	greater	purity	and	holiness,	and	also
greater	love	for	Christ	and	submission	to	him.	The	image	of	the
church	as	branches	in	a	vine	should	cause	us	to	rest	in	him	more
fully.	The	idea	of	an	agricultural	crop	should	encourage	us	to
continue	growing	in	the	Christian	life	and	obtaining	for	ourselves
and	others	the	proper	spiritual	nutrients	to	grow.	The	picture	of	the
church	as	God’s	new	temple	should	increase	our	awareness	of
God’s	very	presence	dwelling	in	our	midst	as	we	meet.	The	concept
of	the	church	as	a	priesthood	should	help	us	to	see	more	clearly	the
delight	God	has	in	the	sacrifices	of	praise	and	good	deeds	that	we
offer	to	him	(see	Heb.	13:15–16).	The	metaphor	of	the	church	as
the	body	of	Christ	should	increase	our	interdependence	on	one
another	and	our	appreciation	of	the	diversity	of	gifts	within	the
body.	Many	other	applications	could	be	drawn	from	these	and	other
metaphors	for	the	church	listed	in	Scripture.
5.	The	Church	and	Israel.
	Among	evangelical	Protestants	there	has	been	a
difference	of	viewpoint	on	the	question	of	the	relationship	between	Israel	and
the	church.	This	question	was	brought	into	prominence	by	those	who	hold	to
a	“dispensational”	system	of	theology.	The	most	extensive	systematic
theology	written	by	a	dispensationalist,	Lewis	Sperry	Chafer’s	
Systematic
Theology,
14
	points	out	many	distinctions	between	Israel	and	the	church,	and
even	between	believing	Israel	in	the	Old	Testament	and	the	church	in	the	New
Testament.
15
	Chafer	argues	that	God	has	two	distinct	plans	for	the	two
different	groups	of	people	that	he	has	redeemed:	God’s	purposes	and	promises
for	
Israel	
are	for	
earthly	blessings,	
and	they	will	yet	be	fulfilled	on	this	earth
at	some	time	in	the	future.	On	the	other	hand,	God’s	purposes	and	promises
for	
the	church	
are	for	
heavenly	blessings,	
and	those	promises	will	be	fulfilled
in	heaven.	This	distinction	between	the	two	different	groups	that	God	saves
will	especially	be	seen	in	the	millennium,	according	to	Chafer,	for	at	that	time
Israel	will	reign	on	earth	as	God’s	people	and	enjoy	the	fulfillment	of	Old
Testament	promises,	but	the	church	will	already	have	been	taken	up	into
heaven	at	the	time	of	Christ’s	secret	return	for	his	saints	(“the	rapture”).	On
this	view,	the	church	did	not	begin	until	Pentecost	(Acts	2).	And	it	is	not	right
to	think	of	Old	Testament	believers	together	with	New	Testament	believers	as
constituting	one	church.
While	Chafer’s	position	continues	to	have	influence	in	some
dispensational	circles,	and	certainly	in	more	popular	preaching,	a
number	of	leaders	among	more	recent	dispensationalists	have	not
followed	Chafer	in	many	of	these	points.	Several	current
dispensational	theologians,	such	as	Robert	Saucy,	Craig	Blaising,
and	Darrell	Bock,	refer	to	themselves	as	“progressive
dispensationalists,”
16
	and	they	have	gained	a	wide	following.	They
would	not	see	the	church	as	a	parenthesis	
in	God’s	plan	but	as	the
first	step	toward	the	establishment	of	the	kingdom	of	God.	On	a
progressive	dispensational	view,	
God	does	not	have	two	separate
purposes	for	Israel	and	the	church,	
but	a	single	purpose—the
establishment	of	the	kingdom	of	God—in	which	Israel	and	the
church	will	both	share.	Progressive	dispensationalists	would	see	
no
distinction	between	Israel	and	the	church	in	the	future	eternal	state,
for	all	will	be	part	of	the	one	people	of	God.	Moreover,	they	would
hold	that	the	church	will	reign	with	Christ	in	
glorified	bodies	on
earth	during	the	millennium	
(see	the	discussion	of	the	millennium
in	
chapter	55
).
However,	there	is	still	a	difference	between	progressive
dispensationalists	and	the	rest	of	evangelicalism	on	one	point:	they
would	say	that	
the	Old	Testament	prophecies	concerning	Israel	will
still	be	fulfilled	in	the	millennium	by	ethnic	Jewish	people	
who	will
believe	in	Christ	and	live	in	the	land	of	Israel	as	a	“model	nation”
for	all	nations	to	see	and	learn	from.	Therefore	they	would	not	say
that	the	church	is	the	“new	Israel”	or	that	all	the	Old	Testament
prophecies	about	Israel	will	be	fulfilled	in	the	church,	for	these
prophecies	will	yet	be	fulfilled	in	ethnic	Israel.
The	position	taken	in	this	book	differs	quite	a	bit	from	Chafer’s
views	on	this	issue	and	also	differs	somewhat	with	progressive
dispensationalists.	However,	it	must	be	said	here	that	questions
about	the	exact	way	in	which	biblical	prophecies	about	the	future
will	be	fulfilled	are,	in	the	nature	of	the	case,	difficult	to	decide
with	certainty,	and	it	is	wise	to	have	some	tentativeness	in	our
conclusions	on	these	matters.	With	this	in	mind,	the	following	may
be	said.
Both	Protestant	and	Catholic	theologians	outside	of	the
dispensational	position	have	said	that	the	church	includes	both	Old
Testament	believers	and	New	Testament	believers	in	one	church	or
one	body	of	Christ.	Even	on	the	nondispensational	view,	a	person
may	hold	that	there	will	be	a	future	large-scale	conversion	of	the
Jewish	people	(Rom.	11:12,	15,	23–24,	25–26,	28–31),
17
	yet	that
this	conversion	will	only	result	in	Jewish	believers	becoming	part
of	the	one	true	church	of	God—they	will	be	“grafted	back	into	their
own	olive	tree”	(Rom.	11:24).
With	regard	to	this	question,	we	should	notice	the	many	New
Testament	verses	that	understand	the	church	as	the	“new	Israel”	or
new	“people	of	God.”	The	fact	that	“Christ	loved	
the	church	
and
gave	himself	up	for	her”	(Eph.	5:25)	would	suggest	this.	Moreover,
this	present	church	age,	which	has	brought	the	salvation	of	many
millions	of	Christians	in	the	church,	is	not	an	interruption	or	a
parenthesis	in	God’s	plan,
18
	but	a	continuation	of	his	plan	expressed
throughout	the	Old	Testament	to	call	a	people	to	himself.	Paul	says,
“For	he	is	not	a	real	Jew	who	is	one	outwardly,	nor	is	true
circumcision	something	external	and	physical.	
He	is	a	Jew	who	is
one	inwardly,	
and	real	circumcision	is	a	matter	of	the	heart,	spiritual
and	not	literal”	(Rom.	2:28–29).	Paul	recognizes	that	though	there
is	a	literal	or	natural	sense	in	which	people	who	physically
descended	from	Abraham	are	to	be	called	Jews,	there	is	also	a
deeper	or	spiritual	sense	in	which	a	“true	Jew”	is	one	who	is
inwardly	a	believer	and	whose	heart	has	been	cleansed	by	God.
Paul	says	that	Abraham	is	not	only	to	be	considered	the	father	of
the	Jewish	people	in	a	physical	sense.	He	is	also	in	a	deeper	and
more	true	sense	“
the	father	of	all	who	believe	
without	being
circumcised	.	.	.	and	likewise	the	father	of	the	circumcised	who	are
not	merely	circumcised	but	also	follow	the	example	of	the	faith
which	our	father	Abraham	had”	(Rom.	4:11–12;	cf.	vv.	16,	18).
Therefore	Paul	can	say,	“not	all	who	are	descended	from	Israel
belong	to	Israel,	and	not	all	are	children	of	Abraham	because	they
are	his	descendants	.	.	.	it	is	not	the	children	of	the	flesh	who	are	the
children	of	God,	but	the	children	of	the	promise	are	reckoned	as
descendants”	(Rom.	9:6–8).	Paul	here	implies	that	the	true	children
of	Abraham,	those	who	are	in	the	most	true	sense	“Israel,”	are	not
the	nation	of	Israel	by	physical	descent	from	Abraham	but	those
who	have	believed	in	Christ.	Those	who	truly	believe	in	Christ	are
now	the	ones	who	have	the	privilege	of	being	called	“my	people”
by	the	Lord	(Rom.	9:25,	quoting	Hos.	2:23);	therefore,	the	church	is
now	God’s	chosen	people.	This	means	that	when	Jewish	people
according	to	the	flesh	are	saved	in	large	numbers	at	some	time	in
the	future,	they	will	not	constitute	a	separate	people	of	God	or	be
like	a	separate	olive	tree,	but	they	will	be	“grafted	back	
into	their
own	olive	tree”	
(Rom.	11:24).	Another	passage	indicating	this	is
Galatians	3:29:	“And	if	you	are	Christ’s,	then	you	are	Abraham’s
offspring,	heirs	according	to	promise.”	Similarly,	Paul	says	that
Christians	are	the	“true	circumcision”	(Phil.	3:3).
Far	from	thinking	of	the	church	as	a	separate	group	from	the	Jewish
people,	Paul	writes	to	Gentile	believers	at	Ephesus	telling	them	that
they	were	formerly	“alienated	from	the	commonwealth	of	Israel,
and	strangers	to	the	covenants	of	promise”	(Eph.	2:12),	but	that
now	they	have	been	“brought	near	in	the	blood	of	Christ”	(Eph.
2:13).	And	when	the	Gentiles	were	brought	into	the	church,	Jews
and	Gentiles	were	united	into	one	new	body.	Paul	says	that	God
“
has	made	us	both	one,	
and	has	broken	down	the	dividing	wall	of
hostility	.	.	.	that	he	might	create	in	himself	one	new	man	in	place	of
the	two,	so	making	peace,	and	might	
reconcile	us	both	to	God	in
one	body	
through	the	cross”	(Eph.	2:14–16).	Therefore	Paul	can	say
that	Gentiles	are	“
fellow	citizens	with	the	saints	
and	members	of	the
household	of	God,	built	upon	the	foundation	of	the	apostles	and
prophets,	Christ	Jesus	himself	being	the	cornerstone”	(Eph.	2:19–
20).	With	his	extensive	awareness	of	the	Old	Testament	background
to	the	New	Testament	church,	Paul	can	still	say	that	“the	Gentiles
are	fellow	heirs,	members	of	the	same	body”	(Eph.	3:6).	The	entire
passage	speaks	strongly	of	the	unity	of	Jewish	and	Gentile	believers
in	one	body	in	Christ	and	gives	no	indication	of	any	distinctive	plan
for	Jewish	people	ever	to	be	saved	apart	from	inclusion	in	the	one
body	of	Christ,	the	church.	The	church	incorporates	into	itself	all
the	true	people	of	God,	and	almost	all	of	the	titles	used	of	God’s
people	in	the	Old	Testament	are	in	one	place	or	another	applied	to
the	church	in	the	New	Testament.
Hebrews	8	provides	another	strong	argument	for	seeing	the	church
as	the	recipient,	and	the	fulfillment,	of	the	Old	Testament	promises
concerning	Israel.	In	the	context	of	speaking	about	the	new
covenant	to	which	Christians	belong,	the	author	of	Hebrews	gives
an	extensive	quotation	from	Jeremiah	31:31–34,	in	which	he	says,
“The	days	will	come,	says	the	Lord,	when	I	will	establish	a	new
covenant	with	the	house	of	Israel	and	with	the	house	of	Judah.	.	.	.
This	is	the	covenant	that	I	will	make	with	the	house	of	Israel	after
those	days,	says	the	Lord:	I	will	put	my	laws	into	their	minds,	and
write	them	on	their	hearts,	and	I	will	be	their	God,	and	they	shall	be
my	people”	(Heb.	8:8–10).	Here	the	author	quotes	the	Lord’s
promise	that	he	will	make	a	new	covenant	with	the	house	of	Israel
and	
with	the	house	of	Judah,	
and	says	that	that	is	the	new	covenant
that	has	now	been	made	
with	the	church.	
That	new	covenant	is	the
covenant	of	which	believers	in	the	church	are	now	members.	It
seems	hard	to	avoid	the	conclusion	that	the	author	views	the	church
as	the	true	Israel	of	God	in	which	the	Old	Testament	promises	to
Israel	find	their	fulfillment.
Similarly,	James	can	write	a	general	letter	to	many	early	Christian
churches	and	say	that	he	is	writing	“To	the	twelve	tribes	in	the
Dispersion”	(James	1:1).	This	indicates	that	he	is	evidently	viewing
New	Testament	Christians	as	the	successors	to	and	fulfillment	of
the	twelve	tribes	of	Israel.
Peter	also	speaks	in	the	same	way.	From	the	first	verse	in	which	he
calls	his	readers	“exiles	of	the	Dispersion”	(1	Peter	1:1)
19
	to	the
next-to-last	verse	in	which	he	calls	the	city	of	Rome	“Babylon”	(1
Peter	5:13),	Peter	frequently	speaks	of	New	Testament	Christians	in
terms	of	Old	Testament	imagery	and	promises	given	to	the	Jews.
This	theme	comes	to	prominence	in	1	Peter	2:4–10,	where
20
	Peter
says	that	God	has	bestowed	on	the	church	almost	all	the	blessings
promised	to	Israel	in	the	Old	Testament.	The	dwelling-place	of	God
is	no	longer	the	Jerusalem	temple,	for	Christians	are	the	new
“temple”	of	God	(v.	
5).	The	priesthood	able	to	offer	acceptable
sacrifices	to	God	is	no	longer	descended	from	Aaron,	for	Christians
are	now	the	true	“royal	priesthood”	with	access	before	God’s	throne
(vv.	4–5,	9).	God’s	chosen	people	are	no	longer	said	to	be	those
physically	descended	from	Abraham,	for	Christians	are	now	the
true	“chosen	race”	(v.	
9).	The	nation	blessed	by	God	is	no	longer
said	to	be	the	nation	of	Israel,	for	Christians	are	now	God’s	true
“holy	nation”	(v.	
9).	The	people	of	Israel	are	no	longer	said	to	be
the	people	of	God,	for	Christians—both	Jewish	Christians	and
Gentile	Christians—are	now	“God’s	people”	and	those	who	have
“received	mercy”	(v.	
10).	Moreover,	Peter	takes	these	quotations
from	contexts	in	the	Old	Testament	that	repeatedly	warn	that	God
will	reject	his	people	who	persist	in	rebellion	against	him	and	who
reject	the	precious	“cornerstone”	(v.	
6)	that	he	has	established.
What	further	statement	could	be	needed	in	order	for	us	to	say	with
assurance	that	the	church	has	now	become	the	true	Israel	of	God
and	will	receive	all	the	blessings	promised	to	Israel	in	the	Old
Testament?
21
6.	The	Church	and	the	Kingdom	of	God.
	What	is	the	relationship	between
the	church	and	the	kingdom	of	God?	The	differences	have	been	summarized
well	by	George	Ladd:
The	Kingdom	is	primarily	the	dynamic	reign	or	kingly	rule	of	God,
and,	derivatively,	the	sphere	in	which	the	rule	is	experienced.	In
biblical	idiom,	the	Kingdom	is	not	identified	with	its	subjects.	They
are	the	people	of	God’s	rule	who	enter	it,	live	under	it,	and	are
governed	by	it.	The	church	is	the	community	of	the	Kingdom	but
never	the	Kingdom	itself.	Jesus’	disciples	belong	to	the	Kingdom	as
the	Kingdom	belongs	to	them;	but	they	are	not	the	Kingdom.	The
Kingdom	is	the	rule	of	God;	the	church	is	a	society	of	men.
22
Ladd	goes	on	to	summarize	five	specific	aspects	of	the	relationship	between
the	kingdom	and	the	church:	(1)	The	church	is	not	the	kingdom	(for	Jesus	and
the	early	Christians	preached	that	the	kingdom	of	God	was	near,	not	that	the
church	was	near,	and	preached	the	good	news	of	the	kingdom,	not	the	good
news	of	the	church:	Acts	8:12;	19:8;	20:25;	28:23,	31).	(2)	The	kingdom
creates	the	church	(for	as	people	enter	into	God’s	kingdom	they	become
joined	to	the	human	fellowship	of	the	church).	(3)	The	church	witnesses	to	the
kingdom	(for	Jesus	said,	“this	gospel	of	the	kingdom	will	be	preached
throughout	the	whole	world,”	Matt.	24:14).	(4)	The	church	is	the	instrument
of	the	kingdom	(for	the	Holy	Spirit,	manifesting	the	power	of	the	kingdom,
works	through	the	disciples	to	heal	the	sick	and	cast	out	demons,	as	he	did	in
the	ministry	of	Jesus:	Matt.	10:8;	Luke	10:17).	(5)	The	church	is	the	custodian
of	the	kingdom	(for	the	church	has	been	given	the	keys	of	the	kingdom	of
heaven:	Matt.	16:19).
23
Therefore	we	should	not	identify	the	kingdom	of	God	and	the
church	(as	in	Roman	Catholic	theology),	nor	should	we	see	the
kingdom	of	God	as	entirely	future,	something	distinct	from	the
church	age	(as	in	older	dispensational	theology).	Rather,	we	should
recognize	that	there	is	a	close	connection	between	the	kingdom	of
God	and	the	church.	As	the	church	proclaims	the	good	news	of	the
kingdom,	people	will	come	into	the	church	and	begin	to	experience
the	blessings	of	God’s	rule	in	their	lives.	The	kingdom	manifests
itself	through	the	church,	and	thereby	the	future	reign	of	God
breaks	into	the	present	(it	is	“already”	here:	Matt.	12:28;	Rom.
14:17;	and	“not	yet”	here	fully:	Matt.	25:34;	1	Cor.	6:9–10).
Therefore	those	who	believe	in	Christ	will	begin	to	experience
something	of	what	God’s	final	kingdom	reign	will	be	like:	they	will
know	some	measure	of	victory	over	sin	(Rom.	6:14;	14:17),	over
demonic	opposition	(Luke	10:17),	and	over	disease	(Luke	10:9).
They	will	live	in	the	power	of	the	Holy	Spirit	(Matt.	12:28;	Rom.
8:4–17;	14:17),	who	is	the	dynamic	power	of	the	coming	kingdom.
Eventually	Jesus	will	return	and	his	kingdom	reign	will	extend	over
all	creation	(1	Cor.	15:24–28).
B.	The	“Marks”	of	the	Church	(Distinguishing	Characteristics)
1.
	There	Are	True	Churches	and	False	Churches.
	What	makes	a	church	a
church?	What	is	necessary	to	have	a	church?	Might	a	group	of	people	who
claim	to	be	Christians	become	so	unlike	what	a	church	should	be	that	they
should	no	longer	be	called	a	church?
In	the	early	centuries	of	the	Christian	church,	there	was	little
controversy	about	what	was	a	true	church.	There	was	only	one
world-wide	church,	the	“visible”	church	throughout	the	world,	and
that	was,	of	course,	the	true	church.	This	church	had	bishops	and
local	clergymen	and	church	buildings	which	everyone	could	see.
Any	heretics	who	were	found	to	be	in	serious	doctrinal	error	were
simply	excluded	from	the	church.
But	at	the	Reformation	a	crucial	question	came	up:	how	can	we
recognize	a	true	church?	Is	the	Roman	Catholic	Church	a	true
church	or	not?	In	order	to	answer	that	question	people	had	to	decide
what	were	the	“marks”	of	a	true	church,	the	distinguishing
characteristics	that	lead	us	to	recognize	it	as	a	true	church.	Scripture
certainly	speaks	of	false	churches.	Paul	says	of	the	pagan	temples	in
Corinth,	“What	pagans	sacrifice	they	offer	to	demons	and	not	to
God”	(1	Cor.	10:20).	He	tells	the	Corinthians	that	“when	you	were
heathen,	you	were	led	astray	to	dumb	idols”	(1	Cor.	12:2).	These
pagan	temples	were	certainly	false	churches	or	false	religious
assemblies.	Moreover,	Scripture	speaks	of	a	religious	assembly	that
is	really	a	“synagogue	of	Satan”	(Rev.	2:9;	3:9).	Here	the	risen	Lord
Jesus	seems	to	be	referring	to	Jewish	assemblies	that	claim	to	be
Jews	but	were	not	true	Jews	who	had	saving	faith.	Their	religious
assembly	was	not	an	assembly	of	Christ’s	people	but	of	those	who
still	belonged	to	the	kingdom	of	darkness,	the	kingdom	of	Satan.
This	also	would	certainly	be	a	false	church.
In	large	measure	there	was	agreement	between	Luther	and	Calvin
on	the	question	of	what	constituted	a	true	church.	The	Lutheran
statement	of	faith,	which	is	called	the	Augsburg	Confession	(1530),
defined	the	church	as	“the	congregation	of	saints	in	which	the
gospel	is	rightly	taught	and	the	Sacraments	rightly	administered”
(Article	7).
24
	Similarly,	John	Calvin	said,	“Wherever	we	see	the
Word	of	God	purely	preached	and	heard,	and	the	sacraments
administered	according	to	Christ’s	institution,	there,	it	is	not	to	be
doubted,	a	church	of	God	exists.”
25
	Although	Calvin	spoke	of	the
pure	preaching	of	the	Word	(whereas	the	Lutheran	Confession
spoke	of	the	right	preaching	of	the	gospel)	and	although	Calvin	said
that	the	Word	must	not	only	be	preached	but	heard	(whereas	the
Augsburg	Confession	merely	mentioned	that	it	had	to	be	rightly
taught),	their	understanding	of	the	distinguishing	marks	of	a	true
church	is	quite	similar.
26
	In	contrast	to	the	view	of	Luther	and
Calvin	regarding	the	marks	of	a	church,	the	Roman	Catholic
position	has	been	that	
the	visible	church	
that	descended	from	Peter
and	the	apostles	
is	the	true	church.
It	seems	appropriate	that	we	take	Luther	and	Calvin’s	view	on	the
marks	of	a	true	church	as	correct	still	today.	Certainly	if	the	Word
of	God	is	not	being	preached,	but	simply	false	doctrines	or
doctrines	of	men,	then	there	is	no	true	church.	In	some	cases	we
might	have	difficulty	determining	just	how	much	wrong	doctrine
can	be	tolerated	before	a	church	can	no	longer	be	considered	a	true
church,	but	there	are	many	clear	cases	where	we	can	say	that	a	true
church	does	not	exist.	For	example,	the	Church	of	Jesus	Christ	of
Latter	Day	Saints	(the	Mormon	Church)	does	not	hold	to	any	major
Christian	doctrines	concerning	salvation	or	the	person	of	God	or	the
person	and	work	of	Christ.	It	is	clearly	a	false	church.	Similarly,	the
Jehovah’s	Witnesses	teach	salvation	by	works,	not	by	trusting	in
Jesus	Christ	alone.	This	is	a	fundamental	doctrinal	deviation
because	if	people	believe	the	teachings	of	the	Jehovah’s	Witnesses,
they	simply	will	not	be	saved.	So	the	Jehovah’s	Witnesses	also
must	be	considered	a	false	church.	When	the	preaching	of	a	church
conceals	the	gospel	message	of	salvation	by	faith	alone	from	its
members,	so	that	the	gospel	message	is	not	clearly	proclaimed,	and
has	not	been	proclaimed	for	some	time,	the	group	meeting	there	is
not	a	church.
The	second	mark	of	the	church,	the	right	administration	of	the
sacraments	(baptism	and	the	Lord’s	Supper)	was	probably	stated	in
opposition	to	the	Roman	Catholic	view	that	saving	grace	came
through	the	sacraments	and	thereby	the	sacraments	were	made
“works”	by	which	we	earned	merit	for	salvation.	In	this	way,	the
Roman	Catholic	Church	was	insisting	on	payment	rather	than
teaching	faith	as	the	means	of	obtaining	salvation.
But	another	reason	exists	for	including	the	sacraments	as	a	mark	of
the	church.	Once	an	organization	begins	to	practice	baptism	and	the
Lord’s	Supper,	it	is	a	continuing	organization	and	is	
attempting	to
function	as	a	church.	
(In	modern	American	society,	an	organization
that	begins	to	meet	for	worship	and	prayer	and	Bible	teachings	on
Sunday	mornings	also	would	clearly	be	attempting	to	function	as	a
church.)
Baptism	and	the	Lord’s	Supper	also	serve	as	“membership
controls”	for	the	church.	Baptism	is	the	means	for	admitting	people
into	the	church,	and	the	Lord’s	Supper	is	the	means	for	allowing
people	to	give	a	sign	of	continuing	in	the	membership	of	the	church
—the	church	signifies	that	it	considers	those	who	receive	baptism
and	the	Lord’s	Supper	to	be	saved.	Therefore	these	activities
indicate	what	a	church	thinks	about	salvation,	and	they	are
appropriately	listed	as	a	mark	of	the	church	today	as	well.	By
contrast,	groups	who	do	not	administer	baptism	and	the	Lord’s
Supper	signify	that	they	are	not	intending	to	function	as	a	church.
Someone	may	stand	on	a	street	corner	with	a	small	crowd	and	have
true	preaching	and	hearing	of	the	Word,	but	the	people	there	would
not	be	a	church.	Even	a	neighborhood	Bible	study	meeting	in	a
home	can	have	the	true	teaching	and	hearing	of	the	Word	without
becoming	a	church.	But	if	a	local	Bible	study	began	baptizing	its
own	new	converts	and	regularly	participating	in	the	Lord’s	Supper,
these	things	would	signify	
an	intention	to	function	as	a	church,	
and
it	would	be	difficult	to	say	why	it	should	not	be	considered	a	church
in	itself.
27
2.	True	and	False	Churches	Today.
	In	view	of	the	question	posed	during	the
Reformation,	what	about	the	Roman	Catholic	Church	today?	Is	it	a	true
church?	Here	it	seems	that	we	cannot	simply	make	a	decision	regarding	the
Roman	Catholic	Church	as	a	whole,	because	it	is	far	too	diverse.	To	ask
whether	the	Roman	Catholic	Church	is	a	true	church	or	a	false	church	today	is
somewhat	similar	to	asking	whether	Protestant	churches	are	true	or	false
today—there	is	great	variety	among	them.	Some	Roman	Catholic	parishes
certainly	lack	both	marks:	there	is	no	pure	preaching	of	the	Word	and	the
gospel	message	of	salvation	by	faith	in	Christ	alone	is	not	known	or	received
by	people	in	the	parish.	Participation	in	the	sacraments	is	seen	as	a	“work”
that	can	earn	merit	with	God.	Such	a	group	of	people	is	not	a	true	Christian
church.	On	the	other	hand,	there	are	many	Roman	Catholic	parishes	in
various	parts	of	the	world	today	where	the	local	priest	has	a	genuine	saving
knowledge	of	Christ	and	a	vital	personal	relationship	with	Christ	in	prayer
and	Bible	study.	His	own	homilies	and	private	teaching	of	the	Bible	place
much	emphasis	on	personal	faith	and	the	need	for	individual	Bible	reading
and	prayer.	His	teaching	on	the	sacraments	emphasizes	their	symbolic	and
commemorative	aspects	much	more	than	it	speaks	of	them	as	acts	that	merit
some	infusion	of	saving	grace	from	God.	In	such	a	case,	although	we	would
have	to	say	that	we	still	have	profound	differences	with	Roman	Catholic
teaching	on	some	doctrines,
28
	nonetheless,	it	would	seem	that	such	a	church
would	have	a	close	enough	approximation	to	the	two	marks	of	the	church	that
it	would	be	hard	to	deny	that	it	is	in	fact	a	true	church.	It	would	seem	to	be	a
genuine	congregation	of	believers	in	which	the	gospel	is	taught	(though	not
purely)	and	the	sacraments	are	administered	more	rightly	than	wrongly.
Are	there	false	churches	within	Protestantism?	If	we	again	look	at
the	two	distinguishing	marks	of	the	church,	in	the	judgment	of	this
present	writer	it	seems	appropriate	to	say	that	many	liberal
Protestant	churches	are	in	fact	false	churches	today.
29
	Is	the	gospel
of	works-righteousness	and	unbelief	in	Scripture	that	these
churches	teach	any	more	likely	to	save	people	than	did	Roman
Catholic	teaching	at	the	time	of	the	Reformation?	And	is	not	their
administration	of	the	sacraments	without	sound	teaching	to	anyone
who	walks	in	the	door	likely	to	give	as	much	false	assurance	to
unregenerate	sinners	as	did	the	Roman	Catholic	use	of	the
sacraments	at	the	time	of	the	Reformation?	When	there	is	an
assembly	of	people	who	take	the	name	“Christian”	but	consistently
teach	that	people	cannot	believe	their	Bibles—indeed	a	church
whose	pastor	and	congregation	seldom	read	their	Bibles	or	pray	in
any	meaningful	way,	and	do	not	believe	or	perhaps	even	understand
the	gospel	of	salvation	by	faith	in	Christ	alone,	then	how	can	we
say	that	this	is	a	true	church?
30
C.	The	Purposes	of	the	Church
We	can	understand	the	purposes	of	the	church	in	terms	of	ministry
to	God,	ministry	to	believers,	and	ministry	to	the	world.
1.
	Ministry	to	God:	Worship.
	In	relationship	to	God	the	church’s	purpose	is
to	worship	him.	Paul	directs	the	church	at	Colossae	to	“sing	psalms	and
hymns	and	spiritual	songs	with	thankfulness	in	your	hearts	to	God”	(Col.
3:16).	God	has	destined	us	and	appointed	us	in	Christ	“to	live	for	the	praise	of
his	glory”	(Eph.	1:12).	Worship	in	the	church	is	not	merely	a	preparation	for
something	else:	it	is	in	itself	fulfilling	the	major	purpose	of	the	church	with
reference	to	its	Lord.	That	is	why	Paul	can	follow	an	exhortation	that	we	are
to	be	“making	the	most	of	the	time”	with	a	command	to	be	filled	with	the
Spirit	and	then	to	be	“singing	and	making	melody	to	the	Lord	with	all	your
heart”	(Eph.	5:16–19).
2.	Ministry	to	Believers:	Nurture.
	According	to	Scripture,	the	church	has	an
obligation	to	nurture	those	who	are	already	believers	and	build	them	up	to
maturity	in	the	faith.	Paul	said	that	his	own	goal	was	not	simply	to	bring
people	to	initial	saving	faith	but	to	“present	every	man	
mature	in	Christ”
(Col.	1:28).	And	he	told	the	church	at	Ephesus	that	God	gave	the	church
gifted	persons	“to	equip	the	saints	for	the	work	of	ministry,	
for	building	up	the
body	of	Christ,	
until	we	all	attain	to	the	unity	of	the	faith	and	of	the
knowledge	of	the	Son	of	God,	to	mature	manhood,	to	the	measure	of	the
stature	of	the	fullness	of	Christ”	(Eph.	4:12–13).	It	is	clearly	contrary	to	the
New	Testament	pattern	to	think	that	our	only	goal	with	people	is	to	bring
them	to	initial	saving	faith.	Our	goal	as	a	church	must	be	to	present	to	God
every	Christian	“mature	in	Christ”	(Col.	1:28).
3.	Ministry	to	the	World:	Evangelism	and	Mercy.
	Jesus	told	his	disciples
that	they	should	“make	disciples	of	all	nations”	(Matt.	28:19).	This
evangelistic	work	of	declaring	the	gospel	is	the	primary	ministry	that	the
church	has	toward	the	world.
31
	Yet	accompanying	the	work	of	evangelism	is
also	a	ministry	of	mercy,	a	ministry	that	includes	caring	for	the	poor	and
needy	in	the	name	of	the	Lord.	Although	the	emphasis	of	the	New	Testament
is	on	giving	material	help	to	those	who	are	part	of	the	church	(Acts	11:29;	2
Cor.	8:4;	1	John	3:17),	there	is	still	an	affirmation	that	it	is	right	to	help
unbelievers	even	if	they	do	not	respond	with	gratitude	or	acceptance	of	the
gospel	message.	Jesus	tells	us,
Love	your	enemies,	and	do	good,	and	lend,	expecting	nothing	in
return;	and	your	reward	will	be	great,	and	you	will	be	sons	of	the
Most	High;	for	
he	is	kind	to	the	ungrateful	and	the	selfish.	
Be
merciful,	even	as	your	Father	is	merciful.	(Luke	6:35–36)
The	point	of	Jesus’	explanation	is	that	we	are	to	imitate	God	in	being	kind	to
those	who	are	being	ungrateful	and	selfish	as	well.	Moreover,	we	have	the
example	of	Jesus	who	did	not	attempt	to	heal	only	those	who	accepted	him	as
Messiah.	Rather,	when	great	crowds	came	to	him,	“he	laid	his	hands	
on	every
one	of	them	
and	healed	them”	(Luke	4:40).	This	should	give	us
encouragement	to	carry	out	deeds	of	kindness,	and	to	pray	for	healing	and
other	needs,	in	the	lives	of	unbelievers	as	well	as	believers.	Such	ministries	of
mercy	to	the	world	may	also	include	participation	in	civic	activities	or
attempting	to	influence	governmental	policies	to	make	them	more	consistent
with	biblical	moral	principles.	In	areas	where	there	is	systematic	injustice
manifested	in	the	treatment	of	the	poor	and/or	ethnic	or	religious	minorities,
the	church	should	also	pray	and—as	it	has	opportunity—speak	against	such
injustice.	All	of	these	are	ways	in	which	the	church	can	supplement	its
evangelistic	ministry	to	the	world	and	indeed	adorn	the	gospel	that	it
professes.	But	such	ministries	of	mercy	to	the	world	should	never	become	a
substitute	for	genuine	evangelism	or	for	the	other	areas	of	ministry	to	God
and	to	believers	mentioned	above.
4.	Keeping	These	Purposes	in	Balance.
	Once	we	have	listed	these	three
purposes	for	the	church	someone	might	ask,	Which	is	most	important?	Or
someone	else	might	ask,	Might	we	neglect	one	of	these	three	as	less	important
than	the	others?
To	that	we	must	respond	that	all	three	purposes	of	the	church	are
commanded	by	the	Lord	in	Scripture;	therefore	all	three	are
important	and	none	can	be	neglected.	In	fact,	a	strong	church	will
have	effective	ministries	in	all	three	of	these	areas.	We	should
beware	of	any	attempts	to	reduce	the	purpose	of	the	church	to	only
one	of	these	three	and	to	say	that	it	should	be	our	primary	focus.	In
fact,	such	attempts	to	make	one	of	these	purposes	primary	will
always	result	in	some	neglect	of	the	other	two.	A	church	that
emphasizes	only	worship	will	end	up	with	inadequate	Bible
teaching	of	believers	and	its	members	will	remain	shallow	in	their
understanding	of	Scripture	and	immature	in	their	Christian	lives.	If
it	also	begins	to	neglect	evangelism	the	church	will	cease	to	grow
and	influence	others;	it	will	become	ingrown	and	eventually	begin
to	wither.
A	church	that	places	the	edification	of	believers	as	a	purpose	that
takes	precedence	over	the	other	two	will	tend	to	produce	Christians
who	know	much	Bible	doctrine	but	have	spiritual	dryness	in	their
lives	because	they	know	little	of	the	joy	of	worshiping	God	or
telling	others	about	Christ.
But	a	church	that	makes	evangelism	such	a	priority	that	it	causes
the	other	two	purposes	to	be	neglected	will	also	end	up	with
immature	Christians	who	emphasize	growth	in	numbers	but	have
less	and	less	genuine	love	for	God	expressed	in	their	worship	and
less	and	less	doctrinal	maturity	and	personal	holiness	in	their	lives.
All	three	purposes	must	be	emphasized	continually	in	a	healthy
church.
However,	
individuals	
are	different	from	churches	in	placing	a
relative	priority	on	one	or	another	of	these	purposes	of	the	church.
Because	we	are	like	a	body	with	diverse	spiritual	gifts	and	abilities,
it	is	right	for	us	to	place	most	of	our	emphasis	on	the	fulfillment	of
that	purpose	of	the	church	that	is	most	closely	related	to	the	gifts
and	interests	God	has	given	to	us.	There	is	certainly	no	obligation
for	every	believer	to	attempt	to	give	exactly	one	third	of	his	or	her
time	in	the	church	to	worship,	one-third	to	nurturing	other
believers,	and	one-third	to	evangelism	or	deeds	of	mercy.	Someone
with	the	gift	of	evangelism	should	of	course	spend	some	time	in
worship	and	caring	for	other	believers,	but	may	end	up	spending	the
vast	majority	of	his	or	her	time	in	evangelistic	work.	Someone	who
is	a	gifted	worship	leader	may	end	up	devoting	90	percent	of	his
time	in	the	church	toward	preparation	for	and	leading	of	worship.
This	is	only	an	appropriate	response	to	the	diversity	of	gifts	that
God	has	given	us.
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
When	you	think	of	the	church	as	the	invisible	fellowship	of	all	true
believers	throughout	all	time,	how	does	it	affect	the	way	you	think	of
yourself	as	an	individual	Christian?	In	the	community	in	which	you	live,
is	there	much	visible	unity	among	genuine	believers	(that	is,	is	there
much	visible	evidence	of	the	true	nature	of	the	invisible	church)?	Does
the	New	Testament	say	anything	about	the	ideal	size	for	an	individual
church?
2
.	
Would	you	consider	the	church	that	you	are	now	in	to	be	a	true	church?
Have	you	ever	been	a	member	of	a	church	that	you	would	think	to	be	a
false	church?	Do	you	think	there	is	any	harm	done	when	evangelical
Christians	continue	to	give	the	impression	that	they	think	liberal
Protestant	churches	are	true	Christian	churches?	Viewed	from	the
perspective	of	the	final	judgment,	what	good	and	what	harm	might	come
from	our	failure	to	state	that	we	think	unbelieving	churches	are	false
churches?
3
.	
Did	any	of	the	metaphors	for	the	church	give	you	a	new	appreciation	for
the	church	that	you	currently	attend?
4
.	
To	which	purpose	of	the	church	do	you	think	you	can	most	effectively
contribute?	Which	purpose	has	God	placed	in	your	heart	a	strong	desire
to	fulfill?
SPECIAL	TERMS
body	of	Christ
	
	
	
	
invisible	church
church
	
	
	
	
marks	of	the	church
ekklemsia
	
	
	
	
visible	church
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the
bibliography	to	chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be
found	in	
Appendix	4
.)
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92			Litton,	363–86
1930			Thomas,	265–80
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1875–76			Pope,	3:259–87
1892–94			Miley,	2:385–94
1940			Wiley,	3:103–17,	126–27
1960			Purkiser,	393–408
1983			Carter,	2:571–613
3.			Baptist
1767			Gill,	2:558–74
1887			Boyce,	1:418–22
1907			Strong,	887–94
1976–83			Henry,	4:524–92
1983–85			Erickson,	1025–68
4.			Dispensational
1947			Chafer,	4:30–153
1949			Thiessen,	305–13,	326–32
1986			Ryrie,	391–404,	435–36
5.			Lutheran
1917–24			Pieper,	3:397–425
1934			Mueller,	541–56
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1559			Calvin,	2:1009–52	(4.1–2)
1861			Heppe,	657–70
1937–66			Murray,	
CW,	
1:231–52;	
CW,	
2:321–36
1938			Berkhof,	555–78
1962			Buswell,	2:216–26;	1:418–24
7.			Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988–92			Williams,	3:15–157
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955			Ott,	270–324
2.			Roman	Catholic:	Post-Vatican	II
1980			McBrien,	2:565–730
Other	Works
Banks,	Robert	J.	
Paul’s	Idea	of	Community:	The	Early	House	Churches
in	Their	Historical	Setting.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1980.
Bannerman,	James.	
The	Church	of	Christ.	
Cherry	Hill,	N.J.:	Mack
Publishing,	1972.	(First	published	in	1869.)
Berkouwer,	G.	C.	
The	Church.	
Trans.	by	James	E.	Davidson.	Grand
Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1976.
Bock,	Darrell	L.,	and	Craig	A.	Blaising,	eds.	
Progressive
Dispensationalism.	
Wheaton:	Victor,	1993.
Carson,	D.	A.,	ed.	
Biblical	Interpretation	and	the	Church:	Text	and
Context.	
Exeter:	Paternoster,	1984.
_____.	
The	Church	in	the	Bible	and	the	World.	
Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	and
Exeter:	Paternoster,	1987.
Clowney,	Edmund.	“Church.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	140–43.
_____.	
The	Doctrine	of	the	Church.	
Philadelphia:	Presbyterian	and
Reformed,	1969.
Feinberg,	John	S.,	ed.	
Continuity	and	Discontinuity:	Perspectives	on	the
Relationship	Between	the	Old	and	New	Testaments.	
Wheaton:	Crossway,
1988.
Gaffin,	Richard	B.	“Kingdom	of	God.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	367–69.
Ladd,	George	Eldon.	“The	Kingdom	and	the	Church.”	In	
A	Theology	of
the	New	Testament.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1974,	pp.	105–19.
Martin,	Ralph	P.	
The	Family	and	the	Fellowship:	New	Testament	Images
of	the	Church.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1979.
Omanson,	R.	L.	“Church,	The.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	231–33.
Poythress,	Vern.	
Understanding	Dispensationalists.	
Grand	Rapids:
Zondervan,	1987.
Saucy,	Robert.	
The	Case	for	Progressive	Dispensationalism.	
Grand
Rapids:	Zondervan,	1993.
_____.	
The	Church	in	God’s	Program.	
Chicago:	Moody,	1972.
Snyder,	Howard	A.	
The	Community	of	the	King.	
Downers	Grove,	Ill.:
InterVarsity	Press,	1977.
VanGemeren,	Willem.	
The	Progress	of	Redemption.	
Grand	Rapids:
Zondervan,	1988.
Watson,	David	C.	
I	Believe	in	the	Church.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,
1979.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
Ephesians	4:11–13:	
And	his	gifts	were	that	some	should	be	apostles,	some
prophets,	some	evangelists,	some	pastors	and	teachers,	to	equip	the	saints	for
the	work	of	ministry,	for	building	up	the	body	of	Christ,	until	we	all	attain	to
the	unity	of	the	faith	and	of	the	knowledge	of	the	Son	of	God,	to	mature
manhood,	to	the	measure	of	the	stature	of	the	fulness	of	Christ.
HYMN
“The	Church’s	One	Foundation”
The	church’s	one	foundation	is	Jesus	Christ	her	Lord;
She	is	his	new	creation	by	water	and	the	Word:
From	heav’n	he	came	and	sought	her	to	be	his	holy	bride;
With	his	own	blood	he	bought	her,	and	for	her	life	he	died.
Elect	from	ev’ry	nation,	yet	one	o’er	all	the	earth,
Her	charter	of	salvation	one	Lord,	one	faith,	one	birth;
One	holy	name	she	blesses,	partakes	one	holy	food,
And	to	one	hope	she	presses,	with	ev’ry	grace	endued.
Though	with	a	scornful	wonder	men	see	her	sore	oppressed,
By	schisms	rent	asunder,	by	heresies	distressed,
Yet	saints	their	watch	are	keeping,	their	cry	goes	up,	“How	long?”
And	soon	the	night	of	weeping	shall	be	the	morn	of	song.
The	church	shall	never	perish!	Her	dear	Lord	to	defend,
To	guide,	sustain	and	cherish,	is	with	her	to	the	end;
Though	there	be	those	that	hate	her,	and	false	sons	in	her	pale,
Against	or	foe	or	traitor	she	ever	shall	prevail.
’Mid	toil	and	tribulation,	and	tumult	of	her	war,
She	waits	the	consummation	of	peace	forevermore;
Til	with	the	vision	glorious	her	longing	eyes	are	blest,
And	the	great	church	victorious	shall	be	the	church	at	rest.
Yet	she	on	earth	hath	union	with	God	the	Three	in	One,
And	mystic	sweet	communion	with	those	whose	rest	is	won:
O	happy	ones	and	holy!	Lord,	give	us	grace	that	we,
Like	them,	the	meek	and	lowly,	on	high	may	dwell	with	thee.
AUTHOR:	SAMUEL	J.	STONE,	1866
NOTES
1
See	
section	5
	for	a	discussion	of	the	dispensational	view	that	the	church	and	Israel	must	be	thought	of	as	distinct	groups.	In	this
book,	I	have	taken	a	non–dispensational	position	on	that	question,	though	it	should	be	pointed	out	that	many	evangelicals	who
agree	with	much	of	the	rest	of	this	book	will	differ	with	me	on	this	particular	question.
2
In	fact,	the	Greek	word	
ekklēsia,	
the	term	translated	“church”	in	the	New	Testament,	is	the	word	that	the	Septuagint	most
frequently	uses	to	translate	the	Old	Testament	term	
qāhal,	
the	word	used	to	speak	of	the	“congregation”	or	the	“assembly”	of
God’s	people.	
Ekklēsia	
translates	
qāhal,	
“assembly,”	69	times	in	the	Septuagint.	The	next	most	frequent	translation	is	
synagōge,
“synagogue”	or	“meeting,	place	of	meeting”	(37	times).
Chafer	objects	to	this	analysis,	for	he	says	that	the	Septuagint	use	of	the	word	
ekklēsia	
does	not	reflect	the	New	Testament
meaning	of	the	word	“church”	but	is	a	common	term	for	an	“assembly.”	Therefore	we	should	not	call	the	“assembly”	in	the
theater	at	Ephesus	a	church	(Acts	19:32)	even	though	the	word	
ekklēsia	
is	used	there	to	refer	to	that	group	of	people.	Similarly,
when	Stephen	refers	to	Israel	in	the	wilderness	(Acts	7:38)	as	an	
ekklēsia,	
it	does	not	imply	that	he	thinks	of	it	as	a	“church”	but
only	an	assembly	of	people.	Chafer	sees	this	usage	of	the	term	as	different	from	its	distinctive	New	Testament	meaning	to	refer	to
the	church	(
Systematic	Theology,	
4:39).	However,	the	extensive	use	of	the	word	
ekklēsia	
in	the	Septuagint	to	refer	to	assemblies
not	of	pagan	mobs	but	specifically	of	God’s	people	certainly	must	be	taken	into	account	in	understanding	the	meaning	of	the	word
when	used	by	New	Testament	authors.	The	Septuagint	was	the	Bible	that	they	most	commonly	used,	and	they	are	certainly	using
the	word	
ekklēsia	
with	awareness	of	its	Old	Testament	content.	This	would	explain	why	Luke	can	so	easily	record	Stephen	as
referring	to	the	“church”	in	the	wilderness	with	Moses	and	yet	many	times	in	the	surrounding	chapters	in	Acts	speak	of	the	growth
of	the	“church”	after	Pentecost	with	no	indication	that	there	is	any	difference	in	meaning	intended.	The	New	Testament	church	is
an	assembly	of	God’s	people	that	simply	continues	in	the	pattern	of	assemblies	of	God’s	people	found	throughout	the	Old
Testament.
3
The	Greek	word	
ekklēsia,	
translated	“church”	in	the	New	Testament,	simply	means	“assembly.”
4
For	a	discussion	of	the	question	of	whether	there	remains	a	distinction	between	“the	church”	and	“Israel”	as	two	separate	peoples
of	God,	see	
section	5
.
Millard	Erickson,	
Christian	Theology,	
p.	1048,	argues	that	the	church	does	not	start	until	Pentecost	because	Luke	does	not	use	the
word	“church”	(
ekklēsia
)	in	his	gospel,	but	uses	it	twenty-four	times	in	Acts.	If	the	church	existed	before	Pentecost,	he	reasons,
why	did	Luke	not	speak	of	it	before	that	time?	Yet	the	reason	Luke	did	not	use	the	word	“church”	to	speak	of	the	people	of	God
during	Jesus’	earthly	ministry	is	probably	because	there	was	no	clearly	defined	or	visible	group	to	which	it	could	refer	during
Jesus’	earthly	ministry.	The	true	church	
did	
exist	in	the	sense	that	it	consisted	of	all	true	believers	in	Israel	during	that	time,	but
this	was	such	a	small	remnant	of	faithful	Jews	(such	as	Joseph	and	Mary,	Zechariah	and	Elizabeth,	Simeon,	Anna,	and	others	like
them),	that	it	was	not	an	outwardly	evident	or	well-defined	group	at	all.	Large	segments	of	the	Jewish	population	had	strayed	from
God	and	had	substituted	other	kinds	of	religious	activities,	such	as	legalism	(the	Pharisees),	unbelieving	“liberalism”	(the
Sadducees),	speculative	mysticism	(those	who	wrote	or	believed	apocalyptic	literature	and	followers	of	sects	such	as	those	in	the
Qumran	community),	crass	materialism	(the	tax	collectors	and	others	for	whom	wealth	was	a	false	god),	or	political	or	military
activism	(the	Zealots	and	others	who	sought	salvation	through	political	or	military	means).	Though	there	were	no	doubt	genuine
believers	among	many	or	all	of	these	groups,	the	nation	as	a	whole	did	not	constitute	an	assembly	of	people	who	worshiped	God
rightly.
Moreover,	the	idea	of	a	people	of	God	newly	“called	out”	as	an	assembly	to	follow	Christ	first	came	to	fruition	on	the	day	of
Pentecost.	Therefore,	although	the	“church”	in	the	sense	of	the	group	of	all	who	truly	believed	in	God	did	exist	before	the	day	of
Pentecost,	it	came	to	much	clearer	visible	expression	on	the	day	of	Pentecost,	and	it	is	natural	that	Luke	should	begin	to	use	the
name	“the	church”	at	that	point.	Before	that	point	the	name	“church”	could	not	have	referred	to	any	clearly	established	entity	apart
from	the	nation	of	Israel	as	a	whole;	after	Pentecost,	however,	it	readily	could	be	used	to	refer	to	those	who	willingly	and	visibly
identified	themselves	with	this	new	people	of	God.
We	should	also	note	that	Jesus	did	use	the	word	“church”	(
ekklēsia
)	twice	in	Matthew’s	gospel	(16:18	and	18:17).
5
The	full	text	of	the	Bishops’	statement	can	be	obtained	from	the	National	Catholic	News	Service,	1312	Massachusetts	Avenue
NW,	Washington,	D.C.	20005.	The	text	was	published	in	“Pastoral	Statement	for	Catholics	on	Biblical	Fundamentalism,”	in
Origins	
vol.	17:21	(Nov.	5,	1987),	pp.	376–77.
6
John	Calvin,	
Institutes	
4.2.2–3,	pp.	1043,	1045.
7
Both	Calvin	and	Luther	would	add	the	third	qualification	that	those	who	are	considered	part	of	the	visible	church	must	partake	of
the	sacraments	of	baptism	and	the	Lord’s	Supper.	Others	might	consider	this	as	a	subcategory	of	the	requirement	that	people	give
evidence	of	faith	in	their	life.
8
Quoted	in	John	Calvin,	
Institutes	
4.1.8	(p.	
1022).
9
John	Calvin,	
Institutes,	
4.1.8	(pp.	1022–23).
10
There	is	a	textual	variant	among	the	Greek	manuscripts	of	Acts	9:31,	with	some	manuscripts	having	“the	church”	and	some
having	“the	churches.”	The	singular	reading	“the	church”	is	far	preferable	to	the	variant	that	has	the	plural.	The	singular	reading	is
given	a	“B”	probability	(next	to	highest	degree	of	probability)	in	the	United	Bible	Societies’	text.	The	singular	is	represented	by
many	early	and	diverse	texts	while	the	plural	reading	is	found	in	the	Byzantine	text	tradition	but	in	no	texts	before	the	fifth
century	A.D.	(In	order	for	the	grammar	to	be	consistent,	six	words	have	to	be	changed	in	the	Greek	text;	therefore	the	variant	is	an
intentional	alteration	in	one	direction	or	the	other.)
11
For	more	discussion	of	this	topic	see	Edmund	P.	Clowney,	“Interpreting	the	Biblical	Models	of	the	Church,”	in	
Biblical
Interpretation	and	the	Church,	
ed.	by	D.	A.	Carson	(Nashville:	Thomas	Nelson,	1985),	pp.	64–109.
12
The	list	of	metaphors	given	in	this	section	is	not	intended	to	be	exhaustive.
13
This	second	metaphor	is	not	even	a	complete	or	“proper”	metaphor,	for	bodily	parts	do	not	grow	up	into	the	head,	but	Paul	is
mixing	the	idea	of	Christ’s	headship	(or	authority),	the	idea	of	the	church	as	a	body,	and	the	idea	that	we	grow	to	maturity	in
Christ,	and	he	combines	them	into	one	complex	statement.
14
Lewis	Sperry	Chafer,	
Systematic	Theology.	
Although	there	are	several	other	distinctive	doctrines	that	usually	characterize
dispensationalists,	the	distinction	between	Israel	and	the	church	as	two	groups	in	God’s	overall	plan	is	probably	the	most
important.	Other	doctrines	held	by	dispensationalists	usually	include	a	pretribulational	rapture	of	the	church	into	heaven	(see
chapter	54
),	a	future	literal	fulfillment	of	Old	Testament	prophecies	concerning	Israel,	the	dividing	of	biblical	history	into	seven
periods	or	“dispensations”	of	God’s	ways	of	relating	to	his	people,	and	an	understanding	the	church	age	as	a	parenthesis	in	God’s
plan	for	the	ages,	a	parenthesis	instituted	when	the	Jews	largely	rejected	Jesus	as	their	Messiah.	However,	many	present-day
dispensationalists	would	qualify	or	reject	several	of	these	other	distinctives.	Dispensationalism	as	a	system	began	with	the
writings	of	J.	N.	Darby	(1800–1882)	in	Great	Britain,	but	was	popularized	in	the	USA	through	the	Scofield	Reference	Bible.
15
Chafer,	
Systematic	Theology,	
4:45–53.
16
See	Robert	L.	Saucy,	
The	Case	for	Progressive	Dispensationalism	
(Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1993),	and	Darrell	L.	Bock	and
Craig	A.	Blaising,	eds.,	
Progressive	Dispensationalism	
(Wheaton:	Victor,	1993).	See	also	John	S.	Feinberg,	ed.,	
Continuity	and
Discontinuity:	Perspectives	on	the	Relationship	Between	the	Old	and	New	Testaments	
(Wheaton:	Crossway,	1988).
17
See	
chapter	54
,	where	I	affirm	the	conviction	that	Rom.	9–11	teaches	a	future	large-scale	conversion	of	the	Jewish	people,	even
though	I	am	not	a	dispensationalist	in	the	commonly	understood	sense	of	that	term.
18
Chafer’s	term	is	“an	intercalation,”	meaning	an	insertion	of	a	period	of	time	into	a	previously	planned	schedule	or	calendar	of
events	(p.	41).	Here	Chafer	says,	“The	present	age	of	the	church	is	an	intercalation	into	the	revealed	calendar	or	program	of	God
as	that	program	was	foreseen	by	the	prophets	of	old.”
19
The	“Dispersion”	was	a	term	used	to	refer	to	the	Jewish	people	scattered	abroad	from	the	land	of	Israel	and	living	throughout
the	ancient	Mediterranean	world.
20
The	remainder	of	this	paragraph	is	largely	taken	from	Wayne	Grudem,	
The	First	Epistle	of	Peter,	
p.	113.
21
A	dispensationalist	may	grant	at	this	point	that	the	church	has	been	the	recipient	of	many	
applications	
of	Old	Testament
prophecies	concerning	Israel,	but	that	the	true	
fulfillment	
of	these	promises	will	yet	come	in	the	future	for	ethnic	Israel.	But	with
all	these	evident	New	Testament	examples	of	clear	application	of	these	promises	to	the	church,	there	does	not	seem	to	be	any
strong	reason	to	deny	that	this	really	is	the	only	fulfillment	that	God	is	going	to	give	for	these	promises.
22
George	Eldon	Ladd,	
A	Theology	of	the	New	Testament,	
p.	111.
23
These	five	points	are	summarized	from	Ladd,	
Theology,	
pp.	111–19.
24
Quoted	from	Philip	Schaff,	
The	Creeds	of	Christendom,	
pp.	11–12.
25
Calvin,	
Institutes	
4.1.9	(p.	1023).
26
Later	confessions	sometimes	added	a	third	mark	of	the	church	(the	right	exercise	of	church	discipline),	but	neither	Luther	nor
Calvin	themselves	listed	this	mark.
27
The	Salvation	Army	is	an	unusual	case	because	it	does	not	observe	baptism	or	the	Lord’s	Supper,	yet	it	seems	in	every	other
way	to	be	a	true	church.	In	this	case	the	organization	has	substituted	other	means	of	signifying	membership	and	continuing
participation	in	the	church,	and	these	other	means	of	signifying	membership	provide	a	substitute	for	baptism	and	the	Lord’s
Supper	in	terms	of	“membership	controls.”
28
Significant	doctrinal	differences	would	still	include	matters	such	as	the	continuing	sacrifice	of	the	mass,	the	authority	of	the
pope	and	the	church	councils,	the	veneration	of	the	Virgin	Mary	and	her	role	in	redemption,	the	doctrine	of	purgatory,	and	the
extent	of	the	biblical	canon.
29
A	similar	conclusion	was	expressed	by	J.	Gresham	Machen	as	long	ago	as	1923:	“The	Church	of	Rome	may	represent	a
perversion	of	the	Christian	religion;	but	naturalistic	liberalism	is	not	Christianity	at	all”	(
Christianity	and	Liberalism	
(Grand
Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1923),	p.	52).
30
In	the	next	chapter	we	shall	discuss	the	question	of	the	purity	of	the	church.	Although	Christians	should	not	voluntarily
associate	with	a	false	church,	we	must	recognize	that	among	true	churches	there	are	more-pure	and	less-pure	churches	(see
discussion	in	
chapter	45
,	below).	It	is	also	important	to	note	here	that	some	liberal	Protestant	denominations	today	can	have	many
false	churches	within	the	denomination	(churches	where	the	gospel	is	not	preached	or	heard)	and	still	have	some	local
congregations	that	preach	the	gospel	clearly	and	faithfully	and	are	true	churches.
31
I	do	not	mean	to	say	that	evangelism	is	more	important	than	worship	or	nurture,	but	only	that	it	is	our	primary	ministry	towards
the	world.
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	45
The	Purity	and	Unity	of	the	Church
What	makes	a	church	more	or	less	pleasing	to	God?	What	kinds	of
churches	should	we	cooperate	with	or	join?
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
A.	More	Pure	and	Less	Pure	Churches
In	the	previous	chapter	we	saw	that	there	are	“true	churches”	and
“false	churches.”	In	this	chapter	a	further	distinction	must	be	made:
there	are	
more	pure	
and	
less	pure	
churches.
This	fact	is	evident	from	a	brief	comparison	of	Paul’s	epistles.
When	we	look	at	Philippians	or	1	Thessalonians	we	find	evidence
of	Paul’s	great	joy	in	these	churches	and	the	relative	absence	of
major	doctrinal	or	moral	problems	(see	Phil.	1:3–11;	4:10–16;	1
Thess.	1:2–10;	3:6–10;	2	Thess.	1:3–4;	2:13;	cf.	2	Cor.	8:1–5).	On
the	other	hand,	there	were	all	sorts	of	serious	doctrinal	and	moral
problems	in	the	churches	of	Galatia	(Gal.	1:6–9;	3:1–5)	and	Corinth
(1	Cor.	3:1–4;	4:18–21;	5:1–2,	6;	6:1–8;	11:17–22;	14:20–23;
15:12;	2	Cor.	1:23–2:11;	11:3–5,	12–15;	12:20–13:10).	Other
examples	could	be	given,	but	it	should	be	clear	that	among	true
churches	there	are	
less	pure	
and	
more	pure	
churches.	This	may	be
represented	as	in	figure	45.1.
AMONG	THE	CHURCHES	THERE	ARE	LESS	PURE	AND	MORE	PURE	CHURCHES
Figure	45.1
B.	Definitions	of	Purity	and	Unity
We	may	define	the	purity	of	the	church	as	follows:	
The	purity	of	the
church	is	its	degree	of	freedom	from	wrong	doctrine	and	conduct,
and	its	degree	of	conformity	to	God’s	revealed	will	for	the	church.
As	we	shall	see	in	the	following	discussion,	it	is	right	to	pray	and
work	for	the	greater	purity	of	the	church.	But	purity	cannot	be	our
only	concern,	or	Christians	would	have	a	tendency	to	separate	into
tiny	groups	of	very	“pure”	Christians	and	tend	to	exclude	anyone
who	showed	the	slightest	deviation	in	doctrine	or	conduct	of	life.
Therefore	the	New	Testament	also	speaks	frequently	about	the	need
to	strive	for	the	
unity	
of	the	visible	church.	This	may	be	defined	in
the	following	way:	
The	unity	of	the	church	is	its	degree	of	freedom
from	divisions	among	true	Christians.
The	definition	specifies	“true	Christians”	because,	as	we	saw	in	the
previous	chapter,	there	are	those	who	are	Christian	in	name	only,
but	have	had	no	genuine	experience	of	regeneration	by	the	Holy
Spirit.	Nonetheless,	many	of	these	people	take	the	name	“Christian”
and	many	churches	that	are	filled	with	such	unbelievers	still	call
themselves	Christian	churches.	We	should	not	expect	or	work	for
organizational	or	functional	unity	that	includes	all	of	those	people,
and	therefore	there	will	never	be	unity	with	all	churches	that	call
themselves	“Christian.”	But,	as	we	shall	also	see	in	the	following
discussion,	the	New	Testament	certainly	encourages	us	to	work	for
the	unity	of	all	true	believers.
C.	Signs	of	a	More	Pure	Church
Factors	that	make	a	church	“more	pure”	include:
	1.	Biblical	doctrine	(or	right	preaching	of	the	Word)
	2.	Proper	use	of	the	sacraments	(or	ordinances)
	3.	Right	use	of	church	discipline
	4.	Genuine	worship
	5.	Effective	prayer
	6.	Effective	witness
	7.	Effective	fellowship
	8.	Biblical	church	government
	9.	Spiritual	power	in	ministry
10.	Personal	holiness	of	life	among	members
11.	Care	for	the	poor
12.	Love	for	Christ
There	may	be	other	signs	than	these,	but	at	least	these	can	be
mentioned	as	factors	that	increase	a	church’s	conformity	to	God’s
purposes.	Of	course,	churches	can	be	more	pure	in	some	areas	and
less	pure	in	others—a	church	may	have	excellent	doctrine	and
sound	preaching,	for	example,	yet	be	a	dismal	failure	in	witness	to
others	or	in	meaningful	worship.	Or	a	church	may	have	a	dynamic
witness	and	very	God-honoring	times	of	worship	but	be	weak	in
doctrinal	understanding	and	Bible	teaching.
Most	churches	will	tend	to	think	that	the	areas	in	which	they	are
strong	are	the	most	important	areas,	and	the	areas	where	they	are
weak	are	less	important.	But	the	New	Testament	encourages	us	to
work	for	the	purity	of	the	church	in	all	of	these	areas.	Christ’s	goal
for	the	church	is	“
that	he	might	sanctify	her,	
having	cleansed	her	by
the	washing	of	water	with	the	word,	
that	he	might	present	the
church	to	himself	
in	splendor,	
without	spot	or	wrinkle	or	any	such
thing,	
that	she	might	be	holy	and	without	blemish”	(Eph.	5:26–27).
Paul’s	ministry	was	one	of	“warning	every	man	and	teaching	every
man	in	all	wisdom,	that	we	may	present	every	man	mature	in
Christ”	(Col.	1:28).	Moreover,	Paul	told	Titus	that	elders	must	“be
able	to	give	instruction	in	sound	doctrine	and	also	to	confute	those
who	contradict	it”	(Titus	1:9),	and	he	said	that	false	teachers	“must
be	silenced”	(Titus	1:11).	Jude	urged	Christians	to	“contend	for	the
faith	which	was	once	for	all	delivered	to	the	saints”	(Jude	3).	Proper
use	of	the	sacraments	is	commanded	in	1	Corinthians	11:17–34,	and
right	use	of	church	discipline	to	protect	the	purity	of	the	church	is
required	in	1	Corinthians	5:6–7,	12–13.
The	New	Testament	also	mentions	a	number	of	other	factors:	we
are	to	strive	for	spiritual	worship	(Eph.	5:18–20;	Col.	3:16–17),
effective	witness	(Matt.	28:19–20;	John	13:34–35;	Acts	2:44–47;	1
John	4:7),	proper	government	of	the	church	(1	Tim.	3:1–13),
spiritual	power	in	ministry	(Acts	1:8;	Rom.	1:16;	1	Cor.	4:20;	2
Cor.	10:3–4;	Gal.	3:3–5;	2	Tim.	3:5;	James	5:16),	personal	holiness
(1	Thess.	4:3;	Heb.	12:14),	care	for	the	poor	(Acts	4:32–35;	Rom.
15:26;	Gal.	2:10),	and	love	for	Christ	(1	Peter	1:8;	Rev.	2:4).	In
fact,	all	Christians	are	to	“strive	to	excel	in	
building	up	the	church”
(1	Cor.	14:12),	an	exhortation	that	applies	not	only	to	an	increase	in
the	number	of	church	members,	but	also	(and	in	fact	primarily)	to
the	“edification”	or	growth	of	the	church	toward	Christian	maturity.
The	force	of	all	of	these	passages	is	to	remind	us	that	
we	are	to
work	for	the	purity	of	the	visible	church.
Of	course,	if	we	are	to	work	for	the	purity	of	the	church,	especially
of	the	local	church	of	which	we	are	a	part,	we	must	recognize	that
this	is	a	process,	and	that	any	church	of	which	we	are	a	part	will	be
somewhat	impure	in	various	areas.	There	were	no	perfect	churches
at	the	time	of	the	New	Testament	and	there	will	be	no	perfect
churches	until	Christ	returns.
1
	This	means	that	Christians	have	no
obligation	to	seek	the	
purest	church	
they	can	find	and	stay	there,
and	then	leave	it	if	an	even	purer	church	comes	to	their	attention.
Rather,	they	should	find	a	
true	church	
in	which	they	can	have
effective	ministry	and	in	which	they	will	experience	Christian
growth	as	well,	and	then	should	stay	there	and	minister,	continually
working	for	the	purity	of	that	church.	God	will	often	bless	their
prayers	and	faithful	witness	and	the	church	will	gradually	grow	in
many	areas	of	purity.
But	we	must	realize	that	not	all	churches	will	respond	well	to
influences	that	would	bring	them	to	greater	purity.	Sometimes,	in
spite	of	a	few	faithful	Christians	within	a	church,	its	dominant
direction	will	be	set	by	others	who	are	determined	to	lead	it	on
another	course.	Unless	God	graciously	intervenes	to	bring
reformation,	some	of	these	churches	will	become	cults,	and	others
will	just	die	and	close	their	doors.	But	more	commonly	these
churches	will	simply	drift	into	liberal	Protestantism.
It	is	helpful	at	this	point	to	remember	that	classical	liberal
Protestantism	is	humanistic,	and	its	approaches	are	
primarily	man-
centered	
rather	than	God-centered.
2
	When	a	church	begins	to	stray
from	faithfulness	to	Christ,	this	will	be	evident	not	only	in	the	shift
to	impure	doctrine	(which	can	sometimes	be	concealed	from	church
members	by	the	use	of	evasive	language)	but	also	in	the	daily	life
of	the	church:	its	activities,	its	preaching,	its	counseling,	and	even
the	casual	conversations	among	members	will	tend	to	become	more
and	more	man-centered	and	less	and	less	God-centered.	There	will
tend	to	be	a	repeated	emphasis	on	the	typical	kinds	of	self-help
advice	given	in	popular	journals	and	by	secular	psychologists.
There	will	be	a	horizontal	orientation	as	opposed	to	a	vertical	or
God-centered	orientation,	there	will	be	fewer	and	fewer	extended
times	of	prayer	and	less	and	less	emphasis	on	the	direct	application
of	Scripture	to	daily	situations,	but	more	emphasis	on	simply	being
a	caring	and	sensitive	person,	and	on	affirming	others	and	acting	in
love	toward	them.	The	conversation	and	activities	of	the	church
will	have	very	little	genuine	spiritual	content—little	emphasis	on
the	need	for	daily	prayer	for	individual	concerns	and	for
forgiveness	of	sins,	little	emphasis	on	daily	personal	reading	of
Scripture,	and	little	emphasis	on	moment-by-moment	trust	in	Christ
and	knowing	the	reality	of	his	presence	in	our	lives.	Where	there
are	admonitions	to	moral	reformation,	these	will	often	be	viewed	as
human	deficiencies	that	people	can	correct	by	their	own	discipline
and	effort,	and	perhaps	encouragement	from	others,	but	these	moral
aspects	of	life	will	not	primarily	be	viewed	as	sin	against	a	holy
God,	sin	which	can	only	effectively	be	overcome	by	the	power	of
the	Holy	Spirit	working	within.	When	such	humanistic	emphases
become	dominant	in	a	church,	it	has	moved	far	toward	the	“less-
pure”	end	of	the	scale	in	many	of	the	areas	listed	above,	and	it	is
moving	in	the	direction	of	becoming	a	false	church.
D.	New	Testament	Teaching	on	the	Unity	of	the	Church
There	is	a	strong	emphasis	in	the	New	Testament	on	the	unity	of	the
church.	Jesus’	goal	is	that	“there	shall	be	
one	flock,	one	shepherd”
(John	10:16),	and	he	prays	for	all	future	believers	“that	they	may	all
be	one”	(John	17:21).	This	unity	will	be	a	witness	to	unbelievers,
for	Jesus	prays	“that	they	may	become	
perfectly	one,	so	that	the
world	may	know	that	you	have	sent	me	
and	have	loved	them	even
as	you	have	loved	me”	(John	17:23).
Paul	reminds	the	Corinthians	that	they	are	“called	to	be	saints
together	with	all	those	who	in	every	place	call	on	the	name	of	our
Lord	Jesus	Christ,	
both	their	Lord	and	ours”	(1	Cor.	1:2).	Then	Paul
writes	to	Corinth,	“I	appeal	to	you,	brethren,	by	the	name	of	our
Lord	Jesus	Christ,	that	
all	of	you	agree	
and	that	there	be	no
dissensions	among	you,	but	
that	you	be	united	
in	the	same	mind
and	the	same	judgment”	(1	Cor.	1:10;	cf.	v.	
13).
He	encourages	the	Philippians,	“complete	my	joy	by	being	of	the
same	mind,	having	the	same	love,	
being	in	full	accord	and	of	one
mind”	
(Phil.	2:2).	He	tells	the	Ephesians	that	Christians	are	to	be
“eager	to	maintain	the	
unity	
of	the	Spirit	in	the	bond	of	peace”
(Eph.	4:3),	and	that	the	Lord	gives	gifts	to	the	church	“for	building
up	the	body	of	Christ,	
until	we	all	attain	to	the	unity	of	the	faith	and
of	the	knowledge	of	the	Son	of	God,	
to	mature	manhood,	to	the
measure	of	the	stature	of	the	fulness	of	Christ”	(Eph.	4:12–13).
Paul	can	
command	
the	church	to	live	in	unity	because	there	already
is	an	
actual	
spiritual	unity	in	Christ	which	exists	among	genuine
believers.	He	says,	“There	is	one	body	and	one	Spirit,	just	as	you
were	called	to	the	one	hope	that	belongs	to	your	call,	one	Lord,	one
faith,	one	baptism,	one	God	and	Father	of	us	all,	who	is	above	all
and	through	all	and	in	all”	(Eph.	4:4–6).	And	though	the	body	of
Christ	consists	of	many	members,	those	members	are	all	
“one
body”	
(1	Cor.	10:17;	12:12–26).
Because	they	are	jealous	to	protect	this	unity	of	the	church,	the
New	Testament	writers	give	strong	warnings	against	those	who
cause	divisions:
I	appeal	to	you,	brethren,	to	take	note	of	those	who	create	dissensions
and	difficulties,	in	opposition	to	the	doctrine	which	you	have	been
taught;	avoid	them.	For	such	persons	do	not	serve	our	Lord	Christ,	but
their	own	appetites.	(Rom.	16:17–18)
Paul	opposed	Peter	to	his	face	because	he	separated	from	Gentile	Christians
and	began	eating	only	with	Jewish	Christians	(Gal.	2:11–14).	Those	who
promote	“strife	.	.	.	dissension,	party	spirit	.	.	.	shall	not	inherit	the	kingdom	of
God”	(Gal.	5:20–21).	And	Jude	warns	that	those	who	“set	up	divisions”	are
“worldly	people,	devoid	of	the	Spirit”	(Jude	19).
Consistent	with	this	New	Testament	emphasis	on	the	unity	of
believers	is	the	fact	that	the	direct	commands	to	
separate	
from
other	people	are	always	commands	to	separate	
from	unbelievers,
not	from	Christians	with	whom	one	disagrees.	When	Paul	says,
“Therefore	come	out	from	them,	and	
be	separate	from	them”	
(2
Cor.	6:17),	it	is	in	support	of	his	opening	command	of	that	section,
“Do	not	be	mismated	
with	unbelievers”	
(2	Cor.	6:14).	And	Paul
tells	Timothy	that	he	is	to	“avoid	such	people”	(2	Tim.	3:5),
referring	not	to	believers	but	to	unbelievers,	those	who	are	“lovers
of	pleasure	rather	than	lovers	of	God,	holding	the	form	of	religion
but	denying	the	power	of	it”	(2	Tim.	3:4–5).	He	says	that	these
people	are	“men	of	corrupt	mind	and	counterfeit	faith”	(2	Tim.	3:8).
Of	course,	there	is	a	kind	of	church	discipline	that	requires
separation	from	an	individual	who	is	causing	trouble	within	the
church	(Matt.	18:17;	1	Cor.	5:11–13),	and	there	may	be	other
reasons	for	which	Christians	conclude	that	separation	is	required,
3
but	it	is	important	to	note	here,	in	discussing	the	unity	of	the
church,	that	there	are	no	direct	New	Testament	commands	to
separate	from	Christians	with	whom	one	has	doctrinal	differences
(unless	those	differences	involve	such	serious	heresy	that	the
Christian	faith	itself	is	denied).
4
These	passages	on	church	unity	tell	us	that,	in	addition	to	working
for	the	purity	of	the	visible	church,	
we	are	also	to	work	for	the	unity
of	the	visible	church.	
Yet	we	must	realize	that	such	unity	does	not
actually	require	one	worldwide	church	government	over	all
Christians.	In	fact,	the	unity	of	believers	is	often	demonstrated	quite
effectively	through	voluntary	cooperation	and	affiliation	among
Christian	groups.	Moreover,	different	types	of	ministries	and
different	emphases	in	ministry	may	result	in	different	organizations,
all	under	the	universal	headship	of	Christ	as	Lord	of	the	church.
Therefore	the	existence	of	different	denominations,	mission	boards,
Christian	educational	institutions,	college	ministries,	and	so	forth	is
not	necessarily	a	mark	of	disunity	of	the	church	(though	in	some
cases	it	may	be),	for	there	may	be	a	great	deal	of	cooperation	and
frequent	demonstrations	of	unity	among	such	diverse	bodies	as
these.	(I	think	the	modern	term	
parachurch	organization	
is
unfortunate,	because	it	implies	that	these	organizations	are
somehow	“beside”	and	therefore	“outside	of”	the	church,	whereas
in	reality	they	are	simply	different	parts	of	the	one	universal
church.)	Moreover,	many	Christians	argue	that	there	
should	not	
be	a
worldwide	government	of	the	church,	because	the	New	Testament
pattern	of	church	government	never	shows	elders	having	authority
over	any	more	than	their	own	local	congregations	(see	
chapter	47
).
In	fact,	even	in	the	New	Testament	the	apostles	agreed	that	Paul
should	emphasize	missionary	work	to	the	Gentiles	while	Peter
would	emphasize	missionary	work	to	the	Jews	(Gal.	2:7),	and	Paul
and	Barnabas	went	their	separate	ways	for	a	time	because	of	a
disagreement	over	whether	they	should	take	Mark	with	them	(Acts
15:39–40),	though	certainly	they	had	unity	in	every	other	way.
5
E.	Brief	History	of	Organizational	Separation	in	the	Church
There	are	sometimes	reasons	why	the	outward	or	visible	unity	of
the	church	cannot	be	maintained.	A	brief	survey	of	the	history	of
organizational	separation	in	the	church	may	highlight	some	of	these
reasons,
6
	and	help	explain	where	present-day	denominational
divisions	came	from.
During	the	first	thousand	years	of	the	church	there	was	for	the	most
part	outward	unity.	There	had	been	some	minor	divisions	during
controversies	with	groups	like	the	Montanists	(second	century)	and
the	Donatists	(fourth	century),	and	there	was	a	minor	separation	by
some	Monophysite	churches	(fifth	and	sixth	centuries),	but	the
prevailing	sentiment	was	one	of	strong	opposition	to	division	in	the
body	of	Christ.	For	example,	Irenaeus,	a	second	century	bishop,
said	about	those	who	cause	divisions	in	the	church,	“No
reformation	able	to	be	effected	by	them	will	be	of	great	enough
importance	to	compensate	for	the	damage	arising	from	their
schism”	(
Against	Heresies	
4.33.7).
The	first	major	division	in	the	church	came	in	A.D.	1054	when	the
Eastern	(now	Orthodox)	church	separated	from	the	Western
(Roman	Catholic)	church.	The	reason	was	that	the	pope	had
changed	a	church	creed	simply	on	his	own	authority,
7
	and	the
Eastern	church	protested	that	he	had	no	right	to	do	that.
The	Reformation	in	the	sixteenth	century	then	separated	the
Western	church	into	Roman	Catholic	and	Protestant	branches,	yet
there	was	often	a	strong	reluctance	to	cause	formal	division.	Martin
Luther	wanted	to	reform	the	church	without	dividing	it,	but	he	was
excommunicated	in	1521.	The	Anglican	(Episcopalian)	church	did
not	separate	from	Rome,	but	was	excommunicated	in	1570;	thus	it
can	say,	“We	suffer	schism,	we	did	not	cause	it.”	On	the	other	hand,
there	were	many	Protestants,	especially	among	the	Anabaptists,
who	wanted	to	form	churches	of	believers	only,	and	began	as	early
as	1525	to	form	separate	churches	in	Switzerland	and	then	other
parts	of	Europe.
In	the	centuries	following	the	Reformation,	Protestantism	splintered
into	hundreds	of	smaller	groups.	Sometimes	leaders	of	the	new
groups	regretted	such	divisions:	John	Wesley,	although	he	was	the
founder	of	Methodism,	claimed	that	he	lived	and	died	a	member	of
the	Anglican	church.	It	was	often	the	case	that	matters	of
conscience	or	religious	freedom	forced	the	division,	as	with	the
Puritans	and	many	Pietist	groups.	On	the	other	hand,	sometimes
language	differences	among	immigrant	groups	in	America	led	to
the	founding	of	separate	churches.
Have	the	reasons	for	separation	into	different	organizations	and
denominations	always	been	proper	ones?	Although	there	have
almost	always	been	strong	theological	differences	in	major	church
divisions,	one	fears	that	too	often,	especially	in	more	recent	history,
the	real	motives	for	beginning	or	maintaining	separation	have	been
selfish	ones,	and	that	John	Calvin	may	have	been	correct	in	saying,
“Pride	or	self-glorification	is	the	cause	and	starting	point	of	all
controversies,	when	each	person,	claiming	for	himself	more	than	he
is	entitled	to	have,	is	eager	to	have	others	in	his	power.”
8
	Moreover,
he	says,	“Ambition	has	been,	and	still	is,	the	mother	of	all	errors,	of
all	disturbances	and	sects.”
9
In	the	mid-twentieth	century	the	ecumenical	movement	sought
greater	organizational	unity	among	denominations,	but	without
noteworthy	success.	It	by	no	means	received	wholehearted	approval
or	support	from	evangelicals.	On	the	other	hand,	since	the	1960s,
the	growth	of	the	charismatic	movement	across	almost	all
denominational	lines,	the	rise	of	neighborhood	Bible	study	and
prayer	groups,	and	a	greatly	diminished	doctrinal	awareness	among
lay	people,	have	brought	about	a	remarkable	increase	in	actual
unity	of	fellowship—even	between	Protestants	and	Catholics—at
the	local	level.
Although	the	previous	paragraphs	spoke	of	separation	in	the	sense
of	(1)	the	formation	of	
separate	organizations,	
there	are	two	other,
more	severe	kinds	of	separation	that	should	be	mentioned:	(2)	“
No
cooperation”:	
in	this	case	a	church	or	Christian	organization
refuses	to	cooperate	in	joint	activities	with	other	churches
(activities	such	as	evangelistic	campaigns	or	joint	worship	services
or	mutual	recognition	of	ordination).	(3)	
“No	personal	fellowship”:
this	involves	the	extremely	strict	avoidance	of	all	personal
fellowship	with	members	of	another	church,	and	prohibits	any	joint
prayer	or	Bible	study,	and	sometimes	even	ordinary	social	contact,
with	members	of	another	church	group.	We	will	discuss	the
possible	reasons	for	these	kinds	of	separation	in	the	following
section.
F.	Reasons	for	Separation
As	we	examine	the	motives	people	have	had	for	church	separation
throughout	history,	and	as	we	compare	those	motives	with	the	New
Testament	requirements	that	we	seek	both	the	unity	and	the	purity
of	the	visible	church,	we	can	find	
both	right	and	wrong	reasons	for
separation.	
Wrong	reasons	would	include	such	things	as	personal
ambition	and	pride,	or	differences	on	minor	doctrines	or	practices
(doctrinal	or	behavioral	patterns	that	would	not	affect	any	other
doctrine	and	that	would	not	have	a	significant	effect	on	the	way	one
lives	the	Christian	life).
10
On	the	other	hand,	there	are	some	reasons	for	separation	that	we
may	consider	to	be	right	(or	possibly	right,	depending	on	the
specific	circumstances).	In	most	cases	these	reasons	will	flow	from
the	need	to	work	for	the	purity	of	the	church	as	well	as	its	unity.
These	reasons	for	separation	can	be	considered	in	three	categories:
(1)	doctrinal	reasons;	(2)	reasons	of	conscience;	(3)	practical
considerations.	In	the	following	section,	I	have	listed	some
situations	where	it	seems	to	me	that	Christians	would	be	
required	
to
leave	a	church.	Then	I	have	listed	some	other	situations	that	seem
to	me	less	clear,	in	which	some	Christians	may	think	it	
wise	
to
leave	a	church,	and	others	will	think	it	
unwise.	
In	these	less-clear
cases,	I	have	generally	not	drawn	any	conclusions,	but	simply	listed
the	kinds	of	factors	that	Christians	will	want	to	consider.
1.
	Doctrinal	Reasons.
	A	need	for	separation	may	arise	when	the	doctrinal
position	of	a	church	deviates	from	biblical	standards	in	a	serious	way.	This
deviation	may	be	in	official	statements	or	in	actual	belief	and	practice,	insofar
as	that	can	be	determined.	But	when	does	doctrinal	deviation	become	so
serious	that	it	requires	withdrawing	from	a	church	or	forming	a	separate
church?	As	we	noted	above,	there	are	no	commands	in	the	New	Testament	to
separate	from	any	true	church,	so	long	as	it	is	still	a	part	of	the	body	of	Christ.
Paul’s	response	even	to	people	in	erring	churches	(even	in	churches	like	the
one	at	Corinth,	which	tolerated	serious	doctrinal	and	moral	error,	and	for	a
time	tolerated	some	who	rejected	Paul’s	apostolic	authority)	is	not	to	tell
faithful	Christians	to	separate	from	those	churches,	but	to	admonish	the
churches,	work	for	their	repentance,	and	pray	for	them.	Of	course	there	are
commands	to	discipline	those	who	cause	trouble	within	the	church,
sometimes	by	excluding	them	from	church	fellowship	(1	Cor.	5:11–13;	2
Thess.	3:14–15;	Titus	3:10–11),	but	there	are	no	instructions	to	leave	the
church	and	cause	division	if	this	cannot	be	done	immediately	(see	Rev.	2:14–
16,	20–25;	cf.	Luke	9:50;	11:23).
Second	John	10–11,	which	forbids	the	receiving	of	false	teachers,
makes	perhaps	the	strongest	statement	in	the	entire	New	Testament:
“Do	not	take	him	into	your	house	or	welcome	him.	Anyone	who
welcomes	him	shares	in	his	wicked	work”	(NIV).	But	it	should	be
noted	that	such	a	visitor	is	teaching	a	serious	heresy	about	the
person	of	Christ,	one	that	prevents	people	from	having	saving	faith.
(John	is	talking	about	anyone	who	“does	not	abide	in	the	doctrine
of	Christ”	and	“does	not	have	God”	[v.	
9].)	Moreover,	this	verse
refers	to	false	teachers,	not	to	all	individuals	who	hold	false	beliefs,
because	it	speaks	of	someone	who	comes	to	you	and	“does	not
bring	this	doctrine”	(v.	
10;	cf.	v.	
7,	“Many	deceivers	have	gone	out
into	the	world,	men	who	will	not	acknowledge	the	coming	of	Jesus
Christ	in	the	flesh”).	John	even	uses	the	word	
antichrist	
for	such
teachers.	Finally,	the	greeting	John	has	in	mind	refers	either	to	an
official	church	greeting	or	one	that	would	give	an	appearance	of
endorsement	of	this	doctrine,	because	the	prohibition	talks	about
someone	who	“
comes	to	you	
and	does	not	
bring	this	doctrine”	
(v.
10),	which	suggests	that	the	person	in	view	is	a	traveling	teacher
who	comes	not	to	an	individual	home	but	to	address	the	church	as	a
whole.
11
On	the	principle	of	separation	from	unbelievers	or	from
fundamental	error	that	would	involve	the	denial	of	the	Christian
faith,	Christians	would	seem	to	be	
required	
on	doctrinal	grounds	to
withdraw	from	a	church	and	join	or	form	a	new	organization	only
when	the	doctrinal	error	is	so	serious	and	so	pervasive	that	the
parent	church	
has	become	a	false	church,	
no	longer	part	of	the	body
of	Christ.	This	would	be	a	church	which	is	no	longer	a	fellowship
of	true	believers,	no	longer	a	true	part	of	the	body	of	Christ,	or	no
longer	a	place	where	those	who	believe	its	teachings	will	find
salvation.
12
	In	the	case	of	leaving	a	false	church,	those	who
separate	will	claim	that	in	fact	they	have	not	
left	
the	true	church,	but
that	they	
are	
the	true	church,	and	that	the	parent	organization	has
left	by	means	of	its	error.	In	fact,	both	Luther	and	Calvin	eventually
said	that	the	Roman	Catholic	Church	was	not	a	true	church.
However,	even	when	withdrawal	or	separation	is	not	absolutely
required,	many	Christians	may	find	that	it	is	
wise	
or	
expedient	
to
withdraw	before	the	church	has	become	a	false	church,	but	when
serious	doctrinal	deviation	occurs.	For	instance,	some	would	argue
that	doctrinal	deviation	has	become	intolerable	whenever	heretical
views	on	major	doctrines	(such	as	the	Trinity,	the	person	of	Christ,
the	atonement,	the	resurrection,	etc.)	can	be	advocated	by	a	church
leader	without	causing	him	to	be	subject	to	church	discipline	or	to
exclusion	from	the	fellowship	of	the	church.	In	other	cases	many
would	say	that	separation	should	occur	when	the	church	as	a	body
publicly	approves	of	some	serious	doctrinal	or	moral	error	(such	as
endorsing	a	doctrinal	error	in	a	church	creed	or	statement	of	faith).
However,	other	Christians	would	not	think	separation	to	be	wise	or
expedient	in	such	cases,	but	would	advocate	praying	and	working
for	revival	and	reformation	within	the	church,	and	giving	clear
public	statements	of	disagreement	with	any	doctrinal	error	that	has
been	tolerated.	In	such	cases,	those	who	decide	to	stay	and	those
who	decide	they	must	leave	should	both	recognize	that	God	may
call	different	Christians	to	different	roles	and	ministries,	and
therefore	to	different	decisions,	and	we	would	do	well	to	give
considerable	freedom	to	others	to	seek	God’s	wisdom	in	such	a	case
and	to	obey	it	as	they	best	understand	it	for	their	own	lives.
2.	Matters	of	Conscience.
	In	the	area	of	conscience,	if	a	Christian	had	no
freedom	to	preach	or	teach	as	his	or	her	conscience,	informed	by	Scripture,
would	dictate,	it	might	be	thought	that	separation	was	necessary	or	at	least
wise.	But	caution	and	great	humility	are	in	order	here:	individual	judgment
may	be	distorted,	especially	if	it	is	not	informed	by	the	consensus	of	faithful
believers	throughout	history,	and	by	the	counsel	of	believers	in	the	present.
Moreover,	the	command	in	2	Corinthians	6:14	not	to	be	yoked
together	with	unbelievers	could	also	require	a	person	to	separate	if
the	parent	church	became	so	dominated	by	those	who	gave	no
evidence	of	saving	faith	that	such	“yoking	together”	could	not	be
avoided.	In	this	passage	the	prohibition	against	being	“yoked
together”	with	unbelievers	forbids	not	mere	association	or	even
acceptance	of	help	(cf.	Luke	9:50,	but	also	3	John	7),	but	rather	
the
giving	up	of	control	over	one’s	activities	and	the	loss	of	freedom	to
act	in	obedience	to	God,	
for	these	restraints	are	what	is	implied	in
the	metaphor	of	being	“yoked”	together.	Some	people	might	also
find	it	necessary	or	at	least	wise	to	leave	a	church	on	the	basis	of
conscience	if	staying	implied	approval	of	some	unbiblical	doctrine
or	practice	within	the	church,	and	thereby	encouraged	others	to
follow	that	wrong	doctrine	or	practice.	But	others	may	think	it	right
to	stay	in	the	church	and	voice	clear	disapproval	of	the	faulty
doctrine.
In	other	cases,	some	have	argued	that	it	is	required	to	leave	a
denomination	when	a	higher	governing	authority	in	that
denomination,	which	one	has	promised	to	obey,	commands	an
action	which	is	clearly	sinful	(that	is,	an	action	which	is	clearly
contrary	to	Scripture).	In	such	a	case	some	would	say	that	leaving
the	denomination	is	the	only	way	to	avoid	doing	either	the	sinful	act
which	is	commanded	or	the	sinful	act	of	disobedience	to	those	in
authority.	But	this	does	not	seem	to	be	a	necessary	requirement,	for
many	Scripture	passages	could	be	cited	showing	that	disobedience
to	a	higher	authority	is	not	wrong	when	one	is	commanded	to	sin
(see	Acts	5:29;	Dan.	3:18;	6:10),	and	that	one	may	disobey	but
remain	in	the	parent	church	until	forced	out.
3.	Practical	Considerations.
	Christians	may	decide	to	separate	from	a	parent
church	if,	after	prayerful	consideration,	it	seems	that	staying	in	the	parent
church	will	very	likely	result	in	more	harm	than	good.	This	could	be	because
their	work	for	the	Lord	would	become	frustrated	and	ineffectual	due	to
opposition	to	it	from	within	the	parent	church,	or	because	they	would	find
little	or	no	fellowship	with	others	in	that	church.	Moreover,	some	may	decide
that	staying	in	the	church	would	harm	the	faith	of	other	believers	or	would
hinder	unbelievers	from	coming	to	true	faith	because	their	continued
affiliation	with	the	parent	church	would	seem	to	imply	approval	of	false
teachings	within	that	church.	Again,	Christians	might	find	themselves	in
situations	where	they	have	prayed	and	worked	for	change	for	some	time	but
there	seems	to	be	no	reasonable	hope	for	change	in	the	parent	church,	perhaps
because	the	present	leadership	group	is	resistant	to	correction	from	Scripture,
is	firmly	entrenched,	and	is	self-perpetuating.	In	all	of	these	situations	much
prayer	and	mature	judgment	will	be	required,	because	withdrawing	from	a
church,	especially	by	people	who	have	been	there	a	long	time	or	have
established	leadership	functions	in	the	church,	is	a	serious	action.
4.	Are	There	Times	When	Cooperation	and	Personal	Fellowship	Are
Prohibited?
	Finally,	when	should	Christians	take	stronger	steps	than	those
mentioned	above	and	engage	in	the	kind	of	separation	that	we	earlier	called
“no	cooperation”	or	“no	personal	fellowship”?	The	biblical	passages	we	have
looked	at	seem	to	require	that	Christians	practice	“no	cooperation”	in	certain
activities	with	another	group	only	when	the	other	group	is	an	unbelieving	one,
and	then,	it	seems,	only	when	the	unbelieving	group	shares	control	of	the
activity	(this	is	implied	in	the	metaphor	of	being	“yoked	together”	in	2	Cor.
6:14).	Of	course,	it	may	be	found	wise	or	expedient	on	other	grounds	to
decide	not	to	cooperate	in	a	particular	function,	but	non-cooperation	would
not	seem	to	be	required	except	when	the	other	group	is	an	unbelieving	one.
Certainly	
opposition	
to	activities	such	as	evangelistic	campaigns	by	other	true
believers	would	be	seen	by	the	New	Testament	authors	as	divisiveness	and	a
failure	to	demonstrate	the	unity	of	the	body	of	Christ.
13
The	third	and	most	extreme	kind	of	separation,	the	avoidance	of	all
personal	fellowship	with	members	of	another	entire	church	group,
is	never	commanded	in	the	New	Testament.	Such	an	extreme
measure	of	“no	fellowship”	is	only	implied	in	serious	cases	of
church	discipline	of	individuals,	not	in	cases	of	differences	with
entire	churches.
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
In	what	areas	is	your	own	church	“more	pure”?	In	what	areas	do	you
think	it	is	“less	pure”?
2
.	
On	a	scale	of	1	to	10	(1	equals	less	pure;	10	equals	more	pure),	where
would	you	rank	your	church	in	each	of	the	categories	that	mark	a	more-
pure	church?
3
.	
What	do	you	think	that	you	should	be	doing	in	order	to	work	for	greater
purity	in	your	own	church?	Does	the	fact	that	you	recognize	a	specific
need	in	the	church	mean	that	God	is	calling	you	(rather	than	someone
else)	to	meet	that	need?
4
.	
Do	you	know	of	other	churches	in	your	area	that	you	would	consider
more	pure	than	your	own?	What	are	the	reasons	that	you	might	think	it
right	to	stay	in	your	own	church	even	though	it	may	not	be	the	most	pure
church	you	know	of?
5
.	
Are	there	marks	of	a	more-pure	church	that	evangelicals	generally	in	this
century	have	been	negligent	in	emphasizing?
6
.	
Since	the	first	century,	do	you	think	that	by	and	large	the	church	has
continued	to	increase	in	purity	over	time?	Can	you	give	specific	reasons
to	support	your	answer?
7
.	
In	your	lifetime,	what	encouraging	signs	do	you	see	that	the	church	is
increasing	in	purity?	What	signs	do	you	see	that	the	church	is	increasing
in	unity?
8
.	
In	what	ways	do	you	think	your	own	local	church	could	grow	in	unity
among	its	members?
9
.	
In	what	ways	could	your	church	demonstrate	greater	unity	with	other
true	churches	in	the	same	geographical	area?	What	do	you	think	are	the
barriers	to	that	unity	(if	any)?	In	what	ways	could	that	unity	be
expressed?	What	might	be	the	benefits	of	such	expressions	of	unity?
10
.	
Are	you	in	a	church	where	you	have	wondered	if	God	would	have	you
leave	and	join	another	church?	After	reading	this	chapter,	do	you	now
think	that	you	should	stay	in	your	present	church	or	leave	it?	Has	there
been	significant	change	for	the	better	in	your	church	in	the	last	ten	years?
If	you	knew	that	the	church	were	to	remain	substantially	the	same	for	the
next	ten	years,	would	you	decide	to	stay	now	or	to	leave	it?
11
.	
What	are	some	ways	in	which	the	worldwide	unity	of	true	believers	is
already	being	expressed	and	demonstrated?	What	would	the	church
around	the	world	look	like	if	there	were	much	greater	demonstration	of
the	unity	of	the	church?	What	would	be	the	result	in	the	world	as	a
whole?
12
.	
If	a	community	already	has	several	active	and	effective	evangelical
churches,	is	there	any	justification	for	another	evangelical	denomination
to	attempt	to	plant	its	own	church	in	that	community?
13
.	
Do	you	think	it	hinders	evangelism	and	witness	to	society	generally
when	the	popular	culture	thinks	of	unbelieving	or	false	churches	and
believing	churches	both	as	“Christians”?	Can	anything	be	done	to
change	that	impression?
14
.	
What	kinds	of	unity	and	cooperation	can	appropriately	be	demonstrated
with	believers	within	the	Roman	Catholic	Church	today?	What	are	the
limits	to	such	cooperation?
SPECIAL	TERMS
Eastern	church
	
	
	
unity	of	the	church
purity	of	the	church
	
	
	
Western	church
separation
	
	
	
	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the
bibliography	to	chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be
found	in	
Appendix	4
.)
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92			Litton,	380–86,	413–18
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1875–76			Pope,	3:267–79
1940			Wiley,	3:112–13
1983			Carter,	2:594–95
3.			Baptist
1983–85			Erickson,	1129–46
4.			Dispensational
(no	explicit	treatment)
5.			Lutheran
1917–24			Pieper,	3:423–27
1934			Mueller,	556–62
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1559			Calvin,	2:1011–53	(4.1–2)
1861			Heppe,	670–72
1887–1921		Warfield,	
SSW,	
1:299–307
1937–66			Murray,	
CW,	
1:269–91;	
CW,	
2:321–36
1962			Buswell,	1:421–24
7.			Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988–92			Williams,	3:25–35
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955			Ott,	290–309
2.			Roman	Catholic:	Post-Vatican	II
1980			McBrien,	2:854–58
Other	Works
Bromiley,	G.	W.	“Unity.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	1127–28.
Carson,	Donald	A.	“Evangelicals,	Ecumenism	and	the	Church.”	In
Evangelical	Affirmations.	
Ed.	by	Kenneth	S.	Kantzer	and	Carl	F.	H.
Henry.	Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1990,	pp.	347–85.
Puritan	and	Reformed	Studies	Conference.	
Approaches	to	Reformation	of
the	Church.	
London:	
The	Evangelical	
magazine,	1965.	Contains	papers
by	D.	W.	Marshall,	D.	P.	Kingdon,	J.	I.	Packer,	G.	S.	R.	Cox,	S.	M.
Houghton,	and	D.	M.	Lloyd-Jones.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
Ephesians	4:14–16:	
So	that	we	may	no	longer	be	children,	tossed	to	and	fro
and	carried	about	with	every	wind	of	doctrine,	by	the	cunning	of	men,	by	their
craftiness	in	deceitful	wiles.	Rather,	speaking	the	truth	in	love,	we	are	to	grow
up	in	every	way	into	him	who	is	the	head,	into	Christ,	from	whom	the	whole
body,	joined	and	knit	together	by	every	joint	with	which	it	is	supplied,	when
each	part	is	working	properly,	makes	bodily	growth	and	upbuilds	itself	in
love.
HYMN
“Blest	Be	the	Tie	That	Binds”
This	hymn	speaks	of	the	unity	or	the	“tie”	that	binds	the	hearts	of
Christians	together	in	love.	It	continues	to	speak	of	fellowship	as
like	the	fellowship	of	heaven:	it	is	“like	to	that	above.”	It	also
speaks	of	sharing	in	prayer	and	concern	for	each	other	and	bearing
of	one	another’s	burdens.	The	hymn	goes	on	to	speak	of	our	hope
that	we	will	one	day	be	united	in	“perfect	love	and	friendship”	for
eternity	in	heaven.
Blest	be	the	tie	that	binds
Our	hearts	in	Christian	love:
The	fellowship	of	kindred	minds
Is	like	to	that	above.
Before	our	Father’s	throne
We	pour	our	ardent	prayers;
Our	fears,	our	hopes,	our	aims,	are	one,
Our	comforts	and	our	cares.
We	share	our	mutual	woes,
Our	mutual	burdens	bear,
And	often	for	each	other	flows
The	sympathizing	tear.
When	we	asunder	part,
It	gives	us	inward	pain;
But	we	shall	still	be	joined	in	heart,
And	hope	to	meet	again.
This	glorious	hope	revives
Our	courage	by	the	way,
While	each	in	expectation	lives,
And	longs	to	see	the	day.
From	sorrow,	toil	and	pain,
And	sin,	we	shall	be	free;
And	perfect	love	and	friendship	reign
Through	all	eternity.
AUTHOR:	JOHN	FAWCETT,	1782
NOTES
1
This	is	recognized	by	the	Westminster	Confession	of	Faith:	“The	purest	Churches	under	heaven	are	subject	both	to	mixture	and
error”	(25.5).
2
See	the	remarkably	accurate	analysis	by	J.	Gresham	Machen,	
Christianity	and	Liberalism	
(repr.	ed.,	Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,
1968;	first	published	in	1923),	esp.	pp.	64–68.
3
See	the	discussion	on	reasons	for	separation	in	
section	F
	above.
4
2	John	10	forbids	Christians	to	give	a	greeting	to	itinerant	heretical	teachers	who	were	not	proclaiming	the	true	gospel	at	all;	see
discussion	below.
5
Scripture	hints	that	Paul	was	right	and	Barnabas	wrong	in	this	controversy,	since	it	tells	us	that	Paul	and	Silas	left	Antioch	“being
commended	by	the	brethren	to	the	grace	of	the	Lord”	(Acts	15:40),	whereas	nothing	similar	is	said	about	Barnabas.	This	incident
is	simply	reported	in	Acts	but	is	not	strong	evidence	for	the	appropriateness	of	diversification	of	ministry,	since	the	report	of	a
“sharp	contention”	(v.	
39)	between	Paul	and	Barnabas	indicates	that	we	should	not	think	of	them	as	entirely	free	from	fault.
6
From	this	point	to	the	end	of	the	chapter	much	of	the	material	has	been	taken	from	the	article,	“Separation,	Ecclesiastical”	by
Wayne	Grudem,	prepared	for	
The	Tyndale	Encyclopedia	of	Christian	Knowledge	
(Wheaton,	Ill.:	Tyndale	House,	copyright	1971,
but	never	published).	Used	by	permission.
7
See	the	discussion	of	the	
filioque	
clause	in	
chapter	14
.
8
Commentary	on	1	Cor.	4:6.
9
Commentary	on	Num.	12:1.
10
See	
chapter	1
,	on	the	differences	between	major	and	minor	doctrines.
11
See	the	discussion	in	John	Stott,	
The	Epistles	of	John,	
TNTC	(London:	Tyndale	Press,	1964),	pp.	212–15.
12
After	saying	that	“The	purist	Churches	under	heaven	are	subject	both	to	mixture	and	error,”	the	Westminster	Confession	of
Faith	adds,	“and	some	have	so	degenerated,	as	to	become	no	Churches	of	Christ,	but	synagogues	of	Satan”	(25.5).
13
The	New	Testament	authors	would	probably	also	think	it	tragic	that	most	divisions	among	Protestants	have	come	about	or	been
maintained	today	because	of	differences	over	some	of	the	least	emphasized	and	least	clearly	taught	doctrines	in	the	New
Testament,	such	as	the	form	of	church	government,	the	exact	nature	of	Christ’s	presence	in	the	Lord’s	Supper,	and	the	details	of
the	end	times.	(Many	people	would	want	to	add	to	that	list:	differences	over	the	proper	subjects	for	baptism.)
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	46
The	Power	of	the	Church
What	kind	of	authority	does	the	church	have?	How	should	church
discipline	function?
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
When	we	look	at	the	powerful	governments	of	the	world	and	at
other	business	and	educational	organizations	that	have	great
influence,	and	then	consider	our	local	churches,	or	even	our
denominational	headquarters,	the	church	may	seem	to	us	to	be
weak	and	ineffective.	Moreover,	when	we	recognize	the	rapid
growth	of	evil	that	is	seen	daily	in	our	society,	we	may	wonder	if
the	church	has	power	to	make	any	changes	at	all.
On	the	other	hand,	in	some	countries	the	officially	recognized
church	has	great	influence	on	the	conduct	of	national	affairs.	This
was	certainly	true	of	the	influence	of	the	Roman	Catholic	Church	in
former	times	in	some	southern	European	and	Latin	American
countries	(and	is	still	true	today	to	some	extent).	It	was	true	of	the
Church	of	England	in	previous	centuries,	and	of	John	Calvin’s
church	in	Geneva,	Switzerland,	while	he	was	alive,	and	of	the
church	founded	by	the	pilgrims	in	the	Massachusetts	Bay	Colony	in
1620.	Situations	like	these	where	the	church	appears	to	have	great
influence	cause	us	to	ask	whether	Scripture	places	any	limitations
on	the	church’s	power.
We	may	define	the	power	of	the	church	as	follows:	
The	power	of
the	church	is	its	God-given	authority	to	carry	on	spiritual	warfare,
proclaim	the	gospel,	and	exercise	church	discipline.
Although	these	three	areas	overlap	and	could	be	treated	in	any
order,	since	the	category	of	“spiritual	warfare”	is	the	broader
category	it	will	be	treated	first.	This	perspective	on	the	church’s
power	also	reminds	us	that	the	power	of	the	church,	unlike	the
worldly	influence	exercised	by	human	armies	and	governments,
directly	affects	the	spiritual	realm.
A.	Spiritual	Warfare
Paul	reminds	the	Corinthians,	“For	though	we	live	in	the	world	we
are	not	carrying	on	a	worldly	war,	for	
the	weapons	of	our	warfare
are	not	worldly	but	have	divine	power	to	destroy	strongholds”	
(2
Cor.	10:3–4).	These	weapons,	used	against	demonic	forces	that
hinder	the	spread	of	the	gospel	and	the	progress	of	the	church,
include	such	things	as	prayer,	worship,	the	authority	to	rebuke
demonic	forces,	the	words	of	Scripture,	faith,	and	righteous	conduct
on	the	part	of	the	members	of	the	church.	(Paul	gives	further	details
about	our	spiritual	conflict	and	the	armor	we	wear	for	it	in	Eph.
6:10–18.)
When	we	consider	this	spiritual	power	in	a	broad	sense,	it	certainly
includes	the	power	of	the	gospel	to	break	through	sin	and	hardened
opposition	and	awaken	faith	in	the	hearts	of	unbelievers	(see	Rom.
10:17;	James	1:18;	1	Peter	1:23).	But	this	power	also	includes
spiritual	power	that	will	render	demonic	opposition	to	the	gospel
ineffective.	We	see	examples	of	this	in	Acts	13:8–11,	where	Paul
pronounced	judgment	on	Elymas	the	magician,	who	was	opposing
the	preaching	of	the	gospel,	and	in	Acts	16:16–18,	where	Paul
rebuked	an	evil	spirit	in	the	soothsaying	girl	who	was	annoying
Paul	while	he	proclaimed	the	gospel.
1
	Such	spiritual	power	to
defeat	evil	opposition	was	seen	frequently	in	the	early	church,	such
as	in	the	freeing	of	Peter	from	prison	(Acts	12:1–17),	and	perhaps
also	in	the	subsequent	judgment	on	King	Herod	Agrippa	I	(Acts
12:20–24).
2
Yet	Paul	realizes	that	he	can	use	this	spiritual	power	not	only
against	those	outside	the	church	who	oppose	the	gospel,	but	also
against	those	within	the	church	who	are	active	opponents	of	his
apostolic	ministry.	He	says	about	some	arrogant	troublemakers	in
the	church,	“I	will	come	to	you	soon,	if	the	Lord	wills,	and	I	will
find	out	not	the	talk	of	these	arrogant	people	but	their	power.	For
the	kingdom	of	God	does	not	consist	in	talk	but	in	power”	(1	Cor.
4:19–20).	Such	power	was	not	to	be	trifled	with,	for	it	was	the	same
power	of	the	Holy	Spirit	that	had	brought	death	to	Ananias	and
Sapphira	(Acts	5:1–11)	and	blindness	to	Elymas	(Acts	13:8–11).
Paul	did	not	wish	to	use	this	power	in	a	judgmental	capacity,	but	he
was	prepared	to	do	so	if	necessary.	Later	he	wrote	again	to	the
Corinthians	that	his	actions	when	present	would	be	as	powerful	as
his	letters	when	absent	(2	Cor.	10:8–11),	and	he	warned	those	who
opposed	his	authority	and	had	sinned	publicly	and	not	repented,	“If
I	come	again	I	will	not	spare	them—since	you	desire	proof	that
Christ	is	speaking	in	me.	.	.	.	For	we	are	weak	in	him,	but	in	dealing
with	you	we	shall	live	with	him	by	the	power	of	God”	(2	Cor.	13:2–
4).	He	then	adds	a	final	reminder	of	his	reluctance	to	use	this
authority,	telling	them	that	he	is	writing	before	he	comes	“in	order
that	when	I	come	I	may	not	have	to	be	severe	in	my	use	of	the
authority	which	the	Lord	has	given	me	for	building	up	and	not	for
tearing	down”	(2	Cor.	13:10).
Now	we	may	question	whether	the	church	today	has	the	same
degree	of	spiritual	power	that	the	apostles	Peter	or	Paul	did.
Certainly	there	is	a	distinction	between	the	apostles	and	the	other
early	Christians	even	in	the	book	of	Acts	(note	that	immediately
after	the	death	of	Ananias	and	Sapphira	“many	signs	and	wonders”
were	done	“by	the	hands	of	the	apostles,”	but	“None	of	the	rest
dared	join	them,	but	the	people	held	them	in	high	honor,”	Acts
5:12–13).	Moreover,	Paul	did	not	instruct	any	leaders	of	the	church
at	Corinth,	or	even	Timothy	or	Titus,	to	exercise	that	spiritual
power	at	Corinth	against	his	opponents.	He	spoke	about	the	power
which	the	Lord	“has	given	
me”	
(2	Cor.	13:10),	not	about	the	power
which	the	Lord	had	given	to	the	church	or	to	Christians	generally.
On	the	other	hand,	Paul	did	direct	the	Corinthian	church	to	exercise
church	discipline	in	a	case	of	incest	in	the	church	at	Corinth,	and	to
do	it	“when	you	are	assembled,	and	my	spirit	is	present,	with	the
power	of	our	Lord	Jesus”	(1	Cor.	5:4).	Moreover,	the	descriptions
of	spiritual	warfare	in	Ephesians	6:10–18	and	2	Corinthians	10:3–4
seem	applicable	to	Christians	generally,	and	few	today	would	deny
that	the	church	has	authority	to	pray	against	and	to	speak	with
authority	against	demonic	opposition	to	the	work	of	the	gospel.
3
	So
there	would	seem	to	be	at	least	some	significant	degree	of	spiritual
power	against	evil	opposition	that	God	is	willing	to	grant	to	the
church	in	every	age	(including	the	present	one).	Perhaps	it	is
impossible	to	define	more	specifically	the	degree	of	spiritual	power
God	will	grant	to	the	church	in	times	of	conflict	against	evil,	but	we
do	not	need	to	know	the	details	in	advance:	our	calling	is	simply	to
be	faithful	to	Scripture	in	praying	and	in	exercising	church
discipline,	and	then	to	leave	the	rest	in	God’s	hands,	knowing	that
he	will	grant	sufficient	power	to	accomplish	his	purposes	through
the	church.
B.	The	Keys	of	the	Kingdom
The	phrase	“the	keys	of	the	kingdom”	occurs	only	once	in	the
Bible,	in	Matthew	16:19,	where	Jesus	is	speaking	to	Peter:	“I	will
give	you	the	keys	of	the	kingdom	of	heaven;	and	whatever	you
shall	bind	on	earth	shall	have	been	bound	in	heaven	and	whatever
you	shall	loose	on	earth	shall	have	been	loosed	in	heaven”	(NASB).
What	is	the	meaning	of	these	“keys	of	the	kingdom	of	heaven”?
4
Elsewhere	in	the	New	Testament	a	key	always	implies	
authority	to
open	a	door	and	give	entrance	to	a	place	or	realm.	
Jesus	says,
“Woe	to	you	lawyers!	for	you	have	taken	away	the	key	of
knowledge;	you	did	not	enter	yourselves,	and	you	hindered	those
who	were	entering”	(Luke	11:52).	Moreover,	Jesus	says	in
Revelation	1:18,	“I	have	the	keys	of	Death	and	Hades,”	implying
that	he	has	the	authority	to	grant	entrance	and	exit	from	those
realms.	(Cf.	also	Rev.	3:7;	9:1;	20:1;	also	the	messianic	prediction
in	Isa.	22:22.)
The	“keys	of	the	kingdom	of	heaven”	therefore	represent	at	least
the	authority	to	preach	the	gospel	of	Christ	(cf.	Matt.	16:16)	and
thus	to	open	the	door	of	the	kingdom	of	heaven	and	allow	people	to
enter.
Peter	first	used	this	authority	by	preaching	the	gospel	at	Pentecost
(Acts	2:14–42).	But	the	other	apostles	also	were	given	this
authority	in	a	primary	sense	(they	wrote	the	gospel	in	permanent
form	in	the	New	Testament).	And	all	believers	have	this	“key”	in	a
secondary	sense,	for	they	can	all	share	the	gospel	with	others,	and
thereby	open	the	kingdom	of	heaven	to	those	who	will	enter	it.
But	is	there	any	other	authority,	in	addition	to	this,	that	Jesus
implies	by	the	phrase	“the	keys	of	the	kingdom	of	heaven”?	There
are	two	factors	suggesting	that	the	authority	of	the	keys	here	also
includes	
the	authority	to	exercise	discipline	within	the	church:	
(1)
The	plural	“keys”	suggests	authority	over	more	than	one	door.
Thus,	more	than	simply	entrance	into	the	kingdom	is	implied;	some
authority	
within	
the	kingdom	is	also	suggested.	(2)	Jesus	completes
the	promise	about	the	keys	with	a	statement	about	“binding”	and
“loosing,”	which	closely	parallels	another	saying	of	his	in	Matthew
18,	in	which	“binding”	and	“loosing”	mean	placing	under	church
discipline	and	releasing	from	church	discipline:
If	he	refuses	to	listen	even	to	the	church,	let	him	be	to	you	as	a
Gentile	and	a	tax-gatherer.	Truly	I	say	to	you,	whatever	you	shall	
bind
on	earth	shall	have	been	bound	in	heaven;	and	whatever	you	
loose	
on
earth	shall	have	been	loosed	in	heaven.	(Matt.	18:17–18	NASB)
But	if	“binding”	and	“loosing”	clearly	refer	to	church	discipline	in	Matthew
18,	then	it	seems	likely	that	they	would	also	refer	to	church	discipline	in
Matthew	16,	where	Jesus’	words	are	very	similar.
5
This	understanding	of	binding	and	loosing	in	terms	of	church
discipline	also	fits	the	context	of	Matthew	16:19,	for,	on	this
understanding,	after	promising	to	build	his	church	(v.	
18),	Jesus
promises	to	give	not	only	the	authority	to	open	the	door	of	entrance
into	the	kingdom,	but	also	some	administrative	authority	to	regulate
the	conduct	of	people	once	they	are	inside.
6
	Therefore	it	seems	that
“the	keys	of	the	kingdom	of	heaven”	which	Jesus	promised	to	Peter
in	Matthew	16:19	included	both	(1)	ability	to	admit	people	to	the
kingdom	through	preaching	the	gospel,	and	(2)	authority	to	exercise
church	discipline	for	those	who	do	enter.
In	Matthew	16:16–19,	Jesus	does	not	indicate	whether	the	authority
of	the	keys	will	later	be	given	to	others	besides	Peter.	But	certainly
the	authority	to	preach	the	gospel	is	given	to	others	at	a	later	time,
and	in	Matthew	18:18	Jesus	does	state	explicitly	that	the	authority
to	exercise	church	discipline	is	given	to	the	church	generally
whenever	it	meets	and	corporately	carries	out	such	discipline	(“Tell
it	to	the	church,”	Matt.	18:17).	Thus	both	aspects	of	the	authority	of
the	keys,	though	first	given	to	Peter,	were	soon	expanded	to	include
the	authority	given	to	the	church	as	a	whole.	In	preaching	the
gospel	and	in	exercising	discipline	the	church	now	exercises	the
authority	of	the	keys	of	the	kingdom.
What	persons	or	actions	are	subject	to	the	kind	of	church	discipline
implied	by	the	authority	of	the	keys?	In	both	Matthew	16:19	and
18:18,	the	term	“whatever”	is	neuter	in	Greek,	and	seems	to
indicate	that	Jesus	is	speaking	not	specifically	to	
persons
(“whoever,”	for	which	a	masculine	plural	would	be	ordinarily
expected),	but	rather	more	generally	to	
situations	
and	
relationships
that	come	up	within	the	church.	This	would	not	exclude	the
authority	to	exercise	discipline	over	individuals,	but	the	phrase	is
broader	than	that,	and	includes	specific	actions	that	are	subject	to
discipline	as	well.
Yet	the	authority	of	the	keys	with	respect	to	church	discipline	is	not
completely	unlimited.	It	will	only	be	effective	against	true	sin	(cf.
Matt.	18:15),	sin	as	defined	by	God’s	Word.	The	church	does	not
have	authority	on	its	own	to	legislate	what	is	morally	right	and
wrong	in	an	absolute	sense,	for	the	authority	to	define	right	and
wrong	belongs	to	God	alone	(see	Rom.	1:32;	2:16;	3:4–8;	9:20;	Ps.
119:89,	142,	160;	Matt.	5:18).	The	church	can	only	declare	and
teach	what	God	has	already	commanded	in	his	Word.	Nor	can	the
authority	of	the	keys	involve	authority	to	forgive	sins	in	any
absolute	sense,	because	in	Scripture	it	is	clear	that	that	can	only	be
done	by	God	himself	(Isa.	43:25;	55:7;	Mark	2:7,	10;	Ps.	103:3;	1
John	1:9).
7
	Therefore	the	authority	to	carry	out	discipline	in	the
church	is	an	authority	that	must	be	carried	out	in	accordance	with
the	standards	of	Scripture.
Is	it	possible	to	be	any	more	specific	about	the	kind	of	spiritual
authority	that	is	involved	in	this	use	of	the	keys	of	the	kingdom	of
heaven?	Both	Matthew	16:19	and	18:18	use	an	unusual	Greek
verbal	construction	(a	periphrastic	future	perfect).	It	is	best
translated	by	the	NASB,	“Whatever	you	shall	bind	on	earth	
shall
have	been	bound	
in	heaven,	and	whatever	you	shall	loose	on	earth
shall	have	been	loosed	
in	heaven.”
8
	Several	other	examples	of	this
construction	show	that	it	indicates	not	just	a	future	action	(“shall	be
bound”),	for	which	a	common	Greek	tense	was	available	(future
passive),	but	rather	
an	action	that	would	be	completed	before	some
future	point,	
with	effects	that	would	continue	to	be	felt.
9
	Thus,
Jesus	is	teaching	that	church	discipline	will	have	heavenly	sanction.
But	it	is	not	as	if	the	church	must	wait	for	God	to	endorse	its
actions	after	the	actions	have	occurred.	Rather,	whenever	the
church	
enacts	discipline	
it	can	be	confident	that	God	has	already
begun	the	process	spiritually.	Whenever	it	
releases	from	discipline,
forgives	the	sinner,	and	restores	personal	relationships,	the	church
can	be	confident	that	God	has	already	begun	the	restoration
spiritually	(cf.	John	20:23).	In	this	way	Jesus	promises	that	the
spiritual	relationship	between	God	and	the	person	subject	to
discipline	will	be	immediately	affected	in	ways	consistent	with	the
direction	of	the	church’s	disciplinary	action.	Legitimate	church
discipline,	therefore,	involves	the	awesome	certainty	that
corresponding	heavenly	discipline	has	already	begun.
Moreover,	this	teaching	on	the	power	of	the	keys	has	a	significant
application	to	individual	Christians	who	begin	to	be	subject	to	the
discipline	of	a	true	church:	Christians	should	submit	to	this
discipline	and	not	run	from	it,	because	God	himself	has	also	put
them	under	discipline	for	that	sin.
C.	The	Power	of	the	Church	and	the	Power	of	the	State
The	previous	sections	have	discussed	spiritual	power	and	spiritual
warfare	to	be	exercised	by	the	church.	But	should	the	church	ever
use	physical	force	(weapons	and	armies,	for	example)	to	carry	out
its	mission?	The	phrase	commonly	used	to	refer	to	the	idea	of
physical,	worldly	warfare	is	“to	take	up	the	sword.”
There	are	several	indications	in	Scripture	that	the	church	must
never	take	up	the	sword	to	carry	out	its	purposes	in	the	new
covenant	age.	This	was	a	dreadful	mistake	made	in	the	Crusades,
when	church-sponsored	armies	marched	across	Europe	and	Asia	to
attempt	to	reclaim	the	land	of	Israel.	In	these	cases	the	church	was
trying	to	use	physical	force	to	bring	about	its	triumph	over	earthly
territories.	But	Jesus	said,	“
My	kingdom	is	not	of	this	world.	
If	it
were,	my	servants	would	fight”	(John	18:36	NIV).	The	church	has
the	power	of	the	keys,	which	is	spiritual	power.	It	is	to	carry	out
spiritual	battles	using	spiritual	weapons,	but	is	not	to	use	the	power
of	the	sword	to	accomplish	its	purposes.	“The	weapons	of	our
warfare	are	not	worldly”	(2	Cor.	10:4).
Certainly	God	does	give	
to	civil	government	
the	right	to	bear	the
sword,	that	is,	to	use	force	to	punish	evil	in	the	world	(Rom.	13:1–
7).	But	there	is	no	indication	that	the	power	of	government	is	to	be
used	to	enforce	adherence	to	Christianity	upon	any	people.
10
Moreover,	there	are	several	indications	that	Jesus	refused	to	use	the
power	of	physical	force	to	compel	people	to	accept	the	gospel.	For
example,	when	a	Samaritan	village	would	not	receive	Jesus,	James
and	John	asked,	“Lord,	do	you	want	us	to	bid	fire	come	down	from
heaven	and	consume	them?”	(Luke	9:54).	But	Jesus	“rebuked
them”	(v.	
55)	for	even	making	that	suggestion.	Jesus	came	the	first
time	to	offer	the	gospel	to	all	who	would	receive	it,	not	to	execute
punishment	on	those	who	rejected	it.	This	is	why	he	could	say,	“For
God	sent	the	Son	into	the	world,	not	to	condemn	the	world,	but	that
the	world	might	be	saved	through	him”	(John	3:17).	He	will	one
day	come	again	in	judgment,	at	the	end	of	the	church	age,	but
during	this	age	it	is	not	the	prerogative	of	the	church	to	use	physical
force	to	carry	out	judgment.
Jesus	clearly	made	a	distinction	between	the	authority	granted	to
the	government	and	the	authority	that	God	exercises	in	our	personal
allegiance	to	him	when	he	said,	“Render	therefore	to	Caesar	the
things	that	are	Caesar’s,	and	to	God	the	things	that	are	God’s”
(Matt.	22:21).	And	though	Jesus	recognized	the	authority	of	civil
government,	he	refused	to	usurp	that	authority	himself,	telling
someone,	“Man,	who	made	me	a	judge	or	divider	over	you?”	with
respect	to	a	matter	of	family	inheritance	(Luke	12:13–14).
A	further	reason	why	the	government	should	not	use	force	to
require	allegiance	to	Christianity	is	that	in	the	new	covenant,
membership	in	the	church	and	allegiance	to	Christ	must	be
voluntary.	They	cannot	be	compelled	by	family	or	by	the	state.	In
fact,	faith	in	Christ,	to	be	truly	held	and	practiced,	cannot	be
compelled	by	force.	If	it	is	compelled,	it	changes	its	essential
quality	and	is	no	longer	a	voluntary	act	of	the	individual,	and
cannot	be	true	faith.
From	this	it	also	follows	that	
the	civil	government	should	not
enforce	laws	requiring	or	prohibiting	kinds	of	church	doctrine,	or
abridging	the	people’s	freedom	to	worship	as	they	choose.	
On	the
other	hand,	the	church	does	not	and	should	not	rule	over	the	state,
as	if	it	were	some	kind	of	higher	authority	over	the	state;	it	is	not.
Rather,	the	authority	of	the	church	and	that	of	the	state	belong	to
distinct	spheres	(Matt.	22:21;	John	18:36;	2	Cor.	10:3–4),	and	each
should	respect	the	authority	God	has	given	the	other	in	its	own
sphere	of	operation.
These	limitations	on	the	activities	of	the	church	and	the	state	are
different	from	the	practice	of	the	Catholic	Church	through	much	of
the	Middle	Ages,	where	it	often	had	more	power	than	the	civil
government.	These	principles	also	differ	from	the	practice	of	the
Church	of	England,	which	is	subject	to	the	authority	of	the	Queen
and	Parliament	in	the	appointment	of	bishops	and	any	change	in
doctrinal	standards.	The	failure	to	respect	the	distinct	roles	of
church	and	state	is	seen	in	many	Roman	Catholic	countries	today,
where	the	church	still	has	strong	influence	on	the	government,	and
in	the	compulsory	membership	in	state-sponsored	Protestant
churches	of	Northern	Europe	after	the	Reformation,	a	situation	that
caused	many	emigrants	to	flee	to	America	for	religious	freedom.
However,	it	should	be	said	that	the	degree	of	state-enforced	religion
in	Protestant	or	Catholic	countries	is	mild	indeed	compared	to	state-
sponsored	and	state-enforced	religion	in	most	Muslim	countries
today,	and	in	many	Hindu	and	Buddhist	countries	as	well.	In	fact,	it
is	difficult	to	find	genuine	freedom	of	religion	apart	from	the	strong
influence	of	healthy	evangelical	Christianity	in	any	country	around
the	world	(except	where	various	religions	are	so	weak	or	so	evenly
balanced	that	no	one	religion	has	dominant	political	power).
Whenever	Christians	are	involved	in	the	political	realm,	they	ought
clearly	to	affirm	freedom	of	religion	as	a	political	policy	that	is
nonnegotiable,	and	they	should	be	willing	to	defend	that	freedom
for	religions	other	than	their	own	as	well.	The	Christian	faith	can
stand	on	its	own	two	feet	and	compete	very	well	in	the	market-
place	of	ideas	in	any	society	and	in	any	culture,	provided	it	has	the
freedom	to	do	so.
Finally,	what	has	been	said	above	should	not	be	misunderstood	as	a
prohibition	against	Christians	attempting	to	bring	positive	moral
influence	on	government	and	attempting	to	persuade	governments
to	make	laws	consistent	with	biblical	standards	of	morality.	It	is
right	for	Christians	to	attempt	to	persuade	governments	to	make
laws	that	protect	families	and	private	property	and	the	lives	of
human	beings—laws	that	both	outlaw	and	punish	murder,	adultery,
theft,	and	the	breaking	of	contracts	(things	that	violate	the	Ten
Commandments),	as	well	as	prohibit	homosexual	conduct,
drunkenness,	drug	abuse,	abortion,	and	other	things	that	are
inconsistent	with	biblical	standards	of	morality.	These	things	are	far
different	from	requiring	belief	in	certain	types	of	church	doctrine	or
theological	conviction,	and	from	requiring	that	people	attend
certain	kinds	of	church	or	worship	services.	The	latter	are	clearly
“religious”	activities	in	the	narrow	sense	in	that	they	pertain	to	our
relationship	to	God	and	our	beliefs	about	him.
11
	Governments
should	refrain	from	making	laws	about	these	things.
D.	Church	Discipline
Since	church	discipline	is	one	aspect	of	the	use	of	the	power	of	the
church,	it	is	appropriate	here	to	give	some	discussion	of	the	biblical
principles	relevant	to	the	practice	of	church	discipline.
1.
	The	Purpose	of	Church	Discipline.
a.	Restoration	and	Reconciliation	of	the	Believer	Who	Is	Going	Astray:
Sin	hinders	fellowship	among	believers	and	with	God.	In	order	for
reconciliation	to	occur,	the	sin	must	be	dealt	with.	Therefore,	the	primary
purpose	of	church	discipline	is	to	pursue	the	twofold	goal	of	
restoration	
(of
the	offender	to	right	behavior)	and	
reconciliation	
(between	believers,	and	with
God).
12
	Just	as	wise	parents	discipline	their	children	(Prov.	13:24:	“He	who
loves	[his	son]	is	diligent	to	discipline	him”),	and	just	as	God	our	Father
disciplines	those	whom	he	loves	(Heb.	12:6;	Rev.	3:19),	so	the	church	in	its
discipline	is	acting	in	love	to	bring	back	a	brother	or	sister	who	has	gone
astray,	reestablishing	that	person	in	right	fellowship	and	rescuing	him	or	her
from	destructive	patterns	of	life.	In	Matthew	18:15,	the	hope	is	that	discipline
will	stop	at	the	first	step,	when	someone	goes	alone:	“If	he	listens	to	you,	you
have	gained	your	brother.”	The	phrase	“you	have	gained	your	brother”
implies	that	those	carrying	out	discipline	should	keep	the	goal	of	personal
reconciliation	among	Christians	always	in	mind.	Paul	reminds	us	that	we	are
to	“restore”	the	sinning	brother	or	sister	“in	a	spirit	of	gentleness”	(Gal.	6:1),
and	James	encourages	us	to	“bring	back	a	sinner	from	the	error	of	his	way”
(James	5:20).
In	fact,	if	church	members	were	actively	involved	in	giving	private
words	of	gentle	admonition	and	in	praying	for	one	another	when
the	first	clear	evidence	of	sinful	conduct	is	seen,	very	little	formal
church	discipline	would	have	to	be	carried	out,	because	the	process
would	begin	and	end	with	a	conversation	between	two	people	that
never	becomes	known	to	anyone	else.
Even	when	the	final	step	of	“excommunication”	(that	is,	putting
someone	out	of	the	fellowship	or	“communion”	of	the	church)	is
taken,	it	is	still	with	the	hope	that	repentance	will	result.	Paul
delivered	Hymenaeus	and	Alexander	to	Satan	
“that	they	may	learn
not	to	blaspheme”	
(1	Tim.	1:20),	and	the	man	living	in	incest	at
Corinth	was	to	be	delivered	to	Satan	“that	his	spirit	may	be	saved	in
the	day	of	the	Lord	Jesus”	(1	Cor.	5:5).
13
If	Christians	who	must	take	steps	of	church	discipline	will	continue
to	remember	this	first	purpose—the	reconciliation	of	believers	who
are	going	astray	with	each	other	and	with	God,	and	their	restoration
to	right	patterns	of	life—then	it	will	be	much	easier	to	continue	to
act	in	genuine	love	for	the	parties	involved,	and	feelings	of	anger	or
desires	for	revenge	on	the	part	of	those	who	have	been	hurt,	which
often	lie	near	the	surface,	will	much	more	easily	be	avoided.
b.	To	Keep	the	Sin	From	Spreading	to	Others:
	Although	the	primary	goal
of	church	discipline	is	restoration	and	reconciliation	for	the	erring	believer,	in
this	present	age	reconciliation	and	restoration	will	not	always	come	about.
But	whether	restoration	comes	about	or	not,	the	church	is	told	to	carry	out
discipline	because	two	other	purposes	are	served	as	well.
One	other	purpose	is	that	the	sin	will	be	kept	from	spreading	to
others.	The	author	of	Hebrews	tells	Christians	to	see	to	it	that	“no
‘root	of	bitterness’	spring	up	and	cause	trouble,	and	by	it	
the	many
become	defiled”	
(Heb.	12:15).	This	means	that	if	conflict	between
persons	is	not	resolved	quickly,	the	effects	may	spread	to	many
others—something	that	sadly	seems	to	be	true	in	many	cases	of
church	division.	Paul	also	says,	
“A	little	leaven	leavens	the	whole
lump,”	
and	tells	the	Corinthians	to	put	out	of	the	church	a	man
living	in	incest	(1	Cor.	5:2,	6–7),	lest	his	sin	affect	the	whole
church.	If	that	man	were	not	disciplined,	the	effects	of	the	sin
would	spread	to	many	others	who	were	aware	of	it	and	saw	that	the
church	paid	little	attention	to	it.	This	would	cause	many	to	think
that	perhaps	that	sin	was	not	as	bad	as	they	had	thought,	and	others
might	be	tempted	to	commit	similar	or	related	kinds	of	sin.
Moreover,	if	discipline	against	one	specific	offense	is	not	carried
out,	then	it	will	be	much	more	difficult	for	the	church	to	carry	out
discipline	if	a	similar	kind	of	sin	is	committed	by	someone	else	in
the	future.
Paul	also	told	Timothy	that	elders	who	persist	in	sin	are	to	be
rebuked	in	the	presence	of	all,	
“so	that	the	rest	may	stand	in	fear”
(1	Tim.	5:20)—that	is,	so	that	many	others	would	realize	that	the
sin	will	not	be	tolerated	but	will	receive	discipline	both	from	the
church	and	from	God	himself.	In	fact,	Paul	rebuked	Peter	publicly,
in	order	that	others	would	not	follow	Peter’s	bad	example	of
separating	himself	and	eating	only	with	Jewish	believers	(Gal.
2:11).
c.	To	Protect	the	Purity	of	the	Church	and	the	Honor	of	Christ:
	A	third
purpose	of	church	discipline	is	that	the	purity	of	the	church	is	to	be	protected,
so	that	Christ	will	not	be	dishonored.	Of	course,	no	believer	in	this	age	has	a
completely	pure	heart,	and	we	all	have	remaining	sin	in	our	lives.	But	when	a
church	member	continues	to	sin	in	a	way	that	is	outwardly	evident	to	others,
especially	to	unbelievers,
14
	this	clearly	brings	dishonor	to	Christ.	It	is	similar
to	the	situation	of	Jews	who	disobeyed	God’s	law	and	led	unbelievers	to	scoff
and	blaspheme	God’s	name	(Rom.	2:24:	“The	name	of	God	is	blasphemed
among	the	Gentiles	because	of	you”).
This	is	why	Paul	is	shocked	that	the	Corinthians	have	not
disciplined	the	man	who	continued	in	willful	sin	that	was	publicly
known	in	the	church	(1	Cor.	5:1–2:	“And	you	are	arrogant!	Ought
you	not	rather	to	mourn?”).	He	is	also	greatly	distressed	to	know
that	“brother	goes	to	law	against	brother,	and	that	before
unbelievers”	(1	Cor.	6:6).	Rather	than	allowing	such	moral
blemishes	on	the	character	of	the	church,	Peter	encourages
believers	to	“be	zealous	to	be	found	by	[Christ]	without	spot	or
blemish,	and	at	peace”	(2	Peter	3:14).	And	our	Lord	Jesus	wants	to
present	to	himself	a	church	“without	spot	or	wrinkle	.	.	.	holy	and
without	blemish”	(Eph.	5:27),	for	he	is	the	head	of	the	church,	and
its	character	reflects	on	his	reputation.	Even	angels	and	demons
look	at	the	church	and	behold	the	wisdom	of	God	expressed	in	it
(Eph.	3:10);	therefore	(Eph.	4:1)	Paul	encourages	Christians	to	be
“eager	to	maintain	the	unity	of	the	Spirit	in	the	bond	of	peace”
(Eph.	4:3).
This	is	a	very	serious	matter.	Since	the	Lord	Jesus	is	jealous	for	his
own	honor,	if	the	church	does	not	exercise	proper	discipline,	he	will
do	it	himself,	as	he	did	at	Corinth,	where	the	Lord’s	discipline
resulted	in	sickness	and	death	(1	Cor.	11:27–34),	and	as	he	warned
he	would	do	both	at	Pergamum	(Rev.	2:14–15)	and	at	Thyatira
(Rev.	2:20).	In	these	last	two	cases	the	Lord	was	displeased	with	the
whole	church	for	tolerating	outward	disobedience	and	not
exercising	discipline:	“But	I	have	this	against	you,	that	
you	tolerate
the	woman	Jezebel,	
who	calls	herself	a	prophetess	and	is	teaching
and	beguiling	my	servants	to	practice	immorality	and	to	eat	food
sacrificed	to	idols”	(Rev.	2:20;	cf.	vv.	14–16).
15
2.	For	What	Sins	Should	Church	Discipline	Be	Exercised?
	On	the	one
hand,	Jesus’	teaching	in	Matthew	18:15–20	tells	us	that	if	a	situation
involving	personal	sin	against	someone	else	cannot	be	resolved	in	a	private	or
small	group	meeting,	then	the	matter	must	be	brought	to	the	church:
If	your	brother	sins	against	you,	go	and	tell	him	his	fault,	between	you
and	him	alone.	If	he	listens	to	you,	you	have	gained	your	brother.	But
if	he	does	not	listen,	take	one	or	two	others	along	with	you,	that	every
word	may	be	confirmed	by	the	evidence	of	two	or	three	witnesses.	If
he	refuses	to	listen	to	them,	tell	it	to	the	church;	and	if	he	refuses	to
listen	even	to	the	church,	let	him	be	to	you	as	a	Gentile	and	a	tax
collector.	(Matt.	18:15–17)
In	this	case	the	matter	has	progressed	from	a	private	and	informal	situation	to
a	public	and	much	more	formal	process	of	discipline	by	the	whole	church.
On	the	other	hand,	there	does	not	seem	to	be	any	explicit	limitation
specified	for	the	kinds	of	sin	that	should	be	subject	to	church
discipline.	The	examples	of	sins	subject	to	church	discipline	in	the
New	Testament	are	extremely	diverse:	divisiveness	(Rom.	16:17;
Titus	3:10),	incest	(1	Cor.	5:1),	laziness	and	refusing	to	work	(2
Thess.	3:6–10),	disobeying	what	Paul	writes	(2	Thess.	3:14–15),
blasphemy	(1	Tim.	1:20),	and	teaching	heretical	doctrine	(2	John
10–11).
Nonetheless,	a	definite	principle	appears	to	be	at	work:	all	sins	that
were	explicitly	disciplined	in	the	New	Testament	were	publicly
known	or	outwardly	evident	sins,
16
	and	many	of	them	had
continued	over	a	period	of	time.	The	fact	that	the	sins	were	publicly
known	meant	that	reproach	was	being	brought	on	the	church,	Christ
was	being	dishonored,	and	there	was	a	real	possibility	that	others
would	be	encouraged	to	follow	the	wrongful	patterns	of	life	that
were	being	publicly	tolerated.
There	is	always	the	need,	however,	for	mature	judgment	in	the
exercise	of	church	discipline,	because	there	is	lack	of	complete
sanctification	in	all	our	lives.	Furthermore,	when	we	realize	that
someone	is	already	aware	of	a	sin	and	struggling	to	overcome	it,	a
word	of	admonition	may	in	fact	do	more	harm	than	good.	We
should	also	remember	that	where	there	are	issues	of	conduct	on
which	Christians	legitimately	disagree,	Paul	encourages	a	wide
degree	of	tolerance	(Rom.	14:1–23).
3.	How	Should	Church	Discipline	Be	Carried	Out?
a.	Knowledge	of	the	Sin	Should	Be	Kept	to	the	Smallest	Group	Possible:
This	seems	to	be	the	purpose	in	Matthew	18:15–17	behind	the	gradual
progression	from	a	private	meeting,	to	a	meeting	with	two	or	three	others,	to
telling	the	entire	church.	The	fewer	people	who	know	about	some	sin,	the
better,	because	repentance	is	easier,	fewer	people	are	led	astray,	and	less	harm
is	done	to	the	reputation	of	the	person,	the	reputation	of	the	church,	and	the
reputation	of	Christ.
17
b.	Disciplinary	Measures	Should	Increase	in	Strength	Until	There	Is	a
Solution:
	Once	again	in	Matthew	18	Jesus	teaches	us	that	we	cannot	stop
simply	with	a	private	conversation	if	that	has	not	brought	satisfactory	results.
He	requires	that	the	wronged	person	first	go	alone,	and	then	take	one	or	two
others	(Matt.	18:15–16).	Moreover,	if	a	Christian	thinks	that	he	or	she	has
wronged	someone	else	(or	even	if	that	other	person	
thinks	
that	he	or	she	has
been	wronged),	Jesus	requires	that	the	person	who	has	done	the	wrong	(or	is
thought	to	have	done	the	wrong)	go	to	the	person	who	considers	himself	the
victim	of	wrongdoing	(Matt.	5:23).	This	means	that	whether	we	have	been
wronged	or	others	think	they	have	been	wronged,	
it	is	always	our
responsibility	
to	take	the	initiative	and	go	to	the	other	person.	Jesus	does	not
allow	us	to	wait	for	the	other	person	to	come	to	us.
After	a	private	meeting	and	a	small	group	meeting,	Jesus	does	not
specify	that	the	elders	or	officers	of	the	church	are	next	to	be
consulted	as	a	group,	but	certainly	this	intermediate	step	seems	to
be	appropriate,	because	Jesus	may	simply	be	summarizing	the
process	without	necessarily	mentioning	every	possible	step	in	it.	In
fact,	there	are	several	examples	of	small	group	admonition	in	the
New	Testament	which	are	carried	out	by	elders	or	other	church
officers	(see	1	Thess.	5:12;	2	Tim.	4:2;	Titus	1:13;	2:15;	3:10;
James	5:19–20).	Moreover,	the	principle	of	keeping	the	knowledge
of	sin	to	the	smallest	group	possible	would	certainly	encourage	this
intermediate	step	as	well.
Finally,	if	the	situation	cannot	be	resolved	Jesus	says	to	“tell	it	to
the	church”	(Matt.	18:17).	In	this	case	the	church	would	be
assembled	to	hear	the	facts	of	the	case	and	to	come	to	a	decision.
Since	Jesus	allows	for	the	possibility	that	the	person	“refuses	to
listen	even	to	the	church”	(v.	17),	the	church	may	have	to	meet	once
to	decide	what	to	say	to	the	offender,	and	then	meet	again	to
exclude	that	person	from	the	fellowship	of	the	church.
18
When	Jesus	gives	these	directions	about	church	discipline,	he
reminds	the	church	that	his	own	presence	and	his	own	power	are
behind	the	decisions	made	by	the	church:	“Again	I	say	to	you,	if
two	of	you	agree	on	earth	about	anything	they	ask,	it	will	be	done
for	them	by	my	Father	in	heaven.	For	where	two	or	three	are
gathered	in	my	name,	
there	am	I	in	the	midst	of	them”	
(Matt.
18:19–20).	Jesus	promises	to	be	present	in	church	gatherings
generally,	but	specifically	here	with	respect	to	the	church	being
gathered	for	discipline	of	an	offending	member.	And	Paul	similarly
tells	the	Corinthians	to	discipline	the	erring	member	when	they	are
assembled	
“with	the	power	of	our	Lord	Jesus”	
(1	Cor.	5:4).	This	is
not	an	activity	to	be	taken	lightly,	but	is	carried	out	in	the	presence
of	the	Lord,	the	spiritual	component	of	it	actually	being	carried	out
by	the	Lord	himself.
If	this	ever	must	be	done,	the	whole	church	will	then	know	that	the
erring	person	is	no	longer	considered	a	member	of	the	church,	and
that	person	would	not	be	allowed	to	take	Communion,	since
partaking	in	the	Lord’s	Supper	is	a	sign	of	partaking	in	the	unity	of
the	church	(1	Cor.	10:17:	“Because	there	is	one	bread,	we	who	are
many	are	one	body,	
for	we	all	partake	of	the	one	bread”).
There	are	other	passages	in	the	New	Testament	that	speak	of
avoiding	fellowship	with	the	excommunicated	person.	Paul	tells	the
Corinthians,	“I	wrote	to	you	
not	to	associate	
with	any	one	who
bears	the	name	of	brother	if	he	is	guilty	of	immorality	or	greed,	or
is	an	idolater,	reviler,	drunkard,	or	robber—not	even	to	eat	with
such	a	one”	(1	Cor.	5:11).	He	tells	the	Thessalonians,	“Now	we
command	you,	brethren,	in	the	name	of	our	Lord	Jesus	Christ,	that
you	keep	away	from	any	brother	who	is	living	in	idleness	and	not	in
accord	with	the	tradition	that	you	received	from	us”	(2	Thess.	3:6).
Moreover,	he	says,	“If	any	one	refuses	to	obey	what	we	say	in	this
letter,	note	that	man,	and	have	nothing	to	do	with	him,	that	he	may
be	ashamed.	Do	not	look	on	him	as	an	enemy,	but	warn	him	as	a
brother”	(2	Thess.	3:14–15).	Second	John	10–11	also	prohibits
greeting	or	welcoming	into	the	house	anyone	who	is	promoting
false	teaching.	These	instructions	are	apparently	given	to	prevent
the	church	from	giving	to	others	the	impression	that	it	approves	of
the	disobedience	of	the	erring	person.
c.	Discipline	of	Church	Leaders:
	In	one	passage	Paul	gives	special
directives	concerning	the	discipline	of	church	elders:
Never	admit	any	charge	
against	an	elder	
except	on	the	evidence	of
two	or	three	witnesses.	As	for	those	who	persist	in	sin,	
rebuke	them	in
the	presence	of	all,	so	that	the	rest	may	stand	in	fear.	
In	the	presence
of	God	and	of	Christ	Jesus	and	of	the	elect	angels	I	charge	you	to
keep	these	rules	without	favor,	doing	nothing	from	partiality.	(1	Tim.
5:19–21)
Paul	here	gives	a	special	caution	to	protect	elders	from	individual	attacks:
action	regarding	wrongdoing	in	this	case	should	require	the	evidence	of	two
or	three	witnesses.	“Those	who	persist	in	sin”
19
	are	to	be	rebuked	
“in	the
presence	of	all.”	
This	is	because	the	bad	example	of	wrongful	conduct	by
elders	will	very	likely	have	a	widespread	negative	effect	on	others	who	see
their	lives.	Then	Paul	reminds	Timothy	to	do	“nothing	from	partiality”	in	this
situation,	a	very	helpful	warning,	since	Timothy	was	probably	a	close	friend
to	many	of	the	elders	in	the	church	at	Ephesus.
Paul’s	command	to	rebuke	a	sinning	elder	publicly	means	that	some
statement	of	the	nature	of	the	offense	must	be	made	to	the	church
(“
rebuke	them	
in	the	presence	of	all,”	v.	
20).
20
	On	the	other	hand,
not	every	detail	of	the	sin	has	to	be	disclosed	to	the	church.	A
helpful	guideline	is	that	the	church	should	be	told	enough	that	(1)
they	will	understand	how	serious	the	offense	was,	(2)	they	will	be
able	to	understand	and	support	the	discipline	process,	and	(3)	they
will	not	subsequently	feel	the	sin	was	minimized	or	covered	up	if
more	details	somehow	leak	out	later.
Such	a	public	disclosure	of	the	sin	of	a	leader	will	signal	to	the
congregation	that	the	leaders	of	the	church	will	not	hide	such
matters	from	them	in	the	future.	This	will	increase	the	confidence
of	the	church	in	the	integrity	of	the	leadership	board.	It	will	also
allow	the	sinning	leader	to	begin	the	gradual	process	of	rebuilding
relationships	and	trust	with	the	congregation,	because	he	will	not
have	to	deal	with	people	who	have	a	hundred	different	speculations
about	what	his	sin	was,	but	with	people	who	know	the	specific	sin,
and	can	see	the	genuine	repentance	and	change	regarding	that	area
of	sin	in	his	life.
What	about	the	serious	sins	of	people	who	are	not	church	leaders?
Scripture	gives	no	command	to	disclose	publicly	the	sins	of	people
who	are	ordinary	members	but	not	recognized	leaders	in	the	church.
Leaders,	however,	are	treated	differently	because	their	lives	are	to
be	“above	reproach”	(1	Tim.	3:2),	and	their	lives	should	be
examples	for	other	Christians	to	imitate	(see	1	Tim.	4:12).
21
d.	Other	Aspects	of	Church	Discipline:
	Once	discipline	has	occurred,	as
soon	as	there	is	repentance	at	any	stage	of	the	process,	the	Christians	who
have	known	about	the	discipline	should	welcome	the	repentant	person	back
quickly	into	the	fellowship	of	the	church.	Paul	says,	“You	should	rather	turn
to	
forgive	and	comfort	him,	
or	he	may	be	overwhelmed	by	excessive
sorrow.	.	.	.	I	beg	you	to	reaffirm	your	love	for	him”	(2	Cor.	2:7–8;	cf.	7:8–
11).	Once	again,	our	purpose	in	church	discipline	should	never	be	to	punish
out	of	a	desire	for	vengeance,	but	always	to	restore	and	heal.
The	attitude	with	which	discipline	is	carried	out	at	any	stage	is	also
very	important.	It	must	be	done	with	gentleness	and	humility,	and
with	a	genuine	appreciation	for	our	own	weakness	and	with	a	fear
that	we	might	fall	into	similar	sins.	“If	a	man	is	overtaken	in	any
trespass,	you	who	are	spiritual	should	restore	him	
in	a	spirit	of
gentleness.	Look	to	yourself,	lest	you	too	be	tempted”	
(Gal.	6:1).
It	is	unwise	to	set	any	timetable	in	advance,	telling	people	how	long
the	discipline	process	is	expected	to	last.	This	is	because	it	is
impossible	for	us	to	predict	how	long	it	will	be	until	the	Holy	Spirit
brings	about	deep,	genuine	repentance	and	a	change	in	the
condition	of	the	person’s	heart	that	led	to	the	sin	in	the	first	place.
Finally,	we	should	notice	that	immediately	following	the	passage	on
church	discipline	in	Matthew	18:15–20,	Jesus	strongly	teaches	the
need	for	personal	forgiveness	of	those	who	sin	against	us	(Matt.
18:21–35).	We	are	to	forgive	those	who	harm	us	“seventy	times
seven”	(v.	
22),	and	Jesus	tells	us	that	our	heavenly	Father	will
punish	us	severely	if	we	do	not	
forgive	our	brother	from	the	heart
(v.	35).	We	should	see	the	passage	on	church	discipline	and	this
passage	as	complementary,	not	contradictory.	As	individuals	we
must	always	forgive	in	our	hearts	and	not	bear	grudges.	Yet	we	can
certainly	forgive	someone	in	our	hearts	and	still	seek	church
discipline	for	the	good	of	the	person	who	is	committing	a	sin,	for
the	good	of	the	church,	for	the	honor	of	Christ,	and	because	God’s
Word	commands	it.
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
Have	you	previously	thought	of	the	church	as	rather	weak	or	rather
strong	in	its	influence	on	the	affairs	of	the	world?	How	has	your	thinking
changed	as	a	result	of	this	chapter?	Do	you	now	think	there	is	any	hope
for	transforming	society	apart	from	the	strong	redemptive	influence	of
the	church?
2
.	
Have	you	previously	thought	of	yourself	as	holding	any	of	the	“keys	of
the	kingdom	of	heaven”?	Do	you	in	fact	have	some	of	those	keys	now?
What	are	you	doing	with	them?
3
.	
In	what	ways	could	your	church	exercise	its	spiritual	power	against	the
forces	of	the	enemy	more	effectively?	In	what	ways	could	you	use	this
power	more	effectively	yourself?
4
.	
What	is	the	strongest	enemy	to	the	effective	proclamation	of	the	gospel
in	your	community	now?	How	might	the	power	of	the	church	be	used
against	that	enemy?
5
.	
If	you	accept	the	principles	that	the	church	should	not	rule	the	state	and
the	state	should	not	rule	over	or	restrict	the	freedom	of	the	church,	are
these	principles	being	played	out	effectively	in	your	own	country	or	local
situation?	What	could	be	done	to	increase	conformity	to	these
principles?	(Do	you	agree	with	these	principles?)
6
.	
Are	you	aware	of	situations	where	a	gentle	word	of	admonition	has
resulted	in	a	positive	change	in	your	own	behavior	or	the	behavior	of
another	Christian?	Are	you	aware	of	situations	where	church	discipline
has	gone	a	step	or	two	further	than	this	and	has	resulted	in	restoration	of
the	erring	person?	If	you	are	aware	of	situations	where	the	practice	of
church	discipline	has	not	brought	a	good	result,	what	could	have	been
done	differently	to	bring	about	a	better	result?
7
.	
If	a	church	refuses	to	carry	out	church	discipline	at	all	for	a	number	of
years,	even	though	there	is	an	evident	need	for	it,	what	will	be	the
harmful	results	in	the	church?	Are	you	aware	of	situations	where	those
harmful	results	have	occurred?
8
.	
Have	there	been	times	when	you	wished	that	someone	would	have	come
to	you	earlier	with	a	word	of	admonition	or	counsel	concerning	an	area
of	sin	that	you	were	unaware	of	or	that	you	were	uncertain	about?	If	so,
why	didn’t	that	happen?
9
.	
Are	there	now	any	relationships	in	your	life	where	Matthew	5:23	and
Matthew	18:15	combine	to	tell	you	that	you	have	an	obligation	to	go	to
another	person	and	seek	to	make	the	situation	right?
SPECIAL	TERMS
binding	and	loosing
	
	
	
power	of	the	church
excommunication
	
	
	
to	take	up	the	sword
keys	of	the	kingdom
	
	
	
	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the
bibliography	to	chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be
found	in	
Appendix	4
.)
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92			Litton,	402–13,	418–27
1930			Thomas,	281–97,	434–46
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1940			Wiley,	3:136–37
3.			Baptist
1767			Gill,	2:607–20
1907			Strong,	924–26
4.			Dispensational
1986			Ryrie,	433–35
5.			Lutheran
1917–24			Pieper,	1:530–31;	3:178–83,	416–20
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1559			Calvin,	2:1149–1240	(4.8–12)
1724–58			Edwards,	2:118–22
1861			Heppe,	684–94
1878			Dabney,	873–87
1937–66			Murray,	
CW,	
1:253–59
1938			Berkhof,	593–603
7.			Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988–92			Williams,	3:120–23,	265–85
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955			Ott,	417–25
2.			Roman	Catholic:	Post-Vatican	II
1980			McBrien,	2:817–48
Other	Works
Adams,	Jay	E.	
Handbook	of	Church	Discipline.	
Grand	Rapids:	Ministry
Resources	Library,	1986.
Bauckham,	Richard.	
The	Bible	in	Politics:	How	to	Read	the	Bible
Politically.	
Louisville:	Westminster/John	Knox,	1989.
DeKoster,	L.	“Church	Discipline.”	In	
EDT,	
p.	238.
Eidsmoe,	John.	
God	and	Caesar:	Christian	Faith	and	Political	Action.
Westchester,	Ill.:	Crossway,	1984.
Grudem,	W.	A.	“Keys	of	the	Kingdom.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	604–6.
Laney,	J.	Carl.	
A	Guide	to	Church	Discipline.	
Minneapolis:	Bethany,
1985.
Linder,	R.	D.	“Church	and	State.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	233–38.
Robertson,	O.	Palmer.	“Reflections	on	New	Testament	Testimony
Concerning	Civil	Disobedience.”	
JETS.	
Vol.	33,	No.	3	(Sept.,	1990),	pp.
331–51.
Schaeffer,	Francis.	
A	Christian	Manifesto.	
Westchester,	Ill.:	Crossway,
1981.
Stott,	John	R.	W.	
The	Preacher’s	Portrait:	Some	New	Testament	Word
Studies.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1961.
White,	John,	and	Ken	Blue.	
Church	Discipline	That	Heals:	Putting
Costly	Love	into	Action.	
(First	published	as	
Healing	the	Wounded.
)
Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,	1985.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
2	Corinthians	10:3–4:	
For	though	we	live	in	the	world	we	are	not	carrying
on	a	worldly	war,	for	the	weapons	of	our	warfare	are	not	worldly	but	have
divine	power	to	destroy	strongholds.
HYMN
“Onward	Christian	Soldiers”
This	hymn	does	not	talk	about	earthly	warfare	with	swords	and
shields,	but	with	the	spiritual	warfare	of	prayer	and	praise,	and	the
enemies	are	not	earthly	unbelievers	but	Satan	and	his	demonic
hosts:	“Hell’s	foundations	quiver	at	the	shout	of	praise;/Brothers,
lift	your	voices,	loud	your	anthems	raise.”
The	hymn	pictures	the	church	moving	as	a	worldwide	army	of	God
against	the	forces	of	Satan,	and	it	proclaims	the	unity	of	the	church
as	well:	“We	are	not	divided,	all	one	body	we,	/One	in	hope	and
doctrine,	one	in	charity.”	It	is	a	triumphant,	joyful	song	of	spiritual
warfare	by	a	church	that	will	not	be	divided	and	will	not	be
defeated.
Onward,	Christian	soldiers,	marching	as	to	war,
With	the	cross	of	Jesus	going	on	before:
Christ	the	royal	Master	leads	against	the	foe;
Forward	into	battle,	see	his	banners	go.
Refrain:
Onward,	Christian	soldiers,	marching	as	to	war,
With	the	cross	of	Jesus	going	on	before.
At	the	sign	of	triumph	Satan’s	host	doth	flee;
On	then,	Christian	soldiers,	on	to	victory:
Hell’s	foundations	quiver	at	the	shout	of	praise;
Brothers,	lift	your	voices,	loud	your	anthems	raise.
Like	a	mighty	army	moves	the	church	of	God;
Brothers,	we	are	treading	where	the	saints	have	trod;
We	are	not	divided,	all	one	body	we,
One	in	hope	and	doctrine,	one	in	charity.
Crowns	and	thrones	may	perish,	kingdoms	rise	and	wane,
But	the	church	of	Jesus	constant	will	remain;
Gates	of	hell	can	never	‘gainst	that	church	prevail;
We	have	Christ’s	own	promise,	and	that	cannot	fail.
Onward,	then	ye	people,	join	our	happy	throng,
Blend	with	ours	your	voices	in	the	triumph	song;
Glory,	laud,	and	honor	unto	Christ	the	King;
This	through	countless	ages	men	and	angels	sing.
AUTHOR:	SABINE	BARING-GOULD,	1865
NOTES
1
Jesus	often	rebuked	demonic	spirits	that	created	disturbances	when	he	was	ministering	to	people:	see	Mark	1:23–26;	5:1–13;	et
al.
2
The	text	does	not	specify	that	Herod’s	death	was	in	any	way	connected	to	the	“earnest	prayer”	(Acts	12:5)	that	was	made	for
Peter	by	the	church,	but	the	fact	that	the	narrative	about	Herod’s	death	follows	immediately	upon	the	story	of	his	killing	James	the
brother	of	John	with	the	sword	and	his	putting	Peter	in	prison	certainly	hints	at	the	fact	that	God	intended	this	as	a	judgment	upon
one	of	the	primary	enemies	of	the	church,	showing	that	no	opposition	could	stand	against	the	progress	of	the	gospel.	This
understanding	is	also	supported	by	the	fact	that	the	sentence	immediately	following	the	narrative	of	Herod’s	death	is,	“But	the
word	of	God	grew	and	multiplied”	(Acts	12:24).
3
See	
chapter	20
,	on	conflict	with	demonic	forces	in	general,	and	
section	D2
	on	the	question	of	“strategic	level	spiritual	warfare.”
4
The	rest	of	this	section	discussing	the	keys	of	the	kingdom	of	heaven	is	adapted	from	the	article,	“Keys	of	the	Kingdom”	by
Wayne	Grudem,	in	
EDT,	
pp.	604–5,	and	is	used	here	by	permission.
5
The	statement	in	Matt.	16:19	uses	singular	pronouns	for	“whatever”	and	“you”	(referring	to	Peter),	while	Matt.	18:18	uses
plurals	(referring	to	Christians	generally),	but	the	same	Greek	words	are	used	for	“bind”	(
deō
)	and	“loose”	(
luō
),	and	the
grammatical	construction	(periphrastic	future	perfect)	is	the	same.
6
Some	have	argued	that	binding	and	loosing	do	not	refer	to	actions	of	church	discipline,	but	to	an	authority	to	make	various	rules
for	conduct,	because	in	the	rabbinic	literature	that	comes	from	Jewish	teachers	around	the	time	of	Jesus	the	words	
bind	
and	
loose
are	sometimes	used	for	forbidding	and	permitting	various	kinds	of	conduct.	This	interpretation	does	not	seem	persuasive,
however,	because	these	rabbinic	statements	are	a	much	more	distant	parallel	than	the	statement	of	Jesus	himself	in	Matt.	18:18,
where	church	discipline	is	clearly	in	view.	Moreover,	it	is	difficult	to	know	whether	any	of	the	rabbinic	parallels	pre-date	the	time
of	the	New	Testament,	or	to	show	that	such	words	would	have	functioned	as	technical	terms	in	the	ordinary	vocabulary	of	Jesus
and	his	hearers—in	fact,	Matt.	18:18	shows	that	they	did	not	function	as	technical	terms	in	that	way,	because	they	were	used
rather	to	refer	to	church	discipline	in	that	verse.
7
In	John	20:23,	the	forgiveness	of	sins	by	the	disciples	is	best	understood	as	freeing	from	church	discipline	and	restoring	personal
relationships	in	a	sense	similar	to	the	“loosing”	of	Matt.	16:19	and	18:18.
8
See	the	grammatical	discussion	in	D.	A.	Carson’s	commentary	on	Matthew	in	
The	Expositors’	Bible	Commentary,	
pp.	370–72.
9
See	examples	in	Luke	12:52;	Gen.	43:9;	44:42;	Ex.	12:6;	Sirach	7:25;	Hermas,	
Similitudes	
5.4.2;	
Letter	of	Aristeas	
40.
10
Edmund	Clowney	rightly	observes,	“We	may	not	suppose	that	Christ	denied	to	his	apostles	the	right	to	bring	in	his	kingdom
with	the	sword,	but	conceded	that	right	to	Pilate”	(“The	Biblical	Theology	of	the	Church,”	in	
The	Church	in	the	Bible	and	the
World,	
ed.	by	D.	A.	Carson	[Exeter:	Paternoster,	and	Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1987],	p.	
33).
11
The	fact	that	Christians	should	try	to	influence	government	to	make	laws	consistent	with	biblical	standards	is	indicated	by
passages	such	as	Matt.	6:10;	14:4;	Acts	24:25;	and	1	Tim.	2:1–4.	We	may	hope	that	the	moral	standards	of	Scripture	will	also
eventually	gain	general	consent	from	most	of	the	people	of	a	given	society,	since	those	moral	standards	have	also	been	inscribed
on	their	hearts	and	therefore	they	have	a	witness	in	their	consciences	that	these	standards	are	correct	(see	Rom.	2:14–15).	It	is	also
the	case	that	God	holds	all	societies	and	cultures	responsible	for	obeying	his	moral	standards,	and	often	in	the	Old	Testament
God’s	prophets	pronounced	judgments	upon	not	only	the	people	of	Israel	but	also	upon	immoral	pagan	societies,	even	though	they
did	not	have	his	written	laws	(see	Deut.	9:5;	Isa.	13–23;	Ezek.	25–32;	Dan.	4:27;	Amos	1–2;	Obadiah	[written	to	Edom];	Jonah
[prophesied	to	Nineveh];	Nahum	[prophesied	to	Nineveh];	Hab.	2;	Zeph.	2).	In	fact,	civil	governments	are	sent	by	God	“to	punish
those	who	do	wrong	and	to	praise	those	who	do	right”	(1	Peter	2:14).
12
In	their	excellent	book	on	church	discipline,	
Church	Discipline	That	Heals	
(Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,	1985;
originally	published	as	
Healing	the	Wounded
),	John	White	and	Ken	Blue	note	that	a	failure	to	keep	reconciliation	as	the	primary
goal	of	church	discipline	has	led	to	many	abuses	of	the	process	in	the	history	of	the	church	(see	esp.	pp.	45–56).	But	they
themselves	say	that	“true	reconciliation	never	takes	place	without	change	in	the	parties	involved”	(p.	
46).	Therefore	I	have
combined	reconciliation	and	restoration	in	this	first	section.
13
The	unusual	phrase	“deliver	to	Satan”	in	these	verses	seems	to	mean	“put	out	of	the	church”	since	that	is	clearly	what	Paul	tells
the	Corinthians	to	do	in	1	Cor.	5:2,	7,	13.	Putting	someone	out	of	the	church	puts	that	person	back	into	the	kingdom	of	this	sinful
age,	which	is	ruled	by	Satan.
14
But	also	to	angels	(see	Eph.	3:10;	1	Tim.	5:21).
15
The	purposes	of	church	discipline	discussed	above	are	well	summarized	in	the	Westminster	Confession	of	Faith,	chapter	30,
paragraph	3:	“Church	censures	are	necessary,	for	the	reclaiming	and	gaining	of	offending	brethren,	for	deterring	of	others	from	the
like	offenses,	for	purging	out	of	that	leaven	which	might	infect	the	whole	lump,	for	vindicating	the	honor	of	Christ,	and	the	holy
profession	of	the	gospel,	and	for	preventing	the	wrath	of	God,	which	might	justly	fall	upon	the	church,	if	they	should	suffer	his
covenant,	and	the	seals	thereof,	to	be	profaned	by	notorious	and	obstinate	offenders.”
16
One	exception	was	the	secret	sin	of	Ananias	and	Sapphira	in	Acts	5:1–11.	In	this	situation	the	Holy	Spirit	(vv.	3,	8)	was	so
powerfully	present	that	he	brought	an	intrusion	of	final	judgment,	when	the	secrets	of	all	hearts	will	be	disclosed,	into	the	church
age,	“and	great	fear	came	upon	the	whole	church”	(v.	
11).
17
However,	see	
section	c
	of	this	chapter	on	the	requirement	for	public	disclosure	of	the	serious	sins	of	a	church	leader.
18
1	Cor.	5:4	also	requires	that	the	church	be	assembled	for	this	final	step	in	church	discipline.
19
This	is	apparently	the	sense	of	
tous	harmartanontas	
in	1	Tim.	5:20,	since	the	present	participle	gives	the	sense	of	continuing	in
an	action	over	a	period	of	time.
20
When	churches	have	to	discipline	a	church	leader,	an	easy	mistake	to	make	is	failing	to	take	Paul’s	command	seriously,	and
thereby	failing	to	give	adequate	disclosure	to	the	church	of	the	nature	of	the	sin	involved.	If	that	happens,	the	congregation	only
hears	that	a	leader	was	removed	from	office	because	of	some	sin	(or	maybe	a	general	category	of	sin	is	mentioned).	But	this	is	not
really	an	effective	public	rebuke.	Because	it	is	so	vague,	it	will	only	result	in	confusion,	speculation,	and	gossip.	Moreover,
serious	divisions	can	arise	in	the	church	because	in	the	absence	of	information	some	people	will	think	the	discipline	process	too
harsh	and	others	will	think	it	too	lenient,	and	the	church	will	not	be	united	in	supporting	the	process.
21
I	understand	“above	reproach”	to	mean	that	their	lives	are	such	that	no	charge	of	serious	wrongdoing	can	be	rightfully	brought
against	them.
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	47
Church	Government
How	should	a	church	be	governed?	How	should	church	officers	be
chosen?	Should	women	serve	as	pastors	of	churches?
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
Churches	today	have	many	different	forms	of	government.	The
Roman	Catholic	Church	has	a	worldwide	government	under	the
authority	of	the	Pope.	Episcopalian	churches	have	bishops	with
regional	authority,	and	archbishops	over	them.	Presbyterian
churches	grant	regional	authority	to	presbyteries	and	national
authority	to	general	assemblies.	On	the	other	hand,	Baptist	churches
and	many	other	independent	churches	have	no	formal	governing
authority	beyond	the	local	congregation,	and	affiliation	with
denominations	is	on	a	voluntary	basis.
Within	local	churches,	Baptists	often	have	a	single	pastor	with	a
board	of	deacons,	but	some	have	a	board	of	elders	as	well.
Presbyterians	have	a	board	of	elders	and	Episcopalians	have	a
vestry.	Other	churches	simply	have	a	church	board.
Is	there	a	New	Testament	pattern	for	church	government?	Is	any
one	form	of	church	government	to	be	preferred	over	another?	These
are	the	questions	addressed	in	this	chapter.
However,	at	the	outset	it	must	be	said	that	the	form	of	church
government	is	not	a	major	doctrine	like	the	Trinity,	the	deity	of
Christ,	substitutionary	atonement,	or	the	authority	of	Scripture.
Although	I	believe,	after	examining	the	New	Testament	evidence,
that	one	particular	form	of	church	government	is	preferable	to	the
others,	nevertheless,	each	form	has	some	weaknesses	as	well	as
strengths.	And	church	history	attests	that	several	different	forms	of
government	have	worked	fairly	well	for	several	centuries.
Moreover,	while	some	aspects	of	church	government	seem	to	be
reasonably	clear	from	the	New	Testament,	other	matters	(such	as
the	way	in	which	church	officers	should	be	chosen)	are	less	clear,
mainly	because	the	New	Testament	evidence	on	them	is	not
extensive,	and	thus	our	inferences	from	this	evidence	are	less
certain.	It	seems	to	me,	then,	that	there	ought	to	be	room	for
evangelical	Christians	to	differ	amicably	over	this	question,	in	the
hope	that	further	understanding	may	be	gained.	And	it	also	seems
that	individual	Christians—while	they	may	have	a	preference	for
one	system	or	another,	and	while	they	may	wish	at	appropriate
times	to	argue	forcefully	for	one	system	over	another—should
nevertheless	be	willing	to	live	and	minister	within	any	of	several
different	Protestant	systems	of	church	government	in	which	they
may	find	themselves	from	time	to	time.
But	I	do	not	mean	to	say	that	this	is	an	entirely	unimportant	matter.
In	this	area	as	well	as	others,	a	church	may	be	more	or	less	pure.	If
there	are	clear	New	Testament	patterns	regarding	some	aspects	of
church	government,	then	there	will	be	negative	consequences	in	our
churches	if	we	disregard	them,	even	if	we	cannot	foresee	all	of
those	consequences	at	the	present	time.	Therefore	Christians	are
certainly	free	to	speak	and	write	on	this	subject	in	order	to	work	for
increased	purity	in	the	church.
In	this	chapter	we	shall	first	survey	the	New	Testament	data
concerning	church	officers,	especially	
apostle,	elder,	
and	
deacon.
Then	we	shall	ask	how	church	officers	should	be	chosen.	After	that
we	shall	look	at	two	controversial	questions:	Which	form	of	church
government—if	any—is	closest	to	the	New	Testament	pattern?
And,	may	women	serve	as	officers	in	the	church?
A.	Church	Officers
For	purposes	of	this	chapter,	we	will	use	the	following	definition:	
A
church	officer	is	someone	who	has	been	publicly	recognized	as
having	the	right	and	responsibility	to	perform	certain	functions	for
the	benefit	of	the	whole	church.
According	to	this	definition,	elders	and	deacons	would	be
considered	officers	in	a	church,	as	would	the	pastor	(if	that	is	a
distinct	office).	The	church	treasurer	and	church	moderator	would
also	be	officers	(these	titles	may	vary	from	church	to	church).	All	of
these	people	have	had	public	recognition,	usually	at	a	service	in
which	they	are	“installed”	or	“ordained”	in	an	office.	In	fact,	they
need	
public	recognition	in	order	to	fulfill	their	responsibilities:	for
example,	it	would	not	be	appropriate	for	people	to	wonder	from
week	to	week	who	was	to	receive	the	offering	and	deposit	it	in	the
bank,	or	for	various	people	to	argue	that	they	had	been	gifted	to
take	that	responsibility	in	any	particular	week!	The	orderly
functioning	of	the	church	requires	that	one	person	be	recognized	as
having	that	responsibility.	Similarly,	the	pastor	who	is	responsible
to	do	Bible	teaching	each	Sunday	morning	must	be	recognized	as
having	the	right	and	responsibility	to	do	that	(at	least,	in	most	forms
of	church	government).	If	this	were	not	the	case,	then	many	people
might	prepare	sermons	and	all	claim	the	right	to	preach,	or	on	some
Sundays	no	one	might	prepare.	Similarly,	in	order	for	people	to
follow	the	elders	of	the	church	and	look	to	them	for	guidance,	they
must	know	who	the	elders	are.
By	contrast,	many	other	people	exercise	gifts	in	the	church,	but	we
do	not	say	they	have	an	“office”	because	they	do	not	need	formal
public	recognition	for	their	gifts	to	function.	Those	who	have	a	gift
of	“helps”	(see	1	Cor.	12:28),	or	who	have	a	gift	of	especially
strong	faith,	or	a	gift	of	“distinguishing	between	spirits”	(1	Cor.
12:10),	or	a	gift	of	exhorting	or	contributing	(Rom.	12:8)	do	not
need	public	recognition	in	order	to	function	effectively	in	the
church.
In	the	material	that	follows,	we	shall	see	that	the	New	Testament
discusses	one	church	office	which	was	limited	to	the	time	when	the
early	church	was	founded	(the	office	of	apostle),	and	two	other
church	offices	which	continue	throughout	the	church	age	(the
offices	of	elder	and	deacon).
1.
	Apostle.
	Earlier	in	this	book	we	saw	that	the	New	Testament	
apostles	
had	a
unique	kind	of	authority	in	the	early	church:	authority	to	speak	and	write
words	which	were	“words	of	God”	in	an	absolute	sense.	To	disbelieve	or
disobey	them	was	to	disbelieve	or	disobey	God.	The	apostles,	therefore,	had
the	authority	to	write	words	which	became	words	of	Scripture.
1
	This	fact	in
itself	should	suggest	to	us	that	there	was	something	unique	about	the	office	of
apostle,	and	that	we	would	not	expect	it	to	continue	today,	for	no	one	today
can	add	words	to	the	Bible	and	have	them	be	counted	as	God’s	very	words	or
as	part	of	Scripture.
2
In	addition,	the	New	Testament	information	on	the	qualifications	of
an	apostle	and	the	identity	of	the	apostles	also	leads	us	to	conclude
that	the	office	was	unique	and	limited	to	the	first	century,	and	that
we	are	to	expect	no	more	apostles	today.
3
	We	shall	see	this	as	we
ask	the	following	questions:	What	were	the	requirements	for	being
an	apostle?	Who	were	the	apostles?	How	many	apostles	were	there?
And	are	there	apostles	today?
At	the	outset	it	must	be	made	clear	that	the	answers	to	these
questions	depend	on	what	one	means	by	the	word	
apostle.	
Today
some	people	use	the	word	
apostle	
in	a	very	broad	sense,	to	refer	to
an	effective	church	planter,	or	to	a	significant	missionary	pioneer
(“William	Carey	was	an	apostle	to	India,”	for	example).	If	we	use
the	word	
apostle	
in	this	broad	sense,	everyone	would	agree	that
there	are	still	apostles	today—for	there	are	certainly	effective
missionaries	and	church	planters	today.
The	New	Testament	itself	has	three	verses	in	which	the	word
apostle	
(Gk.	
apostolos
)	is	used	in	a	broad	sense,	not	to	refer	to	any
specific	church	office,	but	simply	to	mean	“messenger.”	In
Philippians	2:25,	Paul	calls	Epaphroditus	“your	
messenger
(
apostolos
)	and	minister	to	my	need”;	in	2	Corinthians	8:23,	Paul
refers	to	those	who	accompanied	the	offering	that	he	was	taking	to
Jerusalem	as	“
messengers	[apostoloi]
	of	the	churches”;	and	in	John
13:16,	Jesus	says,	“Nor	is	
he	who	is	sent	[apostolos]
greater	than	he
who	sent	him.”
But	there	is	another	sense	for	the	word	
apostle.	
Much	more
frequently	in	the	New	Testament	the	word	refers	to	a	special	office,
“apostle	of	Jesus	Christ.”	
In	this	narrow	sense	of	the	term,	there
are	no	more	apostles	today,	and	we	are	to	expect	no	more.	This	is
because	of	what	the	New	Testament	says	about	the	qualifications
for	being	an	apostle	and	about	who	the	apostles	were.
a.	Qualifications	of	an	Apostle:
	The	two	qualifications	for	being	an	apostle
were	(1)	having	seen	Jesus	after	his	resurrection	with	one’s	own	eyes	(thus,
being	an	“eyewitness	of	the	resurrection”),	and	(2)	having	been	specifically
commissioned	by	Christ	as	his	apostle.
4
The	fact	that	an	apostle	had	to	have	seen	the	risen	Lord	with	his
own	eyes	is	indicated	by	Acts	1:22,	where	Peter	said	that	person	to
replace	Judas	“must	become	with	us	
a	witness	to	his	resurrection.”
Moreover,	it	was	“to	the	apostles	whom	he	had	chosen”	that	“he
presented	himself	alive	after	his	passion	by	many	proofs,	appearing
to	them	during	forty	days”	(Acts	1:2–3;	cf.	4:33).
Paul	makes	much	of	the	fact	that	he	did	meet	this	qualification	even
though	it	was	in	an	unusual	way	(Christ	appeared	to	him	in	a	vision
on	the	road	to	Damascus	and	appointed	him	as	an	apostle:	Acts
9:5–6;	26:15–18).	When	he	is	defending	his	apostleship	he	says,
“Am	I	not	an	apostle?	
Have	I	not	seen	Jesus	our	Lord?”	
(1	Cor.
9:1).	And	when	recounting	the	people	to	whom	Christ	appeared
after	his	resurrection,	Paul	says,	“Then	
he	appeared	to	James,	
then
to	all	the	apostles.	
Last	of	all,	as	to	one	untimely	born,	
he	appeared
also	to	me.	
For	I	am	the	least	of	the	apostles,	unfit	to	be	called	an
apostle”	(1	Cor.	15:7–9).
These	verses	combine	to	indicate	that	unless	someone	had	seen
Jesus	after	the	resurrection	with	his	own	eyes,	he	could	not	be	an
apostle.
The	second	qualification,	specific	appointment	by	Christ	as	an
apostle,	is	also	evident	from	several	verses.	First,	though	the	term
apostle	
is	not	common	in	the	gospels,	the	twelve	disciples	are
called	“apostles”	specifically	in	a	context	where	Jesus	is
commissioning	them,	“sending	them	out”	to	preach	in	his	name:
And	he	called	to	him	his	twelve	disciples	and	gave	them	authority
over	unclean	spirits,	to	cast	them	out,	and	to	heal	every	disease	and
every	infirmity.	The	names	of	the	twelve	
apostles	
are	these.	.	.	.	
These
twelve	Jesus	sent	out,	
charging	them,	“.	.	.	preach	as	you	go,	saying,
‘The	kingdom	of	heaven	is	at	hand.’	”	(Matt.	10:1–7)
Similarly,	Jesus	commissions	his	apostles	in	a	special	sense	to	be
his	“witnesses	.	.	.	to	the	end	of	the	earth”	(Acts	1:8).	And	in
choosing	another	apostle	to	replace	Judas,	the	eleven	apostles	did
not	take	the	responsibility	on	themselves,	but	prayed	and	asked	the
ascended	Christ	to	make	the	appointment:
“Lord,	who	knows	the	hearts	of	all	men,	
show	which	one	of	these	two
you	have	chosen	
to	take	the	place	in	this	ministry	and	apostleship
from	which	Judas	turned	aside.	.	.	.”	And	they	cast	lots	for	them,	and
the	lot	fell	on	Matthias;	and	he	was	enrolled	with	the	eleven	apostles.
(Acts	1:24–26)
Paul	himself	insists	that	Christ	personally	appointed	him	as	an
apostle.	He	tells	how,	on	the	Damascus	Road,	Jesus	told	him	that	he
was	appointing	him	as	an	apostle	to	the	Gentiles:	“I	have	appeared
to	you	for	this	purpose,	to	appoint	you	to	serve	and	to	bear	witness
.	.	.	delivering	you	from	the	people	and	from	the	Gentiles—to
whom	I	send	you”	(Acts	26:16–17).	He	later	affirms	that	he	was
specifically	appointed	by	Christ	as	an	apostle	(see	Rom.	1:1;	Gal.
1:1;	1	Tim.	1:12;	2:7;	2	Tim.	1:11).
b.	Who	Were	Apostles?
	The	initial	group	of	apostles	numbered	twelve—the
eleven	original	disciples	who	remained	after	Judas	died,	plus	Matthias,	who
replaced	Judas:	“And	they	cast	lots	for	them,	and	the	lot	fell	on	Matthias;	and
he	was	enrolled	with	the	eleven	apostles”	
(Acts	1:26).	So	important	was	this
original	group	of	twelve	apostles,	the	“charter	members”	of	the	office	of
apostle,	that	we	read	that	their	names	are	inscribed	on	the	foundations	of	the
heavenly	city,	the	New	Jerusalem:	“And	the	wall	of	the	city	had	twelve
foundations,	and	on	them	
the	twelve	names	of	the	twelve	apostles	of	the
Lamb”	
(Rev.	21:14).
We	might	at	first	think	that	such	a	group	could	never	be	expanded,
that	no	one	could	be	added	to	it.	But	then	Paul	clearly	claims	that
he,	also,	is	an	apostle.	And	Acts	14:14	calls	both	Barnabas	and	Paul
apostles:	“when	
the	apostles	Barnabas	and	Paul	
heard	of	it.	.	.	.”	So
with	Paul	and	Barnabas	there	are	fourteen	“apostles	of	Jesus
Christ.”
5
Then	James	the	brother	of	Jesus	(who	was	not	one	of	the	twelve
original	disciples)	seems	to	be	called	an	apostle	in	Galatians	1:19:
Paul	tells	how,	when	he	went	to	Jerusalem,	“I	saw	none	of	
the	other
apostles	
except	James	the	Lord’s	brother.”
6
	Then	in	Galatians	2:9
James	is	classified	with	Peter	and	John	as	“pillars”	of	the	Jerusalem
church.	And	in	Acts	15:13–21,	James,	along	with	Peter,	exercises	a
significant	leadership	function	in	the	Jerusalem	Council,	a	function
which	would	be	appropriate	to	the	office	of	apostle.	Furthermore,
when	Paul	is	listing	the	resurrection	appearances	of	Jesus	he	once
again	readily	classifies	James	with	the	apostles:
Then	he	appeared	
to	James,	
then	
to	all	the	apostles.	
Last	of	all,	as	to
one	untimely	born,	he	appeared	also	to	me.	For	I	am	the	least	of	the
apostles,	unfit	to	be	called	an	apostle,	because	I	persecuted	the	church
of	God.	(1	Cor.	15:7–9)
Finally,	the	fact	that	James	could	write	the	New	Testament	epistle
which	bears	his	name	would	also	be	entirely	consistent	with	his
having	the	authority	which	belonged	to	the	office	of	apostle,	the
authority	to	write	words	which	were	the	words	of	God.	All	these
considerations	combine	to	indicate	that	James	the	Lord’s	brother
was	also	commissioned	by	Christ	as	an	apostle.	That	would	bring
the	number	to	fifteen	“apostles	of	Jesus	Christ”	(the	twelve	plus
Paul,	Barnabas,	and	James).
Were	there	more	than	these	fifteen?	There	may	possibly	have	been
a	few	more,	though	we	know	little	if	anything	about	them,	and	it	is
not	certain	that	there	were	any	more.	Others,	of	course,	had	seen
Jesus	after	his	resurrection	(“Then	he	appeared	to	more	than	five
hundred	brethren	at	one	time,”	1	Cor.	15:6).	From	this	large	group	it
is	possible	that	Christ	appointed	some	others	as	apostles—but	it	is
also	very	possible	that	he	did	not.	The	evidence	is	not	sufficient	to
decide	the	issue.
Romans	16:7	says,	“Greet	
Andronicus	and	Junias,	
my	kinsmen	and
my	fellow	prisoners;	they	are	
men	of	note	among	the	apostles,	
and
they	were	in	Christ	before	me.”	Because	there	are	several
translation	problems	in	the	verse,	no	clear	conclusions	can	be
reached.	“Men	of	note”	may	be	also	translated	“men	noted	by”	(the
apostles).	“Junias”	(a	man’s	name)	may	also	be	translated	“Junia”
(a	woman’s	name).
7
	“Apostles”	here	may	not	mean	the	office
“apostles	of	Jesus	Christ,”	but	may	simply	mean	“messengers”	(the
broader	sense	which	the	word	takes	in	Phil.	2:25;	2	Cor.	8:23;	John
13:16).	The	verse	has	too	little	clear	information	to	allow	us	to
draw	a	conclusion.
Others	have	been	suggested	as	apostles.	Silas	(Silvanus)	and
sometimes	Timothy	are	mentioned	because	of	1	Thessalonians	2:6:
“though	
we	
might	have	made	demands	
as	apostles	of	Christ.”	
Does
Paul	include	Silas	and	Timothy	here,	since	the	letter	begins,	“Paul,
Silvanus,	and	Timothy”	(1	Thess.	1:1)?
It	is	not	likely	that	Paul	is	including	Timothy	in	this	statement,	for
two	reasons.	(1)	He	says	just	four	verses	earlier,	“we	had	already
suffered	and	been	shamefully	treated	at	Philippi,	as	you	know”	(1
Thess.	2:2),	but	this	refers	to	the	beating	and	imprisonment	which
happened	just	to	Paul	and	Silas,	not	to	Timothy	(Acts	16:19).	So	the
“we”	in	verse	6	does	not	seem	to	include	all	of	the	people	(Paul,
Silvanus,	Timothy)	mentioned	in	the	first	verse.	The	letter	in
general	is	from	Paul,	Silas	and	Timothy,	but	Paul	knows	that	the
readers	will	naturally	understand	the	appropriate	members	of	the
“we”	statements	when	he	does	not	mean	to	include	all	three	of	them
in	certain	sections	of	the	letter.	He	does	not	specify	“we—that	is,
Silas	and	I—had	already	suffered	and	been	shamefully	treated	at
Philippi,	as	you	know,”	because	the	Thessalonians	will	know	who
the	“we”	are	that	he	is	talking	about.
(2)	This	is	also	seen	in	1	Thessalonians	3:1–2,	where	the	“we”
certainly	cannot	include	Timothy:
Therefore	when	we	could	bear	it	no	longer,	we	were	willing	to	be	left
behind	at	Athens	alone,	and	
we	sent	Timothy,	
our	brother	and	God’s
servant	in	the	gospel	of	Christ,	to	establish	you	in	your	faith	and	to
exhort	you.	(1	Thess.	3:1–2)
In	this	case,	the	“we”	refers	either	to	Paul	and	Silas,	or	else	just	to	Paul	alone
(see	Acts	17:14–15;	18:5).	Apparently	Silas	and	Timothy	had	come	to	Paul	in
Athens	“as	soon	as	possible”	(Acts	17:15)—though	Luke	does	not	mention
their	arrival	in	Athens—and	Paul	had	sent	them	back	to	Thessalonica	again	to
help	the	church	there.	Then	he	himself	went	to	Corinth,	and	they	later	joined
him	there	(Acts	18:5).
It	is	most	likely	that	“
We	
were	willing	to	be	left	behind	at	Athens
alone”	(1	Thess.	3:1),	refers	to	Paul	alone,	both	because	he	picks	up
the	argument	again	in	verse	5	with	the	singular	“I”	(“When	I	could
bear	it	no	longer,	I	sent	that	I	might	know	your	faith,”	1	Thess.	3:5),
and	because	the	point	concerning	extreme	loneliness	in	Athens
would	not	be	made	if	Silas	had	stayed	with	him.
8
	In	fact,	in	the
previous	paragraph,	Paul	means	“I,”	for	he	says,	“We	wanted	to
come	to	you—I,	Paul,	again	and	again—but	Satan	hindered	us”	(1
Thess.	2:18).	Apparently	he	is	using	“we”	more	frequently	in	this
epistle	as	a	courteous	way	of	including	Silas	and	Timothy,	who	had
spent	so	much	time	in	the	Thessalonian	church,	in	the	letter	to	that
church.	But	the	Thessalonians	would	have	had	little	doubt	who	was
really	in	charge	of	this	great	mission	to	the	Gentiles,	and	on	whose
apostolic	authority	the	letter	primarily	(or	exclusively)	depended.
So	it	is	just	possible	that	Silas	was	himself	an	apostle,	and	that	1
Thessalonians	2:6	hints	at	that.	He	was	a	leading	member	of	the
Jerusalem	church	(Acts	15:22),	and	could	well	have	seen	Jesus	after
his	resurrection,	and	then	been	appointed	as	an	apostle.	But	we
cannot	be	very	certain.
The	situation	with	Timothy	is	different,	however.	Just	as	he	is
excluded	from	the	“we”	of	1	Thessalonians	2:2	(and	3:1–2),	so	he
seems	to	be	excluded	from	the	“we”	of	1	Thessalonians	2:6.
Moreover,	as	a	native	of	Lystra	(Acts	16:1–3)	who	had	learned	of
Christ	from	his	grandmother	and	mother	(2	Tim.	1:5),	it	seems
impossible	that	he	would	have	been	in	Jerusalem	before	Pentecost
and	would	there	have	seen	the	risen	Lord	and	come	to	believe	in
him,	and	then	suddenly	have	been	appointed	as	an	apostle.	In
addition,	
Paul’s	pattern	of	address	in	his	letters	always	jealously
guards	the	title	“apostle”	for	himself,	
never	allowing	it	to	be
applied	to	Timothy	or	others	of	his	traveling	companions	(note	2
Cor.	1:1;	Col.	1:1:	“
Paul,	an	apostle	
of	Christ	Jesus	.	.	.	
and
Timothy	our	brother”;	
and	then	Phil.	1:1:	“
Paul	and	Timothy,
servants	
of	Christ	Jesus”).	So	Timothy,	as	important	a	role	as	he
had,	should	not	rightly	be	considered	one	of	the	apostles.
This	gives	us	a	limited	but	somewhat	imprecisely	numbered	group
who	had	the	office	“apostles	of	Jesus	Christ.”	There	seem	to	have
been	at	least	fifteen,	and	perhaps	sixteen	or	even	a	few	more	who
are	not	recorded	in	the	New	Testament.
Yet	it	seems	quite	certain	that	there	were	none	appointed	after	Paul.
When	Paul	lists	the	resurrection	appearances	of	Christ,	he
emphasizes	the	unusual	way	in	which	Christ	appeared	to	him,	and
connects	that	with	the	statement	that	this	was	the	“last”	appearance
of	all,	and	that	he	himself	is	indeed	“the	least	of	the	apostles,	unfit
to	be	called	an	apostle.”
He	appeared	to	Cephas	(Peter),	then	to	the	twelve.	Then	he	appeared	to
more	than	five	hundred	brethren	at	one	time,	most	of	whom	are	still
alive,	though	some	have	fallen	asleep.	Then	he	appeared	to	James,	then
to	all	the	apostles.	
Last	of	all,	
as	to	one	untimely	born,	
he	appeared	also
to	me.	
For	I	am	the	least	of	the	apostles,	unfit	to	be	called	an	apostle.”
(1	Cor.	15:5–9)
c.	Summary:
	The	word	
apostle	
can	be	used	in	a	broad	or	narrow	sense.	In	a
broad	sense,	it	just	means	“messenger”	or	“pioneer	missionary.”	But	in	a
narrow	sense,	the	most	common	sense	in	the	New	Testament,	it	refers	to	a
specific	office,	“apostle	of	Jesus	Christ.”	These	apostles	had	unique	authority
to	found	and	govern	the	early	church,	and	they	could	speak	and	write	words
of	God.	Many	of	their	written	words	became	the	New	Testament	Scriptures.
In	order	to	qualify	as	an	apostle,	someone	(1)	had	to	have	seen
Christ	with	his	own	eyes	after	he	rose	from	the	dead,	and	(2)	had	to
have	been	specifically	appointed	by	Christ	as	an	apostle.	There	was
a	limited	number	of	apostles,	perhaps	fifteen	or	sixteen	or	a	few
more—the	New	Testament	is	not	explicit	on	the	number.	The
twelve	original	apostles	(the	eleven	plus	Matthias)	were	joined	by
Barnabas	and	Paul,	very	probably	James,	perhaps	Silas,	and	maybe
even	Andronicus	and	Junias	or	a	few	unnamed	others.	It	seems	that
no	apostles	were	appointed	after	Paul,	and	certainly,	since	no	one
today	can	meet	the	qualification	of	having	seen	the	risen	Christ
with	his	own	eyes,	there	are	no	apostles	today.
9
	In	place	of	living
apostles	present	in	the	church	to	teach	and	govern	it,	we	have
instead	the	writings	of	the	apostles	in	the	books	of	the	New
Testament.	Those	New	Testament	Scriptures	fulfill	for	the	church
today	the	absolutely	authoritative	teaching	and	governing	functions
which	were	fulfilled	by	the	apostles	themselves	during	the	early
years	of	the	church.
Though	some	may	use	the	word	
apostle	
in	English	today	to	refer	to
very	effective	church	planters	or	evangelists,	it	seems	inappropriate
and	unhelpful	to	do	so,	for	it	simply	confuses	people	who	read	the
New	Testament	and	see	the	high	authority	that	is	attributed	to	the
office	of	“apostle”	there.	It	is	noteworthy	that	no	major	leader	in	the
history	of	the	church—not	Athanasius	or	Augustine,	not	Luther	or
Calvin,	not	Wesley	or	Whitefield—has	taken	to	himself	the	title	of
“apostle”	or	let	himself	be	called	an	apostle.	If	any	in	modern	times
want	to	take	the	title	“apostle”	to	themselves,	they	immediately
raise	the	suspicion	that	they	may	be	motivated	by	inappropriate
pride	and	desires	for	self-exaltation,	along	with	excessive	ambition
and	a	desire	for	much	more	authority	in	the	church	than	any	one
person	should	rightfully	have.
2.	Elder	(Pastor/Overseer/Bishop).
a.	Plural	Elders:	The	Pattern	in	All	New	Testament	Churches:
	The	next
church	office	to	be	considered	is	that	of	“elder.”	Although	some	have	argued
that	different	forms	of	church	government	are	evident	in	the	New
Testament,
10
	a	survey	of	the	relevant	texts	shows	the	opposite	to	be	true:	there
is	quite	a	consistent	pattern	of	
plural	elders	
as	the	main	governing	group	in
New	Testament	churches.	For	instance,	in	Acts	14:23	we	read,	“And	when
they	had	appointed	
elders
11
	for	them	in	every	church,	with	prayer	and	fasting,
they	committed	them	to	the	Lord	in	whom	they	believed.”	This	is	on	Paul’s
first	missionary	journey,	when	he	is	returning	through	the	cities	of	Lystra,
Iconium,	and	Antioch.	It	indicates	that	Paul’s	normal	procedure	from	the	time
of	his	first	missionary	journey	was	to	establish	a	group	of	elders	in	each
church	shortly	after	the	church	began.	We	know	that	Paul	also	established
elders	in	the	church	at	Ephesus,	for	we	read,	“From	Miletus	he	sent	to
Ephesus	and	called	to	him	the	
elders	
of	the	church”	(Acts	20:17).	Moreover,
Paul’s	apostolic	assistants	apparently	were	instructed	to	carry	out	a	similar
process,	for	Paul	wrote	to	Titus,	“This	is	why	I	left	you	in	Crete,	that	you
might	amend	what	was	defective,	and	
appoint	elders	in	every	town	
as	I
directed	you”	(Titus	1:5).	Shortly	after	a	church	has	been	established,	once
again	we	see	elders	being	established	in	office,	in	“every	town”	in	which	there
was	a	church.	And	Paul	reminded	Timothy	of	the	time	“when	the	
elders	
laid
their	hands	upon	you”	(1	Tim.	4:14).
James	writes,	“Is	any	among	you	sick?	Let	him	call	for	the	
elders	
of
the	church,	and	let	them	pray	over	him,	anointing	him	with	oil	in
the	name	of	the	Lord”	(James	5:14).	This	is	a	significant	statement
because	the	epistle	of	James	is	a	general	letter	written	to	many
churches,	all	the	believers	scattered	abroad,	whom	James
characterizes	as	“the	twelve	tribes	in	the	Dispersion”	(James	1:1).	It
indicates	that	James	expected	that	there	would	be	elders	
in	every
New	Testament	church	to	which	his	general	epistle	went—
that	is,	in
all	the	churches	in	existence	at	that	time.
A	similar	conclusion	can	be	drawn	from	1	Peter.	Peter	writes,	“So	I
exhort	the	
elders	
among	you.	.	.	.	Tend	the	flock	of	God	that	is	your
charge	.	.	.”	(1	Peter	5:1–2).	First	Peter	is	also	a	general	epistle,
written	to	dozens	of	churches	scattered	throughout	four	Roman
provinces	in	Asia	Minor	(see	1	Peter	1:1;	Bithynia	and	Pontus
constituted	one	Roman	province).	Far	from	expecting	different
kinds	of	church	government	when	he	was	writing	(around	A.D.	62,
more	than	thirty	years	after	Pentecost),	Peter	assumes	that	
all	
these
churches,	whether	founded	by	Paul	or	by	others,	whether
predominantly	Gentile	or	predominantly	Jewish	or	evenly	divided
in	their	make-up,	would	have	elders	leading	them.	Moreover,	there
were	elders	in	the	Jerusalem	church	(Acts	11:30;	15:2),	and,	though
the	word	
elders	
is	not	used,	there	is	a	plurality	of	leaders	in	the
congregation	to	which	the	epistle	to	the	Hebrews	is	directed,	for	the
author	says,	“Obey	your	leaders	and	submit	to	them;	for	they	are
keeping	watch	over	your	souls,	as	men	who	will	have	to	give
account”	(Heb.	13:17).
Two	significant	conclusions	may	be	drawn	from	this	survey	of	the
New	Testament	evidence.	First,	no	passage	suggests	that	any
church,	no	matter	how	small,	had	only	one	elder.	The	consistent
New	Testament	pattern	is	a	plurality	of	elders	“in	every	church”
(Acts	14:23)	and	“in	every	town”	(Titus	1:5).
12
	Second,	we	do	not
see	a	diversity	of	forms	of	government	in	the	New	Testament
church,	but	a	unified	and	consistent	pattern	in	which	every	church
had	elders	governing	it	and	keeping	watch	over	it	(Acts	20:28;	Heb.
13:17;	1	Peter	5:2–3).
b.	Other	Names	for	Elders:	Pastors,	Overseers,	Bishops:
	Elders	are	also
called	“pastors”	or	“bishops”	or	“overseers”	in	the	New	Testament.	The	least
commonly	used	word	(at	least	in	the	noun	form)	is	
pastor	
(Gk.	
poimēn
).	It
may	be	surprising	to	us	to	find	that	this	word,	which	has	become	so	common
in	English,	only	occurs	once	in	the	New	Testament	when	speaking	about	a
church	officer.	In	Ephesians	4:11,	Paul	writes,	“And	his	gifts	were	that	some
should	be	apostles,	some	prophets,	some	evangelists,	some	
pastors	
and
teachers.”	The	verse	is	probably	better	translated	“pastor-teachers”	(one
group)	rather	than	“pastors	and	teachers”	(suggesting	two	groups)	because	of
the	Greek	construction	(though	not	every	New	Testament	scholar	agrees	with
that	translation).
13
	The	connection	with	teaching	suggests	that	these	pastors
were	some	(or	perhaps	all)	of	the	elders	who	carried	on	the	work	of	teaching,
for	one	qualification	for	an	elder	is	that	he	be	“able	to	teach”	(1	Tim.	3:2).
Although	the	noun	
pastor	
(
poimēn
)	is	not	used	of	church	officers
elsewhere	in	the	New	Testament,
14
	the	related	verb	which	means
“to	act	as	a	shepherd”	or	“to	act	as	a	pastor”	(Gk.	
poimainō
)	is
applied	to	elders	in	Paul’s	address	to	the	Ephesian	elders.	He	tells
them	“to	
shepherd	
the	church	of	God”	(Acts	20:28,	literally
translating	the	verb	
poimainō
),	and	in	the	same	sentence	he	referred
to	God’s	people	as	“all	the	
flock,”	
using	another	related	noun	(Gk.
poimnion
)	which	means	“a	flock	of	sheep.”	So	Paul	directly	charges
these	Ephesian	elders	to	act	as	shepherds	or	“pastors.”
15
The	same	verb	is	used	in	1	Peter	5:2	where	Peter	tells	the	elders	to
“
shepherd	
(
poimainō
)	the	flock	of	God	that	is	your	charge”
(author’s	translation).	Then	two	verses	later	Jesus	is	called	the	chief
pastor	or	“chief	shepherd”	(Gk.	
archipoimēn,	
1	Peter	5:4),	implying
quite	clearly	that	Peter	also	viewed	the	elders	as	shepherds	or
“pastors”	in	the	church.	Therefore,	although	the	noun	
pastor	
is	only
used	once	to	refer	to	elders,	the	related	verb	is	used	twice	in
passages	that	explicitly	identify	the	task	of	shepherding	with	the
office	of	elder.
Another	term	used	for	elders	in	the	New	Testament	is	a	Greek	word
episkopos,	
which	is	variously	translated	as	“overseer”	or	“bishop,”
depending	on	the	individual	passage	and	the	English	translation.
16
But	this	word	also	seems	quite	clearly	to	be	another	term	for	elders
in	New	Testament	usage.	For	example,	when	Paul	has	called	to	him
the	
elders	
of	the	church	at	Ephesus	(Acts	20:17),	he	says	to	them,
“Take	heed	to	yourselves	and	to	all	the	flock,	in	which	the	Holy
Spirit	has	made	you	
overseers	
(Gk.	
episkopos
)”	(Acts	20:28).	Paul
quite	readily	refers	to	these	Ephesian	elders	as	“overseers”	(or
“bishops”).
In	1	Timothy	3:1–2,	Paul	writes,	“If	any	one	aspires	to	the	office	of
bishop,	
he	desires	a	noble	task.	Now	a	bishop	must	be	above
reproach.	.	.	.”	We	must	remember	that	Paul	is	writing	to	Timothy
when	Timothy	is	at	Ephesus	(see	1	Tim.	1:3,	“remain	at	Ephesus”)
and	we	already	know	from	Acts	20	that	there	are	
elders	
at	Ephesus
(Acts	20:17–38).	Furthermore,	in	1	Timothy	5:17,	we	see	that
elders	were	ruling	the	church	at	Ephesus	when	Timothy	was	there,
because	it	says,	“Let	the	
elders	who	rule	well	
be	considered	worthy
of	double	honor.”	Now	the	“bishops”	in	1	Timothy	3:1–2	
also	
are	to
rule	over	the	church	at	Ephesus	because	one	qualification	is	that
“He	must	manage	his	own	household	well	.	.	.	for	if	a	man	does	not
know	how	to	manage	his	own	household,	how	can	he	care	for
God’s	church?”	(1	Tim.	3:4–5).	So	here	it	also	seems	that	“bishop”
or	“overseer”	is	simply	another	term	for	“elder,”	since	these
“bishops”	fulfill	the	same	function	as	elders	quite	clearly	do
elsewhere	in	this	epistle	and	in	Acts	20.
In	Titus	1:5,	Paul	tells	Titus	to	“appoint	
elders	
in	every	town”	and
gives	some	qualifications	(v.	
6).	Then	in	the	very	next	sentence	(v.
7),	he	gives	reasons	for	those	qualifications,	and	he	begins	by
saying,	“For	a	
bishop,	
as	God’s	steward,	must	be	blameless.”	Here
again	he	uses	the	word	“bishop”	to	refer	to	the	elders	whom	Titus
was	to	appoint,	giving	another	indication	that	the	terms	
elder	
and
bishop	
were	interchangeable.
Finally,	in	Philippians	1:1,	Paul	writes	“To	all	the	saints	in	Christ
Jesus	who	are	at	Philippi,	with	the	
bishops	
and	deacons.”	Here	it
also	seems	appropriate	to	think	that	“bishops”	is	another	name	for
“elders,”	because	there	certainly	were	elders	at	Philippi,	since	it
was	Paul’s	practice	to	establish	elders	in	every	church	(see	Acts
14:23).	And	if	there	were	elders	ruling	in	the	church	at	Philippi,	it	is
unthinkable	that	Paul	would	write	to	the	church	and	single	out
bishops	and	deacons—but	not	elders—if	their	offices	were	both
different	from	that	of	the	elders.	Therefore,	by	“bishops	and
deacons”	Paul	must	have	meant	the	same	thing	as	“elders	and
deacons.”
17
	Although	in	some	parts	of	the	church	from	the	second
century	A.D.	onward,	the	word	
bishop	
has	been	used	to	refer	to	a
single	individual	with	authority	over	several	churches,	this	was	a
later	development	of	the	term	and	is	not	found	in	the	New
Testament	itself.
c.	The	Functions	of	Elders:
	One	of	the	major	roles	of	elders	in	the	New
Testament	is	to	govern	the	New	Testament	churches.	In	1	Timothy	5:17	we
read,	“Let	the	elders	who	
rule	
well	be	considered	worthy	of	double	honor.”
Earlier	in	the	same	epistle	Paul	says	that	an	overseer	(or	elder)	“must	manage
his	own	household	well,	keeping	his	children	submissive	and	respectful	in
every	way;	for	if	a	man	does	not	know	how	to	manage	his	own	household,
how	can	he	care	for	God’s	church?”	(1	Tim.	3:4–5).
Peter	also	indicates	a	ruling	function	for	elders	when	he	exhorts
them:
Tend	the	flock	of	God	that	is	your	charge,	not	by	constraint	but
willingly,	not	for	shameful	gain	but	eagerly,	not	as	domineering	over
those	in	your	charge	but	being	examples	to	the	flock.	And	when	the
chief	Shepherd	is	manifested	you	will	obtain	the	unfading	crown	of
glory.	Likewise	you	that	are	younger	be	subject	to	the	elders.	(1	Peter
5:2–5)
The	fact	that	they	are	to	act	as	shepherds	of	the	flock	of	God,	and	the	fact	that
they	are	not	to	domineer	(that	is,	not	to	rule	harshly	or	oppressively)	strongly
suggest	that	elders	have	ruling	or	governing	functions	in	the	churches	to
which	Peter	is	writing.	This	is	consistent	with	his	charge	that	especially	those
who	are	younger	should	“be	subject	to	the	elders”	(v.	
5).
18
Although	Hebrews	13:17	does	not	name	elders,	certainly	there	are
some	church	officers	with	governing	authority	over	the	church,	for
the	author	says,	
“Obey	your	leaders	and	submit	to	them;	
for	they
are	keeping	watch	over	your	souls,	as	men	who	will	have	to	give
account.”	Since	the	New	Testament	gives	no	indication	of	any	other
officers	in	the	church	with	this	kind	of	authority,	it	is	reasonable	to
conclude	that	the	congregation	is	to	submit	to	and	obey	its	elders.
(This	conclusion	is	also	consistent	with	the	description	of
responsibilities	Paul	gives	to	the	Ephesian	elders	in	Acts	20:28.)
In	addition	to	governing	responsibility,	elders	also	seem	to	have	had
some	
teaching	responsibilities	
in	the	New	Testament	churches.	In
Ephesians	4:11,	elders	are	referred	to	as	“pastor-teachers”	(or,	on	an
alternative	translation,	pastors	who	are	viewed	as	quite	closely
united	to	teachers).	And	in	1	Timothy	3:2,	an	overseer	(elder)	must
be	“an	
apt	teacher.”	
Then	in	1	Timothy	5:17,	Paul	says,	“Let	the
elders	who	rule	well	be	considered	worthy	of	double	honor,
especially	those	who	labor	in	
preaching	and	teaching.”	
Here	Paul
seems	to	imply	that	there	is	a	special	group	of	elders	who	“labor	in
preaching	and	teaching.”	This	means	at	least	that	there	are	some
among	the	elders	who	give	more	time	to	the	activities	of	preaching
and	teaching,	and	may	even	mean	that	there	are	some	who	“labor”
in	the	sense	of	earning	their	living	from	that	preaching	and
teaching.	The	same	conclusions	can	be	drawn	from	Titus,	where
Paul	says	that	an	elder	“must	hold	firm	to	the	sure	word	as	taught,
so	that	he	may	be	
able	to	give	instruction	
in	sound	doctrine	and	also
to	confute	those	who	contradict	it”	(Titus	1:9).
19
Elders,	then,	had	responsibility	to	rule	and	to	teach	in	New
Testament	churches.
d.	Qualifications	for	Elders:
	When	Paul	lists	the	qualifications	for	elders,	it
is	significant	that	he	combines	requirements	concerning	character	traits	and
heart	attitudes	with	requirements	that	cannot	be	fulfilled	in	a	short	time	but
will	only	become	evident	over	a	period	of	several	years	of	faithful	Christian
living:
Now	a	bishop	must	be	above	reproach,	the	husband	of	one	wife,
temperate,	sensible,	dignified,	hospitable,	an	apt	teacher,	no	drunkard,
not	violent	but	gentle,	not	quarrelsome,	and	no	lover	of	money.	He
must	manage	his	own	household	well,	keeping	his	children
submissive	and	respectful	in	every	way;	for	if	a	man	does	not	know
how	to	manage	his	own	household,	how	can	he	care	for	God’s
church?	He	must	not	be	a	recent	convert,	or	he	may	be	puffed	up	with
conceit	and	fall	into	the	condemnation	of	the	devil;	moreover	he	must
be	well	thought	of	by	outsiders,	or	he	may	fall	into	reproach	and	the
snare	of	the	devil.	(1	Tim.	3:2–7)
Similar	but	differently	worded	qualifications	are	found	in	Titus	1:6–
9,	where	Paul	says	that	Titus	is	to	appoint	elders	in	every	town:
If	any	man	is	blameless,	the	husband	of	one	wife,	and	his	children	are
believers	and	not	open	to	the	charge	of	being	profligate	or
insubordinate.	For	a	bishop,	as	God’s	steward,	must	be	blameless;	he
must	not	be	arrogant	or	quick-tempered	or	a	drunkard	or	violent	or
greedy	for	gain,	but	hospitable,	a	lover	of	goodness,	master	of
himself,	upright,	holy,	and	self-controlled;	he	must	hold	firm	to	the
sure	word	as	taught,	so	that	he	may	be	able	to	give	instruction	in
sound	doctrine	and	also	to	confute	those	who	contradict	it.	(Titus	1:6–
9)
Those	who	are	choosing	elders	in	churches	today	would	do	well	to
look	carefully	at	candidates	in	the	light	of	these	qualifications,	and
to	look	for	these	character	traits	and	patterns	of	godly	living	rather
than	worldly	achievement,	fame,	or	success.	Especially	in	churches
in	western	industrial	societies,	there	seems	to	be	a	tendency	to	think
that	success	in	the	world	of	business	(or	law,	or	medicine,	or
government)	is	an	indication	of	suitability	for	the	office	of	elder,
but	this	is	not	the	teaching	of	the	New	Testament.	It	reminds	us	that
elders	are	to	be	“examples	to	the	flock”	in	their	daily	lives,	and	that
would	certainly	include	their	own	personal	relationships	with	God
in	Bible	reading,	prayer,	and	worship.	Just	as	Paul	could	say,	“
Be
imitators	of	me,	
as	I	am	of	Christ”	(1	Cor.	11:1;	cf.	2	Tim.	3:10–11),
and	just	as	he	could	command	Timothy	to	“
set	the	believers	an
example	
in	speech	and	conduct,	in	love,	in	faith,	in	purity”	(1	Tim.
4:12),	and	just	as	he	could	tell	Titus,	“Show	yourself	in	all	respects
a	
model	of	good	deeds,	
and	in	your	teaching	show	integrity,	gravity,
and	sound	speech	that	cannot	be	censured”	(Titus	2:7),	so	the
pattern	is	to	be	continued	in	the	lives	of	all	church	leaders	today.	It
is	not	optional	that	their	lives	be	examples	for	others	to	follow;	it	is
a	requirement.
e.	What	Is	the	Meaning	of	“Husband	of	One	Wife”?
	The	qualification	
“the
husband	of	one	wife”	
(1	Tim.	3:2;	Titus	1:6)	has	been	understood	in	different
ways.	Some	people	have	thought	that	it	excludes	from	the	office	of	elder	men
who	have	been	divorced	and	have	then	married	someone	else,	since	they	have
then	been	the	husband	of	two	wives.	But	this	does	not	seem	to	be	a	correct
understanding	of	these	verses.	A	better	interpretation	is	that	Paul	was
prohibiting	a	polygamist	(a	man	who	
presently	
has	more	than	one	wife)	from
being	an	elder.	Several	reasons	support	this	view:	(1)	All	the	other
qualifications	listed	by	Paul	refer	to	a	man’s	
present	status,	
not	his	entire	past
life.	For	example,	1	Timothy	3:1–7	does	not	mean	“one	who	has	
never	been
violent,”	but	“one	who	is	
not	now	
violent,	but	gentle.”	It	does	not	mean	“one
who	has	
never	been	
a	lover	of	money,”	but	“one	who	is	
not	now	
a	lover	of
money.”	It	does	not	mean	“one	who	has	been	above	reproach	for	his	whole
life,”	but	“one	who	is	now	above	reproach.”	If	we	made	these	qualifications
apply	to	one’s	entire	past	life,	then	we	would	exclude	from	office	almost
everyone	who	became	a	Christian	as	an	adult,	for	it	is	doubtful	that	any	non-
Christian	could	meet	these	qualifications.
(2)	Paul	could	have	said	“having	been	married	only	once”	if	he	had
wanted	to,	but	he	did	not.
20
	(3)	We	should	not	prevent	remarried
widowers	from	being	elders,	but	that	would	be	necessary	if	we	take
the	phrase	to	mean	“having	been	married	only	once.”	The
qualifications	for	elders	are	all	based	on	a	man’s	moral	and	spiritual
character,	and	there	is	nothing	in	Scripture	to	suggest	that	a	man
who	remarried	after	his	wife	had	died	has	lower	moral	or	spiritual
qualifications.
21
	(4)	Polygamy	was	possible	in	the	first	century.
Although	it	was	not	common,	polygamy	was	practiced,	especially
among	the	Jews.	The	Jewish	historian	Josephus	says,	“For	it	is	an
ancestral	custom	of	ours	to	have	several	wives	at	the	same	time.”
22
Rabbinic	legislation	also	regulated	inheritance	customs	and	other
aspects	of	polygamy.
23
Therefore	it	is	best	to	understand	“the	husband	of	one	wife”	to
prohibit	a	polygamist	from	holding	the	office	of	elder.	The	verses
say	nothing	about	divorce	and	remarriage	with	respect	to
qualifications	for	church	office.
f.	The	Public	Installation	of	Elders:
	In	connection	with	the	discussion	of
elders	Paul	says,	“Do	not	be	hasty	in	the	laying	on	of	hands”	(1	Tim.	5:22).
Although	the	context	does	not	specify	a	process	of	selection	of	elders,	the
immediately	preceding	context	(1	Tim.	5:17–21)	deals	entirely	with	elders,
and	laying	on	of	hands	would	be	an	appropriate	ceremony	for	setting
someone	apart	to	the	office	of	elder	(note	the	laying	on	of	hands	to	ordain	or
establish	people	in	certain	offices	or	tasks	in	Acts	6:6;	13:3;	1	Tim.	4:14).
Therefore	the	setting	apart	of	elders	seems	the	most	likely	possibility	for	the
action	Paul	has	in	mind.	In	this	case	he	would	be	saying,	“Do	not	be	hasty	in
ordaining	people	as	elders.”	This	would	be	consistent	with	a	process	whereby
deacons	also	are	to	be	“tested	first;	then	if	they	prove	themselves	blameless
let	them	serve	as	deacons”	(1	Tim.	3:10).	Although	Paul	did	ordain	elders
quite	soon	after	the	establishment	of	each	church	(Acts	14:23),	here	he
cautions	that	such	appointment	should	not	be	rushed,	lest	a	mistake	be	made.
And	in	the	entire	process,	the	church	must	be	careful	not	to	judge	as	the	world
judges,	for	“man	looks	on	the	outward	appearance,	but	the	L
ORD
	looks	on	the
heart”	(1	Sam.	16:7;	cf.	2	Cor.	5:16).	This	necessity	for	evaluation	of	spiritual
condition	was	also	evident	when	the	apostles	encouraged	the	church	at
Jerusalem	to	pick	out	“seven	men	of	good	repute,	
full	of	the	Spirit	and	of
wisdom,	
whom	we	may	appoint	to	this	duty”	(Acts	6:3).	Among	those	chosen
was	“Stephen,	a	man	full	of	faith	and	of	the	Holy	Spirit”	(Acts	6:5).
We	should	also	note	that	the	appointment	of	elders	in	Paul’s	early
churches	was	accompanied	by	“prayer	and	fasting,”	perhaps	in
connection	with	the	process	of	selection	of	the	elders.	(Note	the
example	of	Jesus	who	“went	out	to	the	mountain	to	pray;	and	all
night	he	continued	in	prayer	to	God”	before	he	chose	his	twelve
disciples	[Luke	6:12–13].)
24
3.	Deacon.
	The	word	
deacon	
is	a	translation	of	the	Greek	word	
diakonos,
which	is	the	ordinary	word	for	“servant”	when	it	is	used	in	contexts	not
dealing	with	church	officers.
Deacons	are	mentioned	clearly	in	Philippians	1:1:	“To	all	the	saints
in	Christ	Jesus	who	are	at	Philippi,	with	the	bishops	and	
deacons.”
But	there	is	no	specification	of	their	function,	other	than	to	indicate
that	they	are	different	from	the	bishops	(elders).	Deacons	are	also
mentioned	in	1	Timothy	3:8–13	in	a	more	extensive	passage:
Deacons	likewise	must	be	serious,	not	double-tongued,	not	addicted
to	much	wine,	not	greedy	for	gain;	they	must	hold	the	mystery	of	the
faith	with	a	clear	conscience.	And	let	them	also	be	tested	first;	then	if
they	prove	themselves	blameless	let	them	serve	as	deacons.	The
women	[or	‘wives’;	the	Greek	can	take	either	meaning]	likewise	must
be	serious,	no	slanderers,	but	temperate,	faithful	in	all	things.	Let
deacons	be	the	husband	of	one	wife,	and	let	them	manage	their
children	and	their	households	well;	for	those	who	serve	well	as
deacons	gain	a	good	standing	for	themselves	and	also	great
confidence	in	the	faith	which	is	in	Christ	Jesus.	(1	Tim.	3:8–13)
The	function	of	deacons	is	not	spelled	out	here,	but	the
qualifications	for	deacons	suggest	some	functions.	For	instance,
they	seem	to	have	had	some	responsibility	in	caring	for	the	finances
of	the	church,	since	they	had	to	be	people	who	were	“not	greedy	for
gain”	(v.	
8).	They	perhaps	had	some	administrative	responsibilities
in	other	activities	of	the	church	as	well,	because	they	were	to
manage	their	children	and	their	households	well	(v.	
12).	They	may
also	have	ministered	to	the	physical	needs	of	those	in	the	church	or
community	who	needed	help	(see	discussion	of	Acts	6	below).
Moreover,	if	verse	11	speaks	of	their	wives	(as	I	think	it	does),	then
it	would	also	be	likely	that	they	were	involved	in	some	house-to-
house	visitation	and	counseling,	because	the	wives	are	to	be	“no
slanderers.”	It	would	do	no	good	for	deacons	if	their	wives	(who
would	no	doubt	also	be	involved	in	prayer	and	counseling	with	the
deacons)	spread	confidential	matters	around	the	church.	But	these
are	only	suggestions	of	possible	areas	of	responsibility	hinted	at	in
this	passage.
The	noun	
deacon	
is	not	itself	used	in	Acts	6:1–6,	but	a	related	verb
(Gk.	
diakoneō,	
“to	serve”)	is	found	in	verse	2:	“It	is	not	right	that
we	should	give	up	preaching	the	word	of	God	to	
serve	
tables.”	Here
the	apostles	who	ruled	over	the	Jerusalem	church	found	it	necessary
to	delegate	some	administrative	responsibilities	to	others.	In	this
case,	the	responsibilities	included	the	distribution	of	food	to
widows	who	were	in	need.	It	seems	appropriate	to	think	of	these
seven	men	as	“deacons”	even	though	the	name	
deacon	
had	perhaps
not	yet	come	to	be	applied	to	them	as	they	began	this	responsibility,
for	they	seem	to	be	given	tasks	which	fit	well	with	the
responsibilities	of	deacons	hinted	at	in	1	Timothy	3:8–12.
There	are	other	texts	in	which	it	is	difficult	to	know	whether	the
New	Testament	is	speaking	about	a	deacon	as	a	special	church
officer	or	is	simply	using	the	word	to	refer	to	a	“servant”	in	a
general	sense.	This	is	the	difficulty	in	Romans	16:1,	where	Phoebe
is	called	a	“servant”	or	a	“deaconess”	or	“deacon”	(this	type	of
Greek	noun	has	the	same	form	in	both	masculine	and	feminine
genders,	so	it	is	simply	a	question	of	which	English	word	is	most
appropriate)	of	the	church	at	Cenchreae.	Because	Paul’s
requirement	for	deacons	was	that	they	be	“the	husband	of	one	wife”
(1	Tim.	3:12),	the	translation	“servant”	seems	preferable	in	Romans
16:1	(
diakonos	
takes	this	sense	in	Rom.	13:4;	15:8;	and	1	Cor.
3:5).
25
	In	general,	the	verses	on	deacons	show	that	they	had
recognized	offices	to	“serve”	the	church	in	various	ways.	Acts	6:1–
6	suggests	that	they	had	some	administrative	responsibilities,	but
were	nevertheless	subject	to	the	authority	of	those	who	had	rule
over	the	entire	church.
It	is	significant	that	nowhere	in	the	New	Testament	do	deacons	have
ruling	authority	over	the	church	as	the	elders	do,	nor	are	deacons
ever	required	to	be	able	to	teach	Scripture	or	sound	doctrine.
4.	Other	Offices?
	In	many	churches	today,	there	are	other	offices,	such	as
treasurer,	moderator	(one	responsible	for	chairing	church	business	meetings),
or	trustees	(in	some	forms	of	church	government,	these	are	people	who	have
legal	accountability	for	the	property	owned	by	the	church).	Moreover,
churches	with	more	than	one	paid	staff	member	may	have	some	staff
members	(such	as	music	director,	education	director,	youth	worker,	etc.)	who
are	“publicly	recognized	as	having	the	right	and	responsibility	to	perform
certain	functions	in	the	church,”	and	who	thus	fit	our	definition	of	church
officer,	and	who	may	even	be	paid	to	perform	such	functions	as	a	full-time
occupation,	but	who	may	not	be	elders	or	deacons	in	the	church.
There	does	not	seem	to	be	any	reason	to	say	that	these	should	not
be	offices	in	the	church	as	well,	even	though	all	of	them	could
probably	be	put	in	the	category	of	either	elder	or	deacon	(most	of
those	mentioned	above	could	be	deacons	with	specific
responsibilities,	or	the	moderator	could	also	be	an	elder	who	simply
moderates	church	business	meetings).	Nevertheless,	if	these	or
other	similar	offices	seem	helpful	for	the	functioning	of	the	church,
there	seems	to	be	no	reason	why	they	should	not	be	established.	Yet
if	they	are	established,	it	would	be	necessary	to	see	that	they	not
overshadow	the	importance	of	the	offices	specifically	named	in
Scripture,	and	that	they	not	have	any	authority	that	is	not	subject	to
the	governing	authority	of	those	officers	that	are	clearly	named	in
Scripture.	If	significant	influence	or	authority	is	gained	by	those
who	have	offices	not	named	in	Scripture,	then	it	is	much	less	likely
that	people	in	the	congregation	or	the	office	holders	themselves	will
look	to	Scripture	and	find	detailed	descriptions	of	how	they	should
act	or	how	they	should	be	chosen.	This	would	tend	to	diminish	the
effective	authority	of	Scripture	to	govern	the	church	in	the	area	of
church	leadership.
B.	How	Should	Church	Officers	Be	Chosen?
In	the	history	of	the	church	there	have	been	two	major	types	of
process	for	the	selection	of	church	officers—selection	by	a	higher
authority,	or	selection	by	the	local	congregation.	The	Roman
Catholic	Church	has	its	officers	appointed	by	a	higher	authority:	the
Pope	appoints	cardinals	and	bishops,	and	the	bishops	appoint
priests	in	local	parishes.	This	is	a	“hierarchy”	or	system	of
government	by	a	priesthood
26
	that	is	distinct	from	the	lay	people	in
the	church.	This	system	claims	an	unbroken	line	of	descent	from
Christ	and	the	apostles,	and	claims	that	the	present	priesthood
stands	as	Christ’s	representatives	in	the	church.	Although	the
Church	of	England	(the	Episcopalian	Church	in	the	United	States)
does	not	submit	to	government	by	the	Pope	or	have	cardinals,	it
does	have	some	similarities	to	the	hierarchical	system	of	the	Roman
Catholic	Church,	since	it	is	governed	by	bishops	and	archbishops,
and	its	clergy	are	thought	of	as	priests.	It	also	claims	direct
succession	from	the	apostles,	and	priests	and	bishops	are	appointed
by	a	higher	authority	outside	the	local	parish.
27
In	distinction	from	this	system	of	appointment	by	higher	authority,
in	most	other	Protestant	groups	church	officers	are	chosen	by	the
local	church,	or	by	some	group	within	the	local	church,	even
though	the	form	of	church	government	may	vary	in	other
significant	ways	(see	below).	Since	this	is	an	area	in	which	there	is
no	absolutely	decisive	biblical	text,	we	ought	to	be	patient	with
some	diversity	among	evangelicals	on	this	issue.	However,	there
are	several	reasons	why	it	seems	most	appropriate	that	church
officers	(such	as	elder	and	deacon,	and	certainly	including	the
“pastor”)	should	be	chosen	or	at	least	affirmed	or	recognized	in
some	way	by	the	whole	congregation:
(1)	In	the	New	Testament,	there	are	several	examples	where	church
officers	were	apparently	chosen	by	the	whole	congregation.	In	Acts
6:3,	the	apostles	do	not	themselves	pick	out	the	seven	early	deacons
(if	we	see	them	as	deacons),	but	say	to	the	whole	church,	“
Pick	out
from	among	you	
seven	men	of	good	repute,	full	of	the	Spirit	and	of
wisdom,	whom	we	may	appoint	to	this	duty.”	The	initial	selection
of	these	men	was	done	by	the	whole	congregation.	When	a
replacement	was	chosen	for	Judas	to	be	numbered	among	the
apostles,	
the	whole	congregation	of	120	persons	
(see	Acts	1:15)
made	the	initial	selection	of	two,	from	whom	the	Lord	himself
indicated	which	one	he	would	appoint:	“And	
they	
put	forward	two,
Joseph	called	Barsabbas,	who	was	surnamed	Justus,	and	Matthias”
(Acts	1:23).	At	the	end	of	the	Jerusalem	council,	the	whole	church
had	a	part	with	the	apostles	and	elders	in	choosing	representatives
to	convey	the	decisions	to	the	other	churches,	for	the	choosing	and
sending	was	done	by	“the	apostles	and	elders,	
with	the	whole
church”	
(Acts	15:22;	cf.	“in	assembly,”	v.	
25).	Moreover,	when
some	of	the	churches	sent	an	offering	with	Paul	to	be	taken	to	the
Jerusalem	church,	the	churches	also	sent	a	representative	to
accompany	Paul,	one	who,	according	to	Paul,	“has	been	appointed
by	the	churches	
to	travel	with	us	in	this	gracious	work”	(2	Cor.
8:19).
28
It	may	be	objected	that	Paul	and	Barnabas	
“appointed”	
elders	in
every	church	(Acts	14:23),	and	Paul	also	told	Titus	to	“
appoint
elders	in	every	town”	(Titus	1:5).	Does	this	not	seem	more	like	the
Roman	Catholic	or	Anglican	system	than	a	system	of
congregational	choice?	Yet	even	those	verses	need	not	imply	that
the	apostles	alone	made	the	selection,	but	could	certainly	include
congregational	consultation	and	even	consent	before	an	official
appointment	or	installation	was	made	(as	with	the	appointment	in
Acts	6:3,	6).	The	word	
appoint	
may	also	mean	“install.”
29
(2)	Another	reason	for	congregational	participation	in	the	selection
of	church	officers	is	that	in	the	New	Testament	generally,	final
governing	authority	seems	to	rest	not	with	any	group	outside	the
church	or	any	group	within	the	church,	but	with	the	church	as	a
whole.	The	final	step	in	church	discipline	before	excommunication
is	to	
“tell	it	to	the	church”	
(Matt.	18:17).	Excommunication,	or	the
act	of	excluding	someone	from	the	fellowship	of	the	church,	is	done
when	the	
whole	congregation	
is	“assembled”	(1	Cor.	5:4),	and	is
therefore	apparently	done	by	the	entire	congregation.	One	other
consideration	that	is	suggestive,	but	not	conclusive,	is	the	fact	that
the	epistles	that	are	written	to	churches	are	not	sent	to	the	elders	or
some	other	group	of	leaders	within	the	churches,	but	are	all	written
to	entire	churches,	and	the	whole	congregation	is	encouraged	to
read	and	expected	to	give	heed	to	these	epistles	(Rom.	1:7;	1	Cor.
1:2;	2	Cor.	1:1;	cf.	2	Cor.	1:13;	Col.	4:16;	1	Tim.	4:13).	This	means
that	the	apostles	relate	directly	to	the	congregations,	not	to	the
congregations	through	the	officers.
There	are	also	some	practical	reasons	that	can	be	mentioned:
(3)	If	the	entire	congregation	selects	the	officers	of	the	church,	there
is	more	accountability	to	the	congregation.	Paul	assumed	some
level	of	accountability	when	he	provided	for	the	fact	that	“two	or
three	witnesses”	could	bring	a	charge	of	wrongdoing	against	an
elder	(1	Tim.	5:19).	This	accountability	provides	an	additional
safeguard	against	temptations	to	sin	and	excessive	lust	for	power.
30
(4)	Historically,	false	doctrine	often	seems	to	be	adopted	by	the
theologians	of	the	church	first,	by	the	pastors	second,	and	by	the
informed	laity,	who	are	daily	reading	their	Bibles	and	walking	with
the	Lord,	last.	Therefore,	if	the	leadership	begins	to	stray	in
doctrine	or	in	life,	and	there	is	no	election	by	the	congregation,	then
the	church	as	a	whole	has	no	practical	means	of	getting	hold	of	the
situation	and	turning	it	around.	But	if	officers	are	elected	by	the
church,	then	there	is	a	system	of	“checks	and	balances”	whereby
even	the	governing	authority	of	the	church	has	some	accountability
to	the	church	as	a	whole.
31
(5)	Government	works	best	when	it	has	the	consent	of	those
governed	(cf.,	in	the	Old	Testament,	Ex.	4:29–31;	1	Sam.	7:5–6;
10:24;	2	Sam.	2:4;	1	Kings	1:39–40;	and	note	the	mistake	of
Rehoboam	in	1	Kings	12:1,	15).
These	factors	combine	to	indicate	that	although	Scripture	does	not
explicitly	command	one	specific	system	of	choosing	church
officers,	it	would	seem	most	wise	to	have	a	system	whereby	the
entire	church	has	a	significant	role	in	the	selection	and	recognition
of	the	officers	of	the	church—perhaps	through	a	congregational
vote,	or	through	some	other	process	whereby	congregational
recognition	is	required	before	church	officers	can	assume	office.
32
Can	anything	else	be	said	about	the	process	of	selecting	officers?
Some	additional	congregational	checks	against	excessive	use	of
authority	might	be	built	into	the	selection	process.	There	is	room
for	wide	variation	here,	but	provisions	such	as	election	to	limited
terms	of	office,	a	requirement	for	a	mandatory	year	off	(except	for
full-time	pastoral	staff	members	who	are	elders)	every	few	years,	a
requirement	for	periodic	reaffirmation	of	election,	and	a	provision
in	the	nominating	process	whereby	nominations	can	be	made	by	the
members	of	the	congregation	(even	if	most	nominations	come	from
the	elders	themselves),	would	all	provide	additional	measures	of
accountability	to	the	congregation	without	forfeiting	any	essential
aspects	of	governing	authority	over	the	congregation	once	elders
are	elected.
These	factors	would	also	provide	some	arguments	against	a	self-
perpetuating	group	of	elders	which	is	not	subject	to	election	or
periodic	reconfirmation	by	the	congregation,	but	once	again	it	must
be	said	that	no	specific	directives	are	listed	in	Scripture	and	there	is
room	for	variation	at	this	point.
C.	Forms	of	Church	Government
In	discussing	forms	of	church	government	there	is	some	overlap
with	the	previous	section	on	the	method	of	choosing	church
officers,	for	the	selection	of	officers	is	one	very	important	aspect	of
authority	in	the	church.	Different	philosophies	of	church
government	will	be	reflected	in	different	methods	used	for	selecting
officers	of	the	church,	as	explained	above.
This	is	evident	in	the	fact	that	forms	of	church	government	can	be
broken	down	into	three	large	categories,	which	we	may	term
“episcopalian,”	“presbyterian,”	and	“congregational.”	The
episcopalian	
forms	have	a	government	by	a	distinct	category	of
church	officers	known	as	a	priesthood,	and	final	authority	for
decision-making	is	found	outside	the	local	church.
33
	The	Episcopal
Church	system	is	the	primary	representative	among	Protestants	of
this	form	of	government.	The	
presbyterian	
forms	have	a
government	by	elders,	some	of	whom	have	authority	not	only	over
their	local	congregation,	but	also,	through	the	presbytery	and	the
general	assembly,	over	all	the	churches	in	a	region	and	then	in	the
denomination	as	a	whole.	The	
congregational	
forms	of	church
government	all	have	final	governing	authority	resting	with	the	local
congregation,	although	various	degrees	of	self-rule	are	given	up
through	denominational	affiliation,	and	the	actual	form	of	local
church	government	may	vary	considerably.	We	shall	examine	each
of	these	forms	of	government	in	the	following	discussion.
1.
	Episcopalian.
In	the	episcopalian	system,	an	archbishop	has	authority	over	many
bishops.	They	in	turn	have	authority	over	a	“diocese,”	which	simply
means	the	churches	under	the	jurisdiction	of	a	bishop.	The	officer
in	charge	of	a	local	parish	is	a	rector	(or	sometimes	a	vicar,	who	is
an	“assistant”	or	one	who	substitutes	for	the	rector).	Archbishops,
bishops,	and	rectors	are	all	priests,	since	they	have	all	at	one	time
been	ordained	to	the	episcopalian	priesthood	(but	in	practice	the
rector	is	most	often	called	the	priest).
34
The	argument	for	the	episcopalian	system	is	not	that	it	is	found	in
the	New	Testament,	but	that	it	is	a	natural	outgrowth	of	the
development	of	the	church	which	began	in	the	New	Testament,	and
it	is	not	forbidden	by	the	New	Testament.	E.	A.	Litton	writes,	“No
order	of	Diocesan	Bishops	appears	in	the	New	Testament,”	but
immediately	adds:
The	evidence	is	in	favour	of	the	supposition	that	Episcopacy	sprang
from	the	Church	itself,	and	by	a	natural	process,	and	that	it	was
sanctioned	by	Saint	John,	the	last	survivor	of	the	Apostles.	The
Presbytery,	when	it	assembled	for	consultation,	would	naturally	elect
a	president	to	maintain	order;	first	temporarily,	but	in	time	with
permanent	authority.	.	.	.	Thus	it	is	probable	that	at	an	early	period	an
informal	episcopate	had	sprung	up	in	each	church.	As	the	Apostles
were	one	by	one	removed	.	.	.	the	office	would	assume	increased
importance	and	become	invested	with	greater	powers.
35
EPISCOPALIAN	GOVERNMENT
Figure	47.1
Moreover,	since	the	office	of	bishop	and	the	corresponding
government	structure	found	in	the	Episcopalian	Church	is	both
historical	and	beneficial,	Litton	argues	that	it	should	be	preserved.
Finally,	the	benefit	of	direct	descent	from	the	apostles	is	regarded	as
a	strong	reason	in	favor	of	the	episcopalian	system.	Litton	says,
“The	Apostles	are	the	first	link	in	the	chain,	and	there	is	no	reason
why	a	succession,	as	regards	to	the	external	commission,	should	not
proceed	from	age	to	age,	the	existing	body	of	ministers	handing
down	the	official	authority	to	their	successors,	and	these	latter	in
turn	to	theirs.”
36
But	there	are	arguments	that	may	be	given	on	the	other	side	of	this
question.	(1)	It	is	significant	that	the	office	of	“bishop”	is	not	a
distinct	office	in	the	New	Testament,	but	is	simply	a	synonym	for
the	name	“elder,”	as	Litton	himself	agrees.
37
	There	is	no	
single
bishop	in	the	New	Testament,	but	bishops	(or	overseers)	are	always
plural	in	number.	This	should	not	be	seen	merely	as	an	incidental
fact,	for	even	among	the	apostles	Jesus	did	not	leave	one	with
superior	authority	over	the	others,	but	left	a	group	of	twelve	who
were	equal	in	governing	authority	(and	to	whom	others	were	later
added,	such	as	Paul).	Though	some	apostles,	such	as	Peter,	James,
and	Paul,	had	prominence	among	the	group,	they	did	not	have	any
greater	authority	than	the	others,	and	even	Peter	was	rebuked	by
Paul	in	Antioch	(Gal.	2:11).
38
	This	may	well	reflect	the	wisdom	of
Christ	in	guarding	against	the	abuse	of	power	that	inevitably	comes
when	any	one	human	being	has	too	much	power	without	sufficient
checks	and	balances	from	others.	Just	as	Jesus	left	a	plurality	of
apostles	to	have	ultimate	(human)	authority	in	the	early	church,	so
the	apostles	always	appointed	a	plurality	of	elders	in	every	church,
never	leaving	only	one	person	with	governing	authority.
(2)	The	theory	of	a	group	of	bishops	established	to	replace	the
apostles	is	not	taught	in	the	New	Testament,	nor	is	there	an
implication	of	a	need	for	
physical	
continuity	of	ordination	through
the	laying	on	of	hands	by	those	who	have	been	ordained	in	an
unbroken	chain	of	succession	from	the	apostles.	For	example,	in
Acts	14:3,	it	was	not	the	Jerusalem	apostles	who	ordained	Paul	and
Barnabas,	but	people	in	the	church	at	Antioch	who	laid	hands	on
them	and	sent	them	out.	In	fact,	there	is	very	little	evidence	that	the
apostles	had	any	concern	for	a	line	of	succession.	Timothy
apparently	was	ordained	not	simply	by	Paul	but	also	by	a	“council
of	elders”	(1	Tim.	4:14),	though	this	may	well	have	included	Paul
as	well	(see	2	Tim.	1:6).	More	importantly,	ordaining	is	ultimately
from	the	Lord	himself	(Acts	20:28;	1	Cor.	12:28;	Eph.	4:11),	and
there	is	nothing	in	the	nature	of	“ordaining”	(when	it	is	simply	seen
as	public	recognition	of	an	office)	that	requires	that	it	be	done	
only
by	those	previously	ordained	in	
physical	
descent	from	the	apostles.
If	God	has	called	an	elder,	he	is	to	be	recognized,	and	no	concern
about	physical	descent	needs	to	be	raised.	In	addition,	if	one	is
convinced	that	the	local	church	should	elect	elders	(see	discussion
above),	then	it	would	seem	appropriate	that	the	church	that	elected
the	elder—not	an	external	bishop—should	be	the	group	to	confer
the	outward	recognition	at	election	by	installing	the	person	in	office
or	ordaining	the	pastor.
39
(3)	While	it	may	be	argued	that	the	development	of	an	episcopalian
system	with	single	bishops	in	authority	over	several	churches	was	a
beneficial	development	in	the	early	church,	one	may	also	argue	that
it	was	a	deviation	from	New	Testament	standards	and	a	result	of
human	dissatisfaction	with	the	system	of	elected	local	elders	that
had	been	established	by	the	apostles	and	that	had	apparently
worked	very	well	from	A.D.	30	to	100	throughout	all	of	the	New
Testament	church.	But	one’s	evaluation	of	the	historical	data	will	of
course	depend	on	one’s	evaluation	of	earlier	arguments	for	and
against	an	episcopalian	system.
2.	Presbyterian.
	In	this	system,	each	local	church	elects	elders	to	a	session	(E
in	figure	47.2	stands	for	elder,	and	the	dotted	lines	indicate	that	the	whole
congregation	elects	the	elders).	The	pastor	of	the	church	will	be	one	of	the
elders	in	the	session,	equal	in	authority	to	the	other	elders.	This	session	has
governing	authority	over	the	local	church.	However,	the	members	of	the
session	(the	elders)	are	also	members	of	a	presbytery,	which	has	authority
over	several	churches	in	a	region.	This	presbytery	consists	of	some	or	all	of
the	elders	in	the	local	churches	over	which	it	has	authority.	Moreover,	some	of
the	members	of	the	presbytery	are	members	of	the	“general	assembly”	which
usually	will	have	authority	over	all	the	presbyterian	churches	in	a	nation	or
region.
40
The	arguments	in	favor	of	this	presbyterian	system	are:	(1)	that
those	who	have	wisdom	and	gifts	for	eldership	should	be	called	on
to	use	their	wisdom	to	govern	more	than	just	one	local	church,	and
(2)	a	national	(or	even	worldwide)	government	of	the	church	shows
the	unity	of	the	body	of	Christ.	Moreover	(3)	such	a	system	is	able
to	prevent	an	individual	congregation	from	falling	into	doctrinal
error	much	more	effectively	than	any	voluntary	association	of
churches.
41
The	presbyterian	system	outlined	above	has	many	adherents	among
evangelical	Christians	today,	and	it	certainly	works	effectively	in
many	cases.	However,	some	objections	can	be	brought	against	this
system:	(1)	Nowhere	in	Scripture	do	
elders	
have	regularly
established	authority	over	more	than	their	own	local	church.	The
pattern	is	rather	that	elders	are	appointed	in	local	churches	and	have
authority	over	local	churches.	Against	this	claim	the	Jerusalem
council	in	Acts	15	is	often	mentioned,	but	we	should	notice	that	this
council	was	held	in	Jerusalem	because	of	the	presence	of	the
apostles.	Apparently	the	apostles	and	the	elders	in	Jerusalem,	with
the	representatives	from	Antioch	(Acts	15:2),	together	sought	God’s
wisdom	on	this	matter.	And	there	seems	to	have	been	some
consultation	with	the	whole	church	as	well,	for	we	read,	at	the
conclusion	of	the	discussion,	“Then	it	seemed	good	to	the	apostles
and	the	elders,	
with	the	whole	church,	
to	choose	men	from	among
them	and	send	them	to	Antioch	with	Paul	and	Barnabas”	(Acts
15:22).	(If	this	narrative	gives	support	to	regional	government	by
elders,	it	therefore	also	gives	support	to	regional	government	by
whole	congregations!)	This	situation	with	the	elders	in	Jerusalem	is
not	a	good	pattern	to	defend	a	system	whereby	elders	have
authority	over	more	than	their	local	churches:	the	Jerusalem	church
did	not	send	for	all	the	elders	in	Judea,	Samaria,	and	Galilee,	and
call	a	meeting	of	“the	Judean	presbytery”	or	a	“general	assembly.”
Although	the	apostles	in	Jerusalem	certainly	had	authority	over	all
the	churches,	there	is	no	indication	that	elders	by	themselves,	even
in	the	Jerusalem	church,	had	any	such	authority.	And	certainly	there
is	no	New	Testament	pattern	for	elders	exercising	authority	over
any	other	than	their	own	local	churches.
42
PRESBYTERIAN	GOVERNMENT
Figure	47.2
(2)	This	system,	in	practice,	results	in	much	formal	litigation,	where
doctrinal	disputes	are	pursued	year	after	year	all	the	way	to	the
level	of	the	general	assembly.	One	wonders	if	this	should	be
characteristic	of	the	church	of	Christ—perhaps	so,	but	it	seems	to
the	present	author	to	be	a	system	that	encourages	such	litigation	far
more	than	is	necessary	or	edifying	for	the	body	of	Christ.
(3)	The	effective	power	in	church	government	seems,	in	practice,	to
be	too	removed	from	the	final	control	of	the	lay	people	in	the
church.	Although	Berkhof,	who	defends	this	system	of	government,
affirms	quite	clearly	that	“the	power	of	the	church	resides	
primarily
in	the	governing	body	of	the	local	church,”
43
	he	also	admits	that,
“the	more	general	the	assembly,	the	more	remote	it	is	from	the
people.”
44
	Thus	the	system	is	very	hard	to	turn	around	when	it
begins	to	go	wrong	since	the	lay	persons	who	are	not	elders	have	no
vote	in	the	session	or	the	presbytery	or	the	general	assembly,	and
the	governing	structure	of	the	church	is	more	removed	from	them
than	in	other	church	government	structures.
(4)	Although	in	some	cases	it	is	true	that	a	doctrinally	sound
denomination	with	a	presbyterian	system	of	government	can	keep	a
local	church	from	going	astray	in	its	doctrine,	in	actuality	very
frequently	the	opposite	has	been	true:	the	national	leadership	of	a
presbyterian	denomination	has	adopted	false	doctrine	and	has	put
great	pressure	on	local	churches	to	conform	to	it.
(5)	Although	the	presbyterian	system	does	represent	in	one	form	the
national	or	even	worldwide	unity	of	Christ’s	church,	such	unity	can
certainly	be	shown	in	other	ways	than	through	this	system	of
government.	The	churches	with	more	purely	congregational	forms
of	government	do	have	voluntary	associations	that	manifest	this
unity.	In	fact,	these	associations	involve	
all	
the	people	in	the
churches,	not	just	the	elders	or	the	clergy,	as	in	a	presbyterian
system.	The	national	meeting	of	a	Baptist	denomination,	for
example,	where	large	numbers	of	ministers	and	lay	persons	(who
are	not	necessarily	elders	or	deacons,	but	just	delegates	from	their
churches)	join	together	in	fellowship	might	be	seen	as	a	better
demonstration	of	the	unity	of	Christ’s	body	than	a	presbyterian
general	assembly	where	only	elders	are	present.
3.	Congregational.
a.	Single	Elder	(or	Single	Pastor):
	We	can	now	look	at	five	varieties	of
congregational	government	for	the	church.	The	first	one,	which	is	currently
the	most	common	among	Baptist	churches	in	the	United	States,	is	the	“single
elder”	form	of	government.	In	this	kind	of	government	the	pastor	is	seen	as
the	only	elder	in	the	church,	and	there	is	an	elected	board	of	deacons	who
serve	under	his	authority	and	give	support	to	him	(D	in	figure	47.3	stands	for
deacon).
SINGLE-ELDER	(SINGLE-PASTOR)	GOVERNMENT
Figure	47.3
In	this	system,	the	congregation	elects	the	pastor	and	also	elects	the
deacons.	The	amount	of	authority	the	pastor	has	varies	greatly	from
church	to	church,	and	will	generally	increase	the	longer	a	pastor
remains	in	a	church.	The	authority	of	the	deacon	board	is	often
thought	to	be	merely	an	advisory	authority.	In	the	way	this	system
ordinarily	functions,	especially	in	smaller	churches,	many	decisions
must	be	brought	before	the	congregation	as	a	whole.
The	arguments	in	favor	of	this	system	are	clearly	presented	in	A.	H.
Strong’s	
Systematic	Theology,	
a	text	that	has	been	widely	used	in
Baptist	circles.
45
	Strong	gives	the	following	arguments:
(1)	The	New	Testament	does	not	require	a	plurality	of	elders,	but
the	pattern	of	plural	elders	seen	in	the	New	Testament	was	only	due
to	the	size	of	the	churches	at	that	time.	He	says:
In	certain	of	the	New	Testament	churches	there	appears	to	have	been	a
plurality	of	elders.	.	.	.	There	is,	however,	no	evidence	that	the	number
of	elders	was	uniform,	or	that	the	plurality	which	frequently	existed
was	due	to	any	other	cause	than	the	size	of	the	churches	for	which
these	elders	cared.	The	New	Testament	example,	while	it	permits	the
multiplication	of	assistant	pastors	according	to	need,	does	not	require
a	plural	eldership	in	every	case.
46
In	this	quotation	Strong	shows	that	he	would	regard	additional	pastors	hired
by	a	larger	church	to	be	elders	as	well,	so	that	this	system	could	be	expanded
beyond	a	single	elder/pastor	to	include	two	or	more	elder/pastors.	But	the
crucial	distinction	is	that	
the	governing	authority	of	the	office	of	elder	is
possessed	only	by	the	professional	pastor(s)	of	the	church,	
and	is	not	shared
by	any	lay	persons	in	the	church.	And	we	must	realize	that	in	practice,	the
vast	majority	of	churches	that	follow	this	pattern	today	are	relatively	small
churches	with	only	one	pastor;	therefore,	in	actuality,	this	usually	becomes	a
single	elder	form	of	government.
47
(2)	Strong	adds	that	“James	was	the	pastor	or	president	of	the
church	at	Jerusalem,”	and	cites	Acts	12:17;	21:18;	and	Galatians
2:12	to	show	that	this	leadership	by	James	was	a	pattern	which
could	then	be	imitated	by	other	churches.
(3)	Strong	notes	that	some	passages	have	“bishop”	in	the	singular
but	“deacons”	in	the	plural,	hinting	at	something	similar	to	this
common	Baptist	form	of	government.	A	literal	translation	of	the
Greek	text	shows	a	singular	definite	article	modifying	“bishop”	in
two	verses:	“
The	bishop	
therefore	must	be	without	reproach”	(1
Tim.	3:2,	literal	translation)	and	that	“
the	bishop	
must	be
blameless”	(Titus	1:7,	literal	translation),	but	by	contrast,	we	read,
“
Deacons	
likewise	must	be	serious	.	.	.”	(1	Tim.	3:8).
(4)	Finally,	the	“angel	of	the	church”	in	Revelation	2:1,	8,	12,	18;
3:1,	7,	14,	according	to	Strong,	“is	best	interpreted	as	meaning	the
pastor	of	the	church;	and,	if	this	be	correct,	it	is	clear	that	each
church	had,	not	many	pastors,	but	one.”
48
(5)	Another	argument,	not	made	by	Strong,	is	found	in	recent
literature	on	church	growth.	The	argument	is	that	churches	need	a
strong	single	pastor	in	order	to	grow	rapidly.
49
Once	again	it	must	be	said	that	this	single	elder	form	of	government
has	also	worked	very	successfully	in	many	evangelical	churches.
However,	there	can	be	objections	to	the	case	presented	by	Strong
and	others.
(1)	It	seems	inconsistent	to	argue	that	the	New	Testament	falls	short
of	giving	a	clear	
command	
that	all	churches	should	have	a	plurality
of	elders	when	the	passages	on	qualifications	of	elders	in	1	Timothy
3:1–7	and	Titus	1:5–7	are	used	as	scriptural	
requirements	
for	church
officers	today.	How	can	churches	say	that	the	
qualifications	for
elders	
found	in	these	verses	are	commanded	for	us	today	but	the
system	of	plural	elders	
found	in	these	very	same	verses	is	not
commanded,	but	was	required	only	in	that	time	and	in	that	society?
Though	it	could	be	objected	that	these	are	commands	written	only
to	individual	situations	in	Ephesus	and	Crete,	much	of	the	New
Testament	consists	of	apostolic	commands	written	to	individual
churches	on	how	they	should	conduct	themselves.	Yet	we	do	not
therefore	say	that	we	are	free	to	disobey	these	instructions	in	other
parts	of	the	epistles.	In	fact,	1	Timothy	and	Titus	give	us	a	great
deal	of	material	on	the	conduct	of	the	local	church,	material	which
all	believing	churches	seek	to	follow.
Moreover,	it	seems	to	be	quite	unwise	to	ignore	a	clear	New
Testament	pattern	which	existed	throughout	all	the	churches	for
which	we	have	evidence	at	the	time	the	New	Testament	was
written.	When	the	New	Testament	shows	us	that	
no	
church	was
seen	to	have	a	single	elder	(“in	
every	
church,”	Acts	14:23;	“in	every
town,”	Titus	1:5;	“let	him	call	for	the	
elders,”	
James	5:14;	“I	exhort
the	
elders	
among	you,”	1	Peter	5:1),	then	it	seems	unpersuasive	to
say	that	smaller	churches	would	have	only	had	one	elder.	Even
when	Paul	had	just	founded	churches	on	his	first	missionary
journey,	there	were	
elders	
appointed	“in	every	church”	(Acts
14:23).	And	“every	town”	on	the	island	of	Crete	was	to	have	elders,
no	matter	how	large	or	small	the	church	was.
In	addition,	there	is	an	inconsistency	in	Strong’s	argument	when	he
says	that	the	large	churches	were	those	which	had	plural	elders,	for
then	he	claims	that	“the	angel	of	the	church	in	Ephesus”	(Rev.	2:1)
was	a	single	pastor,	according	to	this	common	Baptist	pattern.	Yet
the	church	at	Ephesus	at	that	time	was	exceptionally	large:	Paul,	in
founding	that	church,	had	spent	three	years	there	(Acts	20:31),
during	which	time	
“all	the	residents	of	Asia	heard	the	word	of	the
Lord,	
both	Jews	and	Greeks”	(Acts	19:10).	The	population	of
Ephesus	at	that	time	was	more	than	250,000.
50
We	may	ask,	why	should	we	follow	Strong	and	adopt	as	the	norm	a
pattern	of	church	government	which	is	
nowhere	
found	in	the	New
Testament,	and	reject	a	pattern	
everywhere	
found	in	the	New
Testament?
(2)	James	may	well	have	acted	as	moderator	or	presiding	officer	in
the	church	in	Jerusalem,	for	all	churches	will	have	some	kind	of
designated	leader	like	this	in	order	to	conduct	meetings.	But	this
does	not	imply	that	he	was	the	“pastor”	of	the	church	in	Jerusalem
in	a	“single	elder”	sense.	In	fact,	Acts	15:2	shows	that	there	were
elders	
(plural)	in	the	church	in	Jerusalem,	and	James	himself	was
probably	numbered	among	the	apostles	(see	Gal.	1:19)	rather	than
the	elders.
(3)	In	1	Timothy	3:2	and	Titus	1:7,	the	Greek	definite	article
modifying	“bishop”	simply	shows	that	Paul	is	speaking	of	general
qualifications	as	they	applied	to	any	one	example.
51
	In	fact,	in	both
cases	which	Strong	cites	we	know	there	were	
elders	
(plural)	in	the
churches	involved.	1	Timothy	3:2	is	written	to	Timothy	at	Ephesus,
and	Acts	20:17	shows	us	that	there	were	“elders”	in	the	church	at
Ephesus.	And	even	in	1	Timothy,	Paul	writes,	“Let	the	
elders	
who
rule	well	be	considered	worthy	of	double	honor,	especially	those
who	labor	in	preaching	and	teaching”	(1	Tim.	5:17).	With	regard	to
Titus	1:7	we	need	only	look	to	verse	5,	where	Paul	directs	Titus
explicitly	to	“appoint	
elders	
in	every	town.”
(4)	The	angels	of	the	seven	churches	in	Revelation	2–3	are	unusual
and	rather	weak	evidence	for	single	elders.	“The	angel	of	the
church	in	Ephesus”	(Rev.	2:1)	can	hardly	mean	that	there	was	only
one	elder	in	that	church,	since	we	know	there	were	“elders”	there	in
this	very	large	church	(Acts	20:17).	The	word	“angel”	used	in	the
address	to	the	seven	churches	in	Revelation	2–3	may	simply
designate	a	special	messenger	to	each	church,	perhaps	even	the
human	messenger	who	would	take	what	John	wrote	to	each
church,
52
	or	it	may	represent	“the	prevailing	spirit	of	the	church”
rather	than	the	ruling	official	of	the	congregation,
53
	or	may	even
simply	refer	to	an	angel	who	was	given	special	care	over	each
congregation.	Even	if	it	did	represent	a	presiding	officer	of	some
sort	in	each	congregation,	this	“angel”	is	not	shown	to	have	any
ruling	authority	or	any	functions	equivalent	to	today’s	single	pastor,
or	any	functions	equivalent	to	that	of	“elder”	in	the	New	Testament
churches.	This	passage	does	not	furnish	strong	enough	evidence	to
dislodge	the	clear	data	throughout	the	New	Testament	showing
plural	elders	in	every	church,	even	in	the	church	in	Ephesus.
It	is	interesting	that	all	of	the	New	Testament	passages	cited	by
Strong	(Acts	15,	Jerusalem;	1	Tim.	3:2,	Ephesus;	Titus	1:7,	Crete;
Rev.	2–3,	the	seven	churches,	including	Ephesus)	speak	of
situations	in	which	the	New	Testament	itself	points	quite	clearly	to
a	plurality	of	elders	in	authority	in	the	churches	mentioned.
(5)	The	argument	from	church	growth	studies	does	not	really	prove
that	government	led	by	a	single	pastor	is	necessary,	for	at	least	three
reasons:	(a)	We	should	not	reject	a	pattern	supported	in	Scripture
and	adopt	a	different	one	just	because	people	tell	us	that	the
different	pattern	seems	to	work	well	in	producing	large	churches—
our	role	here,	as	in	all	of	life,	should	rather	be	to	obey	Scripture	as
closely	as	we	can	and	expect	God	to	bring	appropriate	blessing	as
he	wills.	(b)	There	are	many	large	churches	with	government	by
plural	elders	(both	Presbyterian	churches	and	independent
churches),	so	the	argument	from	pragmatic	considerations	is	not
conclusive.	(c)	C.	Peter	Wagner	admits	that	strong	leaders	can	be
found	in	various	forms	of	church	government,
54
	and	we	must	agree
that	a	system	of	plural	elders	in	which	all	have	equal	authority	does
not	prevent	one	elder	(such	as	the	pastor)	from	functioning	as	a	sort
of	“first	among	equals”	and	having	a	significant	leadership	role
among	those	elders.
(6)	A	common	practical	problem	with	a	“single	elder”	system	is
either	an	excessive	concentration	of	power	in	one	person	or
excessive	demands	laid	upon	him.	In	either	case,	the	temptations	to
sin	are	very	great,	and	a	lessened	degree	of	accountability	makes
yielding	to	temptation	more	likely.	As	was	mentioned	above,	it	was
never	the	pattern	in	the	New	Testament,	even	with	the	apostles,	to
concentrate	ruling	power	in	the	hands	of	any	one	person.
Here	it	should	be	noted	that	the	“single	elder”	view	of	church
government	really	has	no	more	New	Testament	support	than	the
“single	bishop”	(episcopalian)	view.	Both	seem	to	be	attempts	to
justify	what	has	already	happened	in	the	history	of	the	church,	not
conclusions	that	have	grown	out	of	an	inductive	examination	of	the
New	Testament	itself.
(7)	Finally,	it	should	be	noted	that	in	actual	practice	the	“single
elder”	system	can	change	and	
function	
more	like	a	“plural	elders”
government,	only	those	who	function	as	elders	are	instead	called
“deacons.”	This	would	happen	if	the	deacons	share	the	actual
governing	authority	with	the	pastor,	and	the	pastor	and	other
deacons	see	themselves	as	accountable	to	the	deacon	board	as	a
whole.	The	system	then	begins	to	look	like	figure	47.4.
THE	PASTOR	AND	DEACONS	MAY	GOVERN	TOGETHER	AND	THUS	FUNCTION	LIKE	A
GOVERNMENT	OF	PLURAL	ELDERS
Figure	47.4
The	problem	with	this	arrangement	is	that	it	does	not	use	biblical
terminology	to	apply	to	the	functions	that	people	are	carrying	out,
for	“deacons”	in	the	New	Testament	never	had	governing	or
teaching	authority	in	the	church.	The	result	in	such	a	situation	is
that	people	in	the	church	(both	the	deacons	and	the	other	church
members)	will	fail	to	read	and	apply	scriptural	passages	on	elders	to
those	who	are	
in	fact	functioning	as	elders	
in	their	church.
Therefore	these	passages	lose	the	direct	relevance	that	they	should
have	in	the	church.	In	this	case	however,	the	problem	could	be
solved	by	changing	the	name	“deacon”	to	“elder,”	and	considering
the	pastor	an	elder	along	with	the	others.
b.	Plural	Local	Elders:
	Is	there	any	kind	of	church	government	that
preserves	the	pattern	of	plural	elders	found	in	the	New	Testament	and	that
avoids	the	expansion	of	elders’	authority	beyond	the	local	congregation?
Although	such	a	system	is	not	distinctive	of	any	denomination	today,	it	is
found	in	many	individual	congregations.	Using	the	conclusions	reached	to
this	point	on	the	New	Testament	data,	I	would	suggest	figure	47.5	as	a
possible	pattern.

PLURAL	LOCAL	ELDER	GOVERNMENT
Figure	47.5
Within	such	a	system	the	elders	govern	the	church	and	have
authority	to	rule	over	it,	authority	which	has	been	conferred	by
Christ	himself,	the	head	of	the	church,	and	by	the	Holy	Spirit	(Acts
20:28;	Heb.	13:17).	In	this	system	of	government,	there	is	always
more	than	one	elder,	a	fact	which	distinguishes	this	form	of
government	from	the	“single	elder	system”	discussed	above.	In	a
contemporary	congregation,	the	“pastor”	(or	“senior	pastor”)	would
be	one	among	the	elders	in	this	system.	He	does	not	have	authority
over	them,	nor	does	he	work	for	them	as	an	employee.	He	has	a
somewhat	distinct	role	in	that	he	is	engaged	in	the	full-time	work	of
“preaching	and	teaching”	(1	Tim.	5:17),	and	derives	part	or	all	of
his	income	from	that	work	(1	Tim.	5:18).	He	also	may	frequently
assume	a	leadership	role	(such	as	chairman)	among	the	elders,
which	would	fit	with	his	leadership	role	among	the	congregation,
but	such	a	leadership	role	
among	the	elders	
would	not	be	necessary
to	the	system.	In	addition,	the	pastor	will	ordinarily	have
considerable	authority	to	make	decisions	and	provide	leadership	in
many	areas	of	responsibility	that	have	been	delegated	to	him	by	the
elder	board	as	a	whole.	Such	a	system	would	allow	a	pastor	to
exercise	strong	leadership	in	the	church	while	still	having	equal
governing	authority	with	the	other	elders.
The	strength	of	this	system	of	government	is	seen	in	the	fact	that
the	pastor	does	not	have	authority	on	his	own	over	the
congregation,	but	that	authority	belongs	collectively	to	the	entire
group	of	elders	(what	may	be	called	the	elder	board).	Moreover,	the
pastor	himself,	like	every	other	elder,	is	subject	to	the	authority	of
the	elder	board	as	a	whole.	This	can	be	a	great	benefit	in	keeping	a
pastor	from	making	mistakes,	and	in	supporting	him	in	adversity
and	protecting	him	from	attacks	and	opposition.
55
In	such	a	system,	are	there	limitations	that	should	be	placed	on	the
authority	of	the	elders?	In	the	section	above	on	the	manner	of
choosing	church	officers,	several	reasons	were	given	to	have	some
“checks	and	balances”	that	would	put	restrictions	on	the	authority
of	the	officers	of	a	church.
56
	Those	arguments	are	also	helpful	here
in	indicating	that,	though	elders	have	substantial	governing
authority	over	the	church,	it	should	not	be	unlimited	authority.
Examples	of	such	limitations	might	be	suggested,	such	as:	(1)	they
may	be	elected	rather	than	self-perpetuating;	(2)	they	may	have
specific	terms	with	a	mandatory	year	off	the	board	(except	for	the
pastor,	whose	continuing	leadership	responsibilities	require
continuous	participation	as	an	elder);	(3)	some	large	decisions	may
be	required	to	be	brought	to	the	whole	church	for	approval.
Regarding	this	third	point,	congregational	approval	is	already	a
biblical	requirement	for	church	discipline	in	Matthew	18:17	and	for
excommunication	in	1	Corinthians	5:4.	The	principle	of
congregational	election	of	elders	would	imply	that	the	decision	to
call	any	pastor	would	also	have	to	be	approved	by	the	congregation
as	a	whole.	Major	new	directions	in	the	ministry	of	the	church,
which	will	require	large-scale	congregational	support,	may	be
brought	to	the	church	as	a	whole	for	approval.	Finally,	it	would
seem	wise	to	require	congregational	approval	on	such	large
financial	decisions	as	an	annual	budget,	the	decision	to	purchase
property,	or	the	decision	to	borrow	money	for	the	church	(if	that	is
ever	done),	simply	because	the	church	as	a	whole	will	be	asked	to
give	generously	to	pay	for	these	commitments.
57
In	fact,	the	reasons	for	placing	some	limitations	on	the	authority	of
church	officers	may	appear	so	strong	that	they	would	lead	us	to
think	that	all	decisions	and	all	governing	authority	should	rest	with
the	congregation	as	a	whole.	(Some	churches	have	adopted	a
system	of	almost	pure	democracy	in	governing	the	church,	whereby
everything	must	come	to	the	congregation	as	a	whole	for	approval.)
However,	this	conclusion	ignores	the	abundant	New	Testament
evidence	about	the	clear	ruling	and	governing	authority	given	to
elders	in	New	Testament	churches.	Therefore,	while	it	is	important
to	have	
some	recognized	checks	
on	the	authority	of	elders,	and	to
rest	ultimate	governing	authority	with	the	congregation	as	a	whole,
it	still	is	necessary,	if	we	are	to	remain	faithful	to	the	New
Testament	pattern,	to	have	a	strong	level	of	authority	vested	in	the
elders	themselves.
58
I	have	labeled	this	system	one	of	“plural	
local	
elders”	in	order	to
distinguish	it	from	a	presbyterian	system	where	elders,	when
gathered	on	the	level	of	the	presbytery	or	general	assembly,	have
authority	over	more	than	their	own	local	congregations.	But	in	such
a	system	of	elected	local	elders,	can	there	be	any	wider	associations
with	churches	beyond	the	local	congregation?	Yes,	certainly.	While
churches	with	this	system	may	choose	to	remain	entirely
independent,	most	will	enter	into	voluntary	associations	with	other
churches	of	similar	convictions	in	order	to	facilitate	fellowship,
pooling	of	resources	for	mission	activity	(and	perhaps	for	other
things	such	as	Christian	camps,	publications,	theological	education,
etc.).	However,	the	only	authority	these	larger	associations	would
have	over	the	local	congregation	would	be	the	authority	to	exclude
an	individual	church	from	the	association,	not	the	authority	to
govern	its	individual	affairs.
c.	Corporate	Board:
	The	remaining	three	forms	of	congregational	church
government	are	not	commonly	used,	but	are	sometimes	found	in	evangelical
churches.	The	first	one	is	patterned	after	the	example	of	a	modern
corporation,	where	the	board	of	directors	hires	an	executive	officer	who	then
has	authority	to	run	the	business	as	he	sees	fit.	This	form	of	government	could
also	be	called	the	“you-work-for-us”	structure.	It	is	depicted	in	figure	47.6.
CORPORATE	BOARD	MODEL	OF	CHURCH	GOVERNMENT
Figure	47.6
In	favor	of	this	structure	it	might	be	argued	that	this	system	in	fact
works	well	in	contemporary	businesses.	However,	there	is	no	New
Testament	precedent	or	support	for	such	a	form	of	church
government.	It	is	simply	the	result	of	trying	to	run	the	church	like	a
modern	business,	and	it	sees	the	pastor	not	as	a	spiritual	leader,	but
merely	as	a	paid	employee.
Further	objections	to	this	structure	are	the	fact	that	it	deprives	the
pastor	of	sharing	in	the	ruling	authority	that	must	be	his	if	he	is	to
carry	out	his	eldership	responsibilities	effectively.	Moreover,	the
members	of	the	board	are	also	members	of	the	congregation	over
whom	the	pastor	is	supposed	to	have	some	authority,	but	that
authority	is	seriously	compromised	if	the	leaders	of	the
congregation	are	in	fact	his	bosses.
d.	Pure	Democracy:
	This	view,	which	takes	congregational	church
government	to	its	logical	extreme,	can	be	represented	as	in	figure	47.7.
In	this	system	
everything	
must	come	to	the	congregational	meeting.
The	result	is	that	decisions	are	often	argued	endlessly,	and,	as	the
church	grows,	decision-making	reaches	a	point	of	near	paralysis.
While	this	structure	does	attempt	to	do	justice	to	some	of	the
passages	cited	above	regarding	the	need	for	final	governing
authority	to	rest	with	the	congregation	as	a	whole,	it	is	unfaithful	to
the	New	Testament	pattern	of	recognized	and	designated	elders	who
have	actual	authority	to	rule	the	church	in	most	situations.
GOVERNMENT	BY	PURE	DEMOCRACY
Figure	47.7
e.	“No	Government	but	the	Holy	Spirit”:
	Some	churches,	particularly	very
new	churches	with	more	mystical	or	extremely	pietistic	tendencies,	function
with	a	church	government	that	looks	something	like	figure	47.8.
NO	GOVERNMENT	BUT	THE	HOLY	SPIRIT
Figure	47.8
In	this	case,	the	church	would	deny	that	any	form	of	government	is
needed,	it	would	depend	on	all	the	members	of	the	congregation
being	sensitive	to	the	leading	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in	their	own	lives,
and	decisions	would	generally	be	made	by	consensus.	This	form	of
government	never	lasts	very	long.	Not	only	is	it	unfaithful	to	the
New	Testament	pattern	of	designated	elders	with	governing
authority	in	the	church,	but	it	is	also	subject	to	much	abuse,	because
subjective	feelings	rather	than	wisdom	and	reason	prevail	in	the
decision-making	process.
4.	Conclusions.
	It	must	be	made	clear,	in	concluding	this	discussion	of
church	government,	that	the	form	of	government	adopted	by	a	church	is	not	a
major	point	of	doctrine.	Christians	have	lived	comfortably	and	ministered
very	effectively	within	several	different	kinds	of	systems,	and	there	are	many
evangelicals	within	each	of	the	systems	mentioned.	Moreover,	a	number	of
different	types	of	church	government	systems	seem	to	work	
fairly	well.
Where	there	are	weaknesses	that	appear	to	be	inherent	in	the	governing
structure,	individuals	within	the	system	generally	recognize	those	weaknesses
and	attempt	to	compensate	for	them	in	whatever	ways	the	system	will	allow.
Nevertheless,	a	church	can	be	
more	pure	
or	
less	pure	
on	this	point,
as	in	other	areas.	As	we	are	persuaded	by	Scripture	concerning
various	aspects	of	church	government,	then	we	should	continue	to
pray	and	work	for	the	greater	purity	of	the	visible	church	in	this
area	as	well.
D.	Should	Women	be	Church	Officers?
Most	systematic	theologies	have	not	included	a	section	on	the
question	of	whether	women	can	be	church	officers,	because	it	has
been	assumed	through	the	history	of	the	church,	with	very	few
exceptions,	that	only	men	could	be	pastors	or	function	as	elders
within	a	church.
59
	But	in	recent	years	a	major	controversy	has
arisen	within	the	evangelical	world:	may	women	as	well	as	men	be
pastors?	May	they	share	in	all	the	offices	of	the	church?	I	have
treated	this	question	much	more	extensively	elsewhere
60
	but	a	brief
summary	of	the	question	can	be	given	at	this	point.
We	must	affirm	at	the	outset	that	the	creation	narrative	in	
Genesis
1:27	views	men	and	women	as	equally	created	in	the	image	of	God.
Therefore,	men	and	women	have	equal	value	to	God,	and	should	be
seen	by	us	as	having	absolutely	equal	value	as	persons,	and	equal
value	to	the	church.	Moreover,	Scripture	assures	men	and	women
of	equal	access	to	all	the	blessings	of	salvation	(see	Acts	2:17–18;
Gal.	3:28).
61
	This	is	remarkably	affirmed	in	the	high	dignity	and
respect	which	Jesus	accorded	to	women	in	his	earthly	ministry.
62
We	must	also	admit	that	evangelical	churches	have	often	failed	to
recognize	the	full	equality	of	men	and	women,	and	thereby	have
failed	to	count	women	equal	in	value	to	men.	The	result	has	been	a
tragic	failure	to	recognize	that	God	often	gives	women	equal	or
greater	spiritual	gifts	than	men,	a	failure	to	encourage	women	to
have	full	and	free	participation	in	the	various	ministries	of	the
church,	and	a	failure	to	take	full	account	of	the	wisdom	that	God
has	given	to	women	with	respect	to	important	decisions	in	the	life
of	the	church.	If	the	present	controversy	over	women’s	roles	in	the
church	can	result	in	the	eradication	of	some	of	these	past	abuses,
then	the	church	as	a	whole	will	benefit	greatly.
Yet	the	question	remains,	should	women	be	pastors	or	elders	in
churches?	(Or	should	they	fill	roles	equivalent	to	that	of	an	elder	in
churches	that	have	alternative	forms	of	government?)	My	own
conclusion	on	this	issue	is	that	the	Bible	does	not	permit	women	to
function	in	the	role	of	pastor	or	elder	within	a	church.	This	has	also
been	the	conclusion	of	the	vast	majority	of	churches	in	various
societies	throughout	history.	The	reasons	that	seem	to	me	to	be
most	persuasive	in	answering	this	question	are	the	following:
1.
	1	Timothy	2:11–14.
	The	single	passage	in	Scripture	that	addresses	this
question	most	directly	is	1	Timothy	2:11–14:
Let	a	woman	learn	in	silence	with	all	submissiveness.	
I	permit	no
woman	to	teach	or	to	have	authority	over	men;	
she	is	to	keep	silent.
For	Adam	was	formed	first,	then	Eve;	and	Adam	was	not	deceived,
but	the	woman	was	deceived	and	became	a	transgressor.
Here	Paul	is	speaking	about	the	church	when	it	is	assembled	(see
vv.	8–9).	In	such	a	setting,	Paul	says,	“I	permit	no	woman	to	
teach
or	to	
have	authority	
over	men”	(v.	
12).	These	are	the	functions	that
are	carried	out	by	the	elders	of	the	church,	and	especially	by	what
we	know	as	a	pastor	in	contemporary	church	situations.
63
	It	is
specifically	these	functions	unique	to	elders	that	Paul	prohibits	for
women	in	the	church.
64
Several	objections	have	been	brought	against	this	position:
65
(a)	It	has	been	said	that	this	passage	applies	only	to	a	specific
situation	that	Paul	is	addressing,	probably	one	where	women	were
teaching	heretical	doctrine	within	the	church	at	Ephesus.	But	this
objection	is	not	persuasive,	since	there	is	no	clear	statement	in	1
Timothy	that	says	that	women	were	actually	
teaching	
false
doctrines.	(1	Tim.	5:13	talks	about	women	who	are	gossiping,	but
does	not	mention	false	doctrine.)	Moreover,	Paul	does	not	simply
tell	certain	women	who	are	teaching	false	doctrine	to	be	silent,	but
he	says,	“I	permit	no	
woman	
to	teach	or	to	have	authority	over
men.”	And	finally,	the	
reason	
Paul	gives	for	this	prohibition	is	not
the	one	proposed	in	this	objection,	but	a	far	different	one:	the
situation	of	Adam	and	Eve	before	the	fall,	and	before	there	was	any
sin	in	the	world	(see	v.	
13),	and	the	way	in	which	a	reversal	in	male
and	female	roles	occurred	at	the	time	of	the	fall	(see	v.	
14).	These
reasons	are	not	limited	to	one	situation	in	the	church	at	Ephesus,
but	have	application	to	manhood	and	womanhood	generally.
(b)	Another	objection	is	to	say	that	Paul	gave	this	prohibition
because	women	were	not	well	educated	in	the	first	century,	and
therefore	were	not	qualified	for	teaching	or	governing	roles	in	the
church.	But	Paul	does	not	give	lack	of	education	as	a	reason	for
saying	that	women	cannot	“teach	or	.	.	.	have	authority	over	men,”
but	rather	points	back	to	creation	(vv.	13–14).	It	is	precarious	to
base	an	argument	on	a	reason	Paul	did	
not	
give	instead	of	the
reason	he	
did	
give.
In	addition,	this	objection	misunderstands	the	actual	facts	of	the
ancient	church	and	the	ancient	world.	Formal	training	in	Scripture
was	not	required	for	church	leadership	in	the	New	Testament
church,	because	several	of	the	apostles	did	not	have	formal	biblical
training	(see	Acts	4:13).	On	the	other	hand,	the	skills	of	basic
literacy	and	therefore	the	ability	to	read	and	study	Scripture	were
available	to	men	and	women	alike	(note	Acts	18:26;	Rom.	16:1;	1
Tim.	2:11;	Titus	2:3–4).	There	were	many	well-educated	women	in
the	ancient	world,	and	particularly	in	a	cultural	center	such	as
Ephesus.
66
Finally,	those	who	make	such	an	argument	are	sometimes
inconsistent	in	that	elsewhere	they	point	to	women	who	had
leadership	positions	in	the	ancient	church,	such	as	Priscilla.	This
point	is	especially	relevant	to	1	Timothy	2,	because	Paul	was
writing	to	Ephesus	(1	Tim.	1:3),	which	was	the	home	church	of
Priscilla	and	Aquila	(see	Acts	18:18–19,	21).	It	was	in	this	very
church	at	Ephesus	that	Priscilla	knew	Scripture	well	enough	to	help
instruct	Apollos	in	A.D.	51	(Acts	18:26).	Then	she	had	probably
learned	from	Paul	himself	for	another	three	years	while	he	stayed	at
Ephesus	teaching	“the	whole	counsel	of	God”	(Acts	20:27;	cf.	v.
31;	also	1	Cor.	16:19).	No	doubt	many	other	women	in	Ephesus	had
followed	her	example	and	also	had	learned	from	Paul.	Although
they	later	went	to	Rome,	we	find	Aquila	and	Priscilla	back	in
Ephesus	at	the	end	of	Paul’s	life	(2	Tim.	4:19),	about	A.D.	67.
Therefore,	it	is	likely	that	they	were	in	Ephesus	in	A.D.	65,	about
the	time	Paul	wrote	1	Timothy	(about	
fourteen	years	after	Priscilla
had	helped	instruct	Apollos
).	Yet	Paul	does	not	allow	even	well-
educated	Priscilla	or	any	other	well-educated	women	at	Ephesus	to
teach	men	in	the	public	assembly	of	the	church.	The	reason	was	not
lack	of	education,	but	the	order	of	creation	which	God	established
between	men	and	women.
2.	1	Corinthians	14:33b–36.
	In	a	similar	teaching,	Paul	says:
As	in	all	the	churches	of	the	saints,	the	women	should	keep	silence	in
the	churches.	For	they	are	not	permitted	to	speak,	but	should	be
subordinate,	as	even	the	law	says.	If	there	is	anything	they	desire	to
know,	let	them	ask	their	husbands	at	home.	For	it	is	shameful	for	a
woman	to	speak	in	church.	What!	Did	the	word	of	God	originate	with
you,	or	are	you	the	only	ones	it	has	reached?	(1	Cor.	14:33b–36)
In	this	section	Paul	cannot	be	prohibiting	all	public	speech	by	women	in	the
church,	for	he	clearly	allows	them	to	pray	and	prophesy	in	church	in	1
Corinthians	11:5.	Therefore,	it	is	best	to	understand	this	passage	as	referring
to	speech	that	is	in	the	category	being	discussed	in	the	immediate	context,
namely,	the	spoken	evaluation	and	judging	of	prophecies	in	the	congregation
(see	v.	
29:	“Let	two	or	three	prophets	speak,	and	
let	the	others	weigh	what	is
said”
).	While	Paul	allows	women	to	speak	and	give	prophecies	in	the	church
meeting,	he	does	not	allow	them	to	speak	up	and	give	evaluations	or	critiques
of	the	prophecies	that	have	been	given,	for	this	would	be	a	ruling	or
governing	function	with	respect	to	the	whole	church.
67
	This	understanding	of
the	passage	depends	on	our	view	of	the	gift	of	prophecy	in	the	New
Testament	age,	namely,	that	prophecy	involves	not	authoritative	Bible
teaching,	and	not	speaking	words	of	God	which	are	equal	to	Scripture,	but
rather	reporting	something	which	God	spontaneously	brings	to	mind.
68
	In	this
way,	Paul’s	teachings	are	quite	consistent	in	1	Corinthians	14	and	1	Timothy
2:	in	both	cases	he	is	concerned	to	preserve	male	leadership	in	the	teaching
and	governing	of	the	church.
69
3.	1	Timothy	3:1–7	and	Titus	1:5–9.
	Both	1	Timothy	3:1–7	and	Titus	1:5–9
assume	that	elders	are	going	to	be	men.	An	elder	(or	bishop/overseer)	must	be
“the	husband	of	one	wife”	(1	Tim.	3:2;	also	Titus	1:6),	and	“must	manage	his
own	household	well,	keeping	his	children	submissive	and	respectful	in	every
way”	(1	Tim.	3:4).
Some	may	object	that	these	were	directions	given	only	for	the
cultural	situation	in	the	ancient	world,	where	women	were	not	well
educated,	but	the	same	response	that	was	given	above	concerning	1
Timothy	2	would	apply	in	this	case	as	well.
4.	The	Relationship	Between	the	Family	and	the	Church.
	The	New
Testament	makes	frequent	connections	between	the	life	of	the	family	and	the
life	of	the	church.	Paul	says,	“If	a	man	does	not	know	how	to	manage	his	own
household,	how	can	he	care	for	God’s	church?”	(1	Tim.	3:5).	He	says	to
Timothy,	“Do	not	rebuke	an	older	man	but	exhort	him	as	you	would	a	
father;
treat	younger	men	like	
brothers,	
older	women	like	
mothers,	
younger	women
like	
sisters,	
in	all	purity”	(1	Tim.	5:1–2).	Several	other	passages	could	be
cited,	but	the	close	relationship	between	the	family	and	the	church	should	be
clear.
Because	of	this	connection,	it	is	inevitable	that	leadership	patterns
in	the	family	will	reflect	leadership	patterns	in	the	church,	and	vice
versa.	It	is	very	appropriate	that,	as	godly	men	fulfill	their
leadership	responsibilities	in	the	family,	they	should	also	fulfill
leadership	responsibilities	in	the	church.	Conversely,	if	patterns	of
female	leadership	are	established	in	the	church,	it	will	inevitably
bring	pressures	toward	greater	female	leadership,	and	toward
abdication	of	male	leadership,	within	the	family.
70
5.	The	Example	of	the	Apostles.
	While	the	apostles	are	not	the	same	as
elders	in	local	churches,	it	is	still	important	to	realize	that	Jesus	established	a
pattern	of	male	leadership	in	the	church	when	he	appointed	twelve	men	as
apostles.	It	is	simply	not	true	that	women	have	equal	access	to	all	offices	in
the	church,	for	Jesus,	the	head	of	the	church,	is	a	man.	And	the	twelve
apostles	who	will	sit	on	twelve	thrones	judging	the	twelve	tribes	of	Israel	(see
Matt.	19:28),	and	whose	names	are	written	forever	on	the	foundations	of	the
heavenly	city	(Rev.	21:14),	are	all	men.	Therefore,	
there	will	be	no	eternal
modeling	of	equal	roles	for	men	and	women	at	all	levels	of	authority	in	the
church.	
Rather,	there	is	a	pattern	of	male	leadership	in	the	highest	governing
roles	of	the	church,	a	pattern	that	will	be	evident	to	all	believers	for	all
eternity.
One	objection	brought	against	this	argument	is	the	claim	that	the
culture	at	that	time	would	not	have	allowed	Jesus	to	choose	six	men
and	six	women	as	apostles,	or	six	husband-wife	teams	as	apostles,
and	this	is	the	reason	he	did	not	do	so.	But	such	an	objection
impugns	Jesus’	integrity	and	courage.	Jesus	was	not	afraid	to	break
social	customs	when	a	moral	principle	was	at	stake:	he	criticized
the	Pharisees	publicly,	healed	on	the	Sabbath,	cleansed	the	temple,
spoke	with	a	Samaritan	woman,	ate	with	tax	collectors	and	sinners,
and	ate	with	unwashed	hands.
71
	If	Jesus	had	wanted	to	establish	a
principle	of	equal	access	to	church	leadership	by	both	men	and
women,	he	certainly	could	have	done	so	in	the	appointment	of	his
apostles,	and	he	would	have	done	so,	in	spite	of	cultural	opposition,
if	it	had	been	the	pattern	he	wanted	to	establish	in	his	church.	But
he	did	not.
72
Another	objection	to	this	argument	is	to	say	that,	if	this	is	true,	then
only	Jews	can	be	leaders	in	our	churches,	since	all	twelve	apostles
were	Jewish	as	well.	But	this	objection	is	not	persuasive	because	it
fails	to	recognize	that	the	church	was	entirely	Jewish	at	its
beginning.	This	was	because	it	was	God’s	plan	to	bring	salvation
through	the	Jews,	and	this	led	to	twelve	Jewish	apostles.	Yet	within
the	pages	of	the	New	Testament,	we	see	that	the	church	soon
expanded	to	include	Gentiles	(Matt.	28:19;	Eph.	2:16)	and	Gentiles
soon	became	elders	and	leaders	in	the	New	Testament	church.	A
Gentile	(Luke)	wrote	two	books	of	the	New	Testament	(Luke	and
Acts),	and	several	Gentiles	such	as	Titus	and	Epaphroditus	were
Paul’s	apostolic	assistants	and	co-workers.	In	fact,	God	had
progressively	revealed	from	the	time	of	Abraham	(Gen.	12:3;	17:5)
that	it	was	his	plan	eventually	to	include	countless	Gentiles	among
his	people.
So	the	Jewishness	of	the	early	apostles	is	not	like	their	maleness.
The	church	began	as	entirely	Jewish,	but	soon	became	Jewish	and
Gentile	as	well.	But	the	church	did	not	begin	all	male,	and	only
later	include	females	as	well.	
Christ’s	followers	were	male	and
female	from	the	beginning,	
and	both	men	and	women	were	present
at	the	beginning	of	the	church	at	Pentecost.	So	this	objection	is	not
persuasive	either.
6.	The	History	of	Male	Teaching	and	Leadership	Through	the	Whole
Bible.
	Sometimes	opponents	of	the	view	presented	here	have	said	it	is	based
only	on	one	text,	1	Timothy	2.	Several	of	the	foregoing	arguments	have
demonstrated	that	this	is	not	the	case,	but	there	is	one	further	argument	that
can	be	made:	throughout	the	history	of	the	entire	Bible,	from	Genesis	to
Revelation,	there	is	a	consistent	pattern	of	male	leadership	among	God’s
people.	Though	there	are	occasional	examples	of	women	having	leadership	in
government	positions	such	as	queen	(Athaliah	did	reign	as	sole	monarch	in	2
Kings	11:1–20,	but	she	is	hardly	an	example	to	imitate)	or	judge	(note
Deborah	in	Judg.	4–5),	and	though	there	were	occasionally	women	such	as
Deborah	and	Huldah	who	were	prophetesses	(see	Judg.	4–5;	2	Kings	22:14–
20),	we	should	note	that	these	are	rare	exceptions	in	unusual	circumstances.
They	occur	in	the	midst	of	an	overwhelming	pattern	of	male	leadership	in
teaching	and	governance,	and,	as	such,	they	hardly	serve	as	patterns	for	New
Testament	church	office.
73
	Moreover,	
there	is	not	one	example	in	the	entire
Bible	of	a	woman	doing	the	kind	of	congregational	Bible	teaching	that	is
expected	of	pastors/elders	in	the	New	Testament	church.	
In	the	Old	Testament
it	was	the	priests	who	had	teaching	responsibilities	for	the	people,	and	the
priesthood	was	exclusively	male;	moreover,	even	the	women	prophets
Deborah	and	Huldah	prophesied	only	privately,	not	publicly	to	a	congregation
of	people
.
74
7.	The	History	of	the	Church.
	As	was	mentioned	above,	the	overwhelming
pattern	through	the	entire	history	of	the	church	has	been	that	the	office	of
pastor/elder	(or	its	equivalent)	has	been	reserved	for	men.	Although	this	does
not	demonstrate	conclusively	that	such	a	position	is	correct,	it	should	give	us
reason	to	reflect	very	seriously	on	the	question	before	we	rush	ahead	and
declare	that	almost	the	entire	church	throughout	its	history	has	been	wrong	on
this	issue.
75
8.	Objections.
	Numerous	objections	have	been	brought	against	the	position
outlined	here,	only	a	few	of	which	can	be	treated	at	this	point.
76
	It	is	objected
that	
ministry	should	be	determined	by	gifts,	not	by	gender.	
But	in	response,	it
must	be	said	that	spiritual	gifts	have	to	be	used	within	the	guidelines	given	in
Scripture.	The	Holy	Spirit	who	empowers	spiritual	gifts	is	also	the	Holy	Spirit
who	inspired	the	Bible,	and	he	does	not	want	us	to	use	his	gifts	in
disobedience	to	his	words.
Another	objection	is	to	say	that	
if	God	has	genuinely	called	a
woman	to	be	a	pastor,	she	should	not	be	prevented	from	acting	as
one.	
The	response	to	this	objection	is	similar	to	the	one	given
above:	an	individual	claim	to	have	experienced	a	call	from	God
must	always	be	tested	by	subjecting	it	to	the	words	of	God	in
Scripture.	If	the	Bible	teaches	that	God	wills	for	men	alone	to	bear
the	primary	teaching	and	governing	responsibilities	of	the	pastorate,
then	by	implication	the	Bible	also	teaches	that	God	does	not	call
women	to	be	pastors.	However,	we	should	add	that	often	what	a
woman	discerns	as	a	divine	call	to	the	pastorate	may	be	indeed	a
call	to	full-time	Christian	ministry,	but	not	to	be	a	pastor/elder	in	a
church.	In	fact,	many	opportunities	for	full-time	occupational
ministry	exist	within	the	local	church	and	elsewhere,	apart	from
being	a	teaching	pastor	or	an	elder—for	example,	church	staff
positions	in	counseling,	women’s	ministries,	Christian	education,
and	children’s	ministries,	as	well	as	ministries	of	music	and
worship,	campus	student	ministries,	evangelistic	ministries,
ministries	to	the	poor,	and	administrative	responsibilities	that	do	not
involve	functioning	in	the	elder’s	role	of	government	over	the	entire
church.
77
	This	list	could	be	expanded,	but	the	point	is	that	we
should	not	make	restrictions	where	Scripture	itself	does	not	place
restrictions,	but	should	allow	and	encourage	full	and	free
participation	by	women	as	well	as	men	in	all	of	these	other	areas.
Some	object	that	
the	New	Testament	emphasis	is	on	servant
leadership,	
and	therefore	that	we	should	not	be	so	concerned	about
authority,	since	that	is	more	a	pagan	than	a	Christian	concern.	But
this	objection	makes	a	false	distinction	between	servanthood	and
authority.	Certainly	Jesus	himself	is	the	model	of	a	servant	leader,
but	Jesus	also	has	authority—great	authority!	He	is	the	Lord	of	our
lives	and	the	Lord	of	the	church.	By	analogy,	elders	ought	to	follow
Jesus’	example	of	servant	leadership	(see	1	Peter	5:1–5)	but	that
does	not	mean	that	they	should	neglect	to	govern	with	authority
when	the	Bible	itself	gives	them	this	responsibility	(see	1	Tim.
5:17;	Heb.	13:17;	1	Peter	5:5).
78
Sometimes	people	object	that,	
just	as	the	church	finally	realized
that	slavery	was	wrong,	so	the	church	today	should	recognize	that
male	leadership	is	wrong,	
and	is	an	outdated	cultural	tradition	that
should	be	discarded.	But	this	objection	fails	to	realize	the	difference
between	the	temporary	cultural	institution	of	slavery,	which	God
certainly	did	not	establish	at	creation,	and	the	existence	of	a
difference	in	male-female	roles	in	marriage	(and,	by	implication,	in
relationships	within	the	church)	which	God	established	at	creation.
The	seeds	for	the	destruction	of	slavery	were	sown	in	the	New
Testament	(see	Philem.	16;	Eph.	6:9;	Col.	4:1;	1	Tim.	6:1–2),	but	no
seeds	for	the	destruction	of	marriage,	or	the	destruction	of	male-
female	differences	as	created,	are	sown	in	the	Bible.	Moreover,	the
objection	can	be	turned	around:	it	is	likely	that	a	closer	parallel	to
the	Christian	defenders	of	slavery	in	the	nineteenth	century	is	found
in	evangelical	feminists	who	today	use	arguments	from	the	Bible	to
justify	conformity	to	some	extremely	strong	pressures	in
contemporary	society	(in	favor	of	slavery	then,	and	women	being
pastors	now).
It	is	sometimes	objected	that	
Priscilla	and	Aquila	together	spoke	to
Apollos	
and	“expounded	to	him	the	way	of	God	more	accurately”
(Acts	18:26).	This	is	true,	and	it	is	helpful	evidence	showing	that
informal	discussion	of	Scripture	by	men	and	women	together,	in
which	both	men	and	women	play	a	significant	role	in	helping	one
another	understand	Scripture,	is	approved	by	the	New	Testament.
Once	again,	an	example	such	as	this	cautions	us	not	to	prohibit
activities	which	are	not	prohibited	by	Scripture,	yet	it	does	not
overturn	the	principle	that	the	publicly	recognized	governing	and
teaching	role	within	a	church	is	restricted	to	men.	Priscilla	was	not
doing	anything	contrary	to	this	restriction.
Sometimes	it	is	objected	that	
it	is	inconsistent	to	allow	women	to
vote	in	churches	that	have	congregational	government,	but	not	to
serve	as	elders.	
But	the	authority	of	the	church	as	a	whole	is	not	the
same	as	the	authority	given	to	specific	individuals	within	the
church.	When	we	say	that	the	congregation	as	a	whole	has
authority,	we	do	not	mean	that	each	man	and	each	woman	in	the
congregation	has	the	authority	to	speak	or	act	for	the	congregation.
Therefore,	gender,	as	a	part	of	individual	personhood,	is	not
significantly	in	view	in	corporate	congregational	decisions.
Another	way	of	putting	this	is	to	say	that	the	only	question	we	are
asking	in	this	section	is	whether	women	can	be	officers	within	the
church,	and	specifically	whether	they	can	be	elders	within	the
church.	In	any	congregational	system	where	the	elders	are	elected
by	the	congregation,	it	is	evident	to	everyone	in	the	church	that	the
elders	have	a	kind	of	delegated	authority	which	other	members	of
the	congregation	do	not	have—even	though	the	other	members	of
the	congregation	have	voted	for	these	people	in	the	first	place.	It	is
the	same	in	all	systems	of	government	where	officials	are	elected:
once	the	President	of	the	United	States	or	the	mayor	of	a	city	is
elected,	that	person	has	a	delegated	authority	over	the	people	who
elected	him	or	her	and	it	is	an	authority	that	is	greater	than	the
authority	of	any	individual	person	who	voted.
79
At	this	point	it	is	also	appropriate	to	recognize	that	God	has	given
much	insight	and	wisdom	to	women	as	well	as	to	men,	and	that	any
church	leaders	who	neglect	to	draw	on	the	wisdom	that	women
have	are	really	acting	foolishly.	Therefore,	any	group	of	elders	or
other	male	leaders	who	make	decisions	affecting	the	entire	church
should	frequently	have	procedures	within	the	church	whereby	the
wisdom	and	insight	of	other	members	of	the	church,	especially	the
wisdom	and	insight	of	women	as	well	as	men,	can	be	drawn	upon
as	an	aid	in	making	decisions.
9.	What	About	Other	Offices	Within	the	Church?
	The	entire	discussion
above	has	focused	on	the	question	of	whether	women	should	function	as
pastors	or	elders	within	the	church.	But	what	about	other	offices?
The	biblical	teaching	regarding	the	office	of	
deacon	
is	much	less
extensive	than	that	regarding	the	office	of	elder,
80
	and	what	is
involved	in	the	office	of	deacon	varies	considerably	from	church	to
church.	If	deacons	are	actually	functioning	as	elders	and	have	the
highest	governing	authority	within	a	local	church,	then	the
arguments	given	above	against	women	being	elders	would	apply
directly	to	this	situation,	and	it	would	follow	that	Scripture	does	not
permit	women	to	be	deacons	in	this	sense.	On	the	other	hand,	if
deacons	simply	have	delegated	administrative	responsibility	for
certain	aspects	of	the	ministry	of	the	church,	then	there	seems	to	be
no	good	reason	to	prevent	women	from	functioning	as	deacons.
Regarding	the	question	of	women	as	deacons	in	1	Timothy	3:8–13,
it	does	not	seem	to	the	present	author	that	this	passage	allows
women	to	be	deacons	
in	the	way	deacons	are	understood	in	that
situation,	
but	there	is	a	significant	difference	of	viewpoint	among
evangelicals	over	the	understanding	of	this	passage,
81
	and	it	is
much	less	clear	to	us	exactly	what	deacons	did	at	that	time	than	it	is
clear	what	elders	did.
82
With	regard	to	other	offices,	such	as	treasurer,	for	example,	or	other
staff	positions	such	as	youth	minister	or	counseling	director	or
children’s	minister,	and	so	forth,	the	only	question	to	be	asked	is
whether	these	offices	include	the	ruling	and	teaching	functions
reserved	for	elders	in	the	New	Testament.	If	not,	then	
all	of	these
offices	would	be	open	to	women	as	well	as	to	men,	
for	we	must	be
careful	not	to	prohibit	what	the	New	Testament	does	not	prohibit.
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
No	matter	what	kind	of	church	government	structure	you	currently	find
yourself	in,	are	there	ways	in	which	you	could	be	more	encouraging	and
supportive	to	the	current	leaders	in	your	church?
2
.	
If	you	are	currently	an	officer	in	your	church,	or	if	you	someday	would
like	to	be	one,	is	your	pattern	of	life	such	that	you	would	like	to	see	it
imitated	by	others	in	the	church?	If	you	have	had	a	part	in	the	process	of
selecting	church	leaders,	have	you	tended	to	emphasize	the	character
traits	and	spiritual	qualifications	talked	about	in	Scripture,	or	have	you
emphasized	other	qualifications	that	the	world	would	look	for	in
selecting	its	leaders?
3
.	
Do	you	think	that	the	current	governing	structure	of	your	church	works
quite	well?	How	could	it	be	improved,	without	changing	the	basic
philosophy	of	church	government	to	which	it	is	committed?	Whether	or
not	your	church	has	officers	who	are	called	“elders,”	who	are	the	people
who	carry	out	the	functions	of	elders	in	your	church?	Do	you	know	if
your	own	pastor	would	like	to	see	some	modifications	in	the	government
of	your	church,	to	enable	him	to	carry	out	his	task	more	effectively?
4
.	
Before	reading	this	chapter,	what	was	your	view	on	the	question	of
women	serving	as	teaching	pastors	or	elders	in	a	church?	How	has	this
chapter	changed	your	view,	if	at	all?	Why	do	you	think	people’s
emotions	are	often	very	strong	concerning	this	issue?	Can	you	explain
how	you	personally	feel	(emotionally)	about	the	teaching	presented	in
this	chapter?	Does	it	seem	right	to	you,	or	not?
SPECIAL	TERMS
apostle
	
local	elders
bishop
	
officer
classis
	
overseer
congregational	government
	
pastor
consistory
	
presbyterian	government
deacon
	
presbytery
diocese
	
priest
elder
	
rector
episcopalian	government
	
session
general	assembly
	
synod
hierarchical	government
	
vicar
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the
bibliography	to	chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be
found	in	
Appendix	4
.)
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92			Litton,	384–418
1930			Thomas,	313–18,	429–33,	452–58
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1875–76			Pope,	3:335–59
1892–94			Miley,	2:415–19
1940			Wiley,	3:117–37
1983			Carter,	2:619–20
3.			Baptist
1767			Gill,	2:574–607
1907			Strong,	894–929
1983–85			Erickson,	1069–88
4.			Dispensational
1947			Chafer,	4:150–53
1949			Thiessen,	314–318
1986			Ryrie,	403–20
5.			Lutheran
1917–24			Pieper,	3:427–38,	439–72
1934			Mueller,	563–84
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1559			Calvin,	2:1053–1228	(4.3–11)
1861			Heppe,	672–84
1937–66			Murray,	
CW,	
1:260–68;	
CW,	
2:336–65
1938			Berkhof,	579–92
1962			Buswell,	1:424–28
7.			Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988–92			Williams,	3:177–220
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955			Ott,	276–90,	450–60
2.			Roman	Catholic:	Post-Vatican	II
1980			McBrien	(no	explicit	treatment)
Other	Works
Babbage,	S.	B.	“Church	Officers.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	243–45.	(Contains	a	list
of	various	titles	for	church	officers	used	in	different	denominations	today,
with	definitions.)
Bannerman,	James.	
The	Church	of	Christ.	
2	vols.	London:	Banner	of
Truth,	1960.	(First	published	in	1869.)
Baxter,	Richard.	
The	Reformed	Pastor.	
Carlisle,	Pa.:	Banner	of	Truth,
1979.	[Reprint.]
Bilezikian,	Gilbert.	
Beyond	Sex	Roles.	
2d	ed.	Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1985.
(Favors	women	as	pastors.)
Burge,	G.	M.	“Deacon,	Deaconness.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	295–96.
Carson,	D.	A.	“Church,	Authority	in.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	228–31.
Clark,	Stephen	B.	
Man	and	Women	in	Christ.	
Ann	Arbor,	Mich.:	Servant,
1980.	(Opposes	women	as	pastors.)
Clowney,	Edmund.	
Called	to	the	Ministry.	
Chicago:	InterVarsity	Press,
1964.
_____.	“Presbyterianism.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	530–31.
Evans,	Mary	J.	
Women	in	the	Bible.	
Exeter:	Paternoster,	and	Downers
Grove:	InterVarsity	Press,	1983.	(Favors	women	as	pastors.)
Foh,	Susan.	
Women	and	the	Word	of	God:	A	Response	to	Biblical
Feminism.	
Philadelphia:	Presbyterian	and	Reformed,	1980.	(Opposes
women	as	pastors.)
Fung,	Ronald	Y.	K.	“Ministry	in	the	New	Testament.”	In	
The	Church	in
the	Bible	and	the	World.	
Ed.	by	D.	A.	Carson.	Exeter:	Paternoster,	and
Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1987.
Gundry,	Patricia.	
Neither	Slave	nor	Free:	Helping	Women	Answer	the
Call	to	Church	Leadership.	
San	Francisco:	Harper	and	Row,	1987.
(Favors	women	as	pastors.)
_____.	
Women	Be	Free!	The	Clear	Message	of	Scripture.	
Grand	Rapids:
Zondervan,	1988.	(Favors	women	as	pastors.)
Hodge,	Charles.	
Discussions	in	Church	Polity.	
New	York:	Charles
Scribner’s	Sons,	1878.
Hort,	F.	J.	A.	
The	Christian	Ecclesia.	
London:	Macmillan,	1898.
House,	H.	Wayne.	
The	Role	of	Women	in	Ministry	Today.	
Nashville:
Thomas	Nelson,	1990.	(Opposes	women	as	pastors.)
Hurley,	James	B.	
Man	and	Woman	in	Biblical	Perspective.	
Leicester:
Inter-Varsity	Press,	and	Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1981.	(Opposes
women	as	pastors.)
Kirby,	G.	W.	“Congregationalism.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	159–61.
Knight,	George	W.,	III.	
The	Role	Relationship	of	Men	and	Women.
Revised	ed.	Chicago:	Moody,	1985.	(Opposes	women	as	pastors.)
Kroeger,	Richard	and	Catherine.	
I	Suffer	Not	a	Woman.	
Grand	Rapids:
Baker,	1992.	(Favors	women	as	pastors.)
Macleod,	D.	“Church	Government.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	143–46.
Marshall,	I.	Howard.	“Apostle.”	In	
EDT,	
p.	40.
Mickelsen,	Alvera,	ed.	
Women,	Authority,	and	the	Bible.	
Downers	Grove,
Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,	1986.	(A	collection	of	essays	by	several	authors,
most	of	whom	favor	women	as	pastors.)
Morris,	L.	“Church	Government.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	238–41.
_____.	
Ministers	of	God.	
London:	Inter-Varsity	Press,	1964.
Piper,	John,	and	Wayne	Grudem,	eds.	
Recovering	Biblical	Manhood	and
Womanhood:	A	Response	to	Evangelical	Feminism.	
Wheaton,	Ill.:
Crossway,	1991.	(A	collection	of	twenty-eight	essays	by	twenty-two
authors;	opposes	women	as	pastors.)
Richards,	Lawrence	O.	
A	Theology	of	Church	Leadership.	
Grand	Rapids:
Zondervan,	1980.
Saucy,	Robert	L.	“Authority	in	the	Church.”	In	
Walvoord:	A	Tribute.	
Ed.
by	Donald	K.	Campbell.	Chicago:	Moody,	1982.	pp.	219–37.	(An
extensive	argument	in	favor	of	congregational	government.)
_____.	
The	Church	in	God’s	Program.	
Chicago:	Moody,	1972.
Spencer,	Aida	Besancon.	
Beyond	the	Curse:	Women	Called	to	Ministry.
Nashville:	Thomas	Nelson,	1985.	(Favors	women	as	pastors.)
Stott,	John	R.	W.	
The	Preacher’s	Portrait.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,
1961.
Strauch,	Alexander.	
Biblical	Eldership:	An	Urgent	Call	to	Restore
Biblical	Church	Leadership.	
Littleton,	Col.:	Lewis	and	Roth,	1986.
Tiller,	J.	“Ministry.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	430–33.
Toon,	Peter.	“Bishop.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	157–58.
Tucker,	Ruth	A.,	and	Walter	L.	Liefeld.	
Daughters	of	the	Church:	Women
and	Ministry	from	New	Testament	Times	to	the	Present.	
Grand	Rapids:
Zondervan,	1987.	(Favors	women	as	pastors.)
Wallace,	R.	S.	“Elder.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	347–48.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
1
	Peter	5:1–4:	
So	I	exhort	the	elders	among	you,	as	a	fellow	elder	and	a
witness	of	the	sufferings	of	Christ	as	well	as	a	partaker	in	the	glory	that	is	to
be	revealed.	Tend	the	flock	of	God	that	is	your	charge,	not	by	constraint	but
willingly,	not	for	shameful	gain	but	eagerly,	not	as	domineering	over	those	in
your	charge	but	being	examples	to	the	flock.	And	when	the	chief	Shepherd	is
manifested	you	will	obtain	the	unfading	crown	of	glory.
HYMN
“Glorious	Things	of	Thee	Are	Spoken”
There	are	not	many	hymns—if	any—written	about	church
government!	I	have	put	here	a	hymn	which	thanks	God	for	the
blessings	of	being	a	member	of	God’s	people	in	general,	and
therefore	a	citizen	of	the	heavenly	Mount	Zion,	the	heavenly	city
where	God’s	people	dwell.	But	in	the	hymn	the	author	also	uses
Old	Testament	imagery	from	the	journey	of	God’s	people	through
the	wilderness	(“see	the	cloud	and	fire	appear,”	v.	
3),	and	the	entire
hymn	can	also	be	seen	as	one	of	thanks	to	God	for	the	blessing	of
dwelling	(spiritually)	within	the	walls	of	the	church	today.
The	author,	John	Newton,	is	also	the	author	of	the	well-known
hymn	“Amazing	Grace.”
Glorious	things	of	thee	are	spoken,	Zion,	city	of	our	God;
He	whose	Word	cannot	be	broken	formed	thee	for	his	own	abode:
On	the	Rock	of	Ages	founded,	what	can	shake	thy	sure	repose?
With	salvation’s	walls	surrounded,	thou	may’st	smile	at	all	thy	foes.
See,	the	streams	of	living	waters,	springing	from	eternal	love,
Well	supply	thy	sons	and	daughters,	and	all	fear	of	want	remove:
Who	can	faint,	while	such	a	river	ever	flows	their	thirst	t’assuage?
Grace	which,	like	the	Lord,	the	giver,	never	fails	from	age	to	age.
Round	each	habitation	hov’ring,	see	the	cloud	and	fire	appear
For	a	glory	and	cov’ring,	showing	that	the	Lord	is	near:
Thus	deriving	from	their	banner	light	by	night	and	shade	by	day,
Safe	they	feed	upon	the	manna	which	he	gives	them	when	they	pray.
Savior,	if	of	Zion’s	city	I,	through	grace,	a	member	am,
Let	the	world	deride	or	pity,	I	will	glory	in	thy	name:
Fading	is	the	worldling’s	pleasure,	all	his	boasted	pomp	and	show;
Solid	joys	and	lasting	treasure	none	but	Zion’s	children	know.
AUTHOR:	JOHN	NEWTON,	1779
NOTES
1
See	
chapter	3
,	and	
chapter	4
,	for	a	discussion	of	the	authority	of	the	apostles.
2
See	
chapter	3
,	for	a	discussion	of	the	closing	of	the	New	Testament	canon.
3
The	material	from	this	point	through	p.	1113	has	been	taken	from	Wayne	Grudem,	
The	Gift	of	Prophecy	in	the	New	Testament
and	Today	
(Eastbourne,	U.K.:	Kingsway,	and	Westchester,	Ill.:	Crossway,	1988),	pp.	269–76,	and	is	used	by	permission.
4
These	two	qualifications	are	discussed	in	detail	in	the	classic	essay	by	J.	B.	Lightfoot,	“The	Name	and	Office	of	an	Apostle,”	in
his	commentary,	
The	Epistle	of	St.	Paul	to	the	Galatians	
(first	published	1865;	repr.	Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1957),	pp.	92–101;
see	also	K.	H.	Rengstorf,	
“apostolos,”	TDNT,	
1:398–447.
5
If	the	apostles’	writings	were	accepted	as	Scripture,	someone	may	wonder	why	the	extrabiblical	document	called	
The	Epistle	of
Barnabas	
is	not	included	in	Scripture.	The	answer	is	that	nearly	unanimous	scholarly	opinion	has	concluded	that	it	was	not	written
by	Barnabas,	but	by	some	unknown	Christian	who	probably	lived	in	Alexandria	between	A.D.	70	and	100.	The	epistle	claims	that
much	of	the	Old	Testament,	including	animal	sacrifices,	much	of	the	Mosaic	law,	and	the	construction	of	a	physical	temple,	were
mistakes	that	were	contrary	to	God’s	will	(see	ODCC,	p.	
134).	(Text	and	translation	are	found	in	Kirsopp	Lake,	translator,	
The
Apostolic	Fathers	
[Cambridge,	Mass.:	Harvard	University	Press,	and	London:	Heinemann,	1970],	1:335–409).
6
It	is	not	absolutely	necessary	to	translate	the	verse	this	way,	including	James	among	the	apostles.	(The	NIV	reads,	“I	saw	none	of
the	other	apostles—only	James,	the	Lord’s	brother.”)	Yet	the	translation	“except	James	the	Lord’s	brother”	seems	clearly
preferable,	because	(1)	the	Greek	phrase	is	
ei	mē,	
which	ordinarily	means	“except”	(BAGD,	p.	22,	8a),	and	in	the	great	majority	of
New	Testament	uses	designates	something	that	is	part	of	the	previous	group	but	is	“excepted”	from	it;	and	(2)	in	the	context	of
Gal.	1:18,	it	would	not	make	much	sense	for	Paul	to	say	that	when	he	went	to	Jerusalem	he	saw	Peter,	and	no	other	people	except
James—or	Peter,	and	no	other	church	leaders	except	James—for	he	stayed	there	“fifteen	days”	(Gal.	1:18).	So	he	must	mean	he
saw	Peter,	and	
no	other	apostles	
except	James.	But	this	classifies	James	with	the	apostles.	See	discussion	in	E.	D.	Burton,	
The
Epistle	to	the	Galatians,	
ICC	(Edinburgh:	T.	&	T.	Clark,	1920),	p.	60.	(Burton	says,	“
ei	mē	
means	here,	as	always	before	a	noun,
‘except’	”	[ibid.].)
7
For	an	extensive	discussion	of	whether	to	translate	“Junias”	or	“Junia”	here,	see	John	Piper	and	Wayne	Grudem,	eds.,
Recovering	Biblical	Manhood	and	Womanhood	
(Wheaton:	Crossway,	1991),	pp.	79–81,	214,	221–22.	Some	have	claimed	that
Junia	was	a	common	woman’s	name	in	ancient	Greece,	but	this	is	incorrect,	at	least	in	written	Greek	literature:	A	computer	search
of	2,889	ancient	Greek	authors	over	thirteen	centuries	(ninth	century	B.C.–fifth	century	A.D.)	turned	up	only	two	examples	of
Junia	as	a	woman’s	name,	one	in	Plutarch	(c.	A.D.	50—c.	120)	and	one	in	the	church	father	Chrysostom	(A.D.	347—407),	who
referred	to	Junia	as	a	woman	in	a	sermon	on	Rom.	16:7.	It	is	not	common	as	a	man’s	name	either,	since	this	search	found	only	one
example	of	Junias	as	a	man’s	name,	in	Epiphanius	(A.D.	315—403),	bishop	of	Salimis	in	Cyprus,	who	refers	to	Junias	in	Rom.
16:7	and	says	he	became	bishop	of	Apameia	in	Syria	(
Index	of	Disciples	
125.19–20;	this	quotation	is	the	most	significant,	since
Epiphanius	knows	more	information	about	Junias).	The	Latin	text	of	the	church	father	Origen	(d.	A.D.	252)	also	refers	to	Junias	in
Rom.	16:7	as	a	man	(J.	P.	Migne,	
Patrologia	Graeca,	
vol.	14,	col.	1289).	Therefore	the	available	data	give	some	support	to	the
view	that	Junias	was	a	man,	but	the	information	is	too	sparse	to	be	conclusive.
8
See	the	discussion	in	Leon	Morris,	
The	First	and	Second	Epistles	to	the	Thessalonians,	
NIC	(Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1959),
pp.	98–99.	Morris	says,	“The	practice	in	this	epistle	differs	somewhat	from	that	in	the	Pauline	epistles	generally.	The	plural	is
used	almost	throughout,	whereas	in	most	of	his	letters	Paul	prefers	the	singular”	(p.	98;	cf.	pp.	46–47).	Morris	takes	the	plurals
here	to	refer	only	to	Paul	himself.
9
Someone	may	object	that	Christ	could	appear	to	someone	today	and	appoint	that	person	as	an	apostle.	But	the	foundational
nature	of	the	office	of	apostle	(Eph.	2:20;	Rev.	21:14)	and	the	fact	that	Paul	views	himself	as	the	last	one	whom	Christ	appeared	to
and	appointed	as	an	apostle	(“last	of	all,	as	to	one	untimely	born,”	1	Cor.	15:8),	indicate	that	this	will	not	happen.	Moreover,
God’s	purpose	in	the	history	of	redemption	seems	to	have	been	to	give	apostles	only	at	the	beginning	of	the	church	age	(see	Eph.
2:20).
Another	objection	to	the	idea	that	there	are	no	apostles	today,	one	that	comes	especially	from	people	in	the	charismatic	movement,
is	the	argument	that	the	“fivefold	ministry”	of	Eph.	4:11	should	continue	today,	and	we	should	have	(1)	apostles,	(2)	prophets,	(3)
evangelists,	(4)	pastors,	and	(5)	teachers,	since	Paul	says	that	Christ	“gave	some	as	apostles,	and	some	as	prophets,	and	some	as
evangelists,	and	some	as	pastors	and	teachers”	(Eph.	4:11	NASB).
However,	Eph.	4:11	talks	about	a	one-time	event	in	the	past	(note	the	aorist	
kai	edōken,	
“and	he	
gave”
),	when	Christ	ascended
into	heaven	(vv.	8–10)	and	then	at	Pentecost	poured	out	initial	giftings	on	the	church,	giving	the	church	apostles,	prophets,
evangelists,	and	pastor-teachers	(or	pastors	and	teachers).	Whether	or	not	Christ	would	later	give	more	people	for	each	of	these
offices	
cannot	be	decided	from	this	verse	alone,	
but	must	be	decided	based	on	other	New	Testament	teachings	on	the	nature	of
these	offices	and	whether	they	were	expected	to	continue.	In	fact,	we	see	that	there	were	many	prophets,	evangelists,	and	pastor-
teachers	established	by	Christ	throughout	all	of	the	early	churches,	but	there	was	only	one	more	apostle	given	after	this	initial	time
(Paul,	“last	of	all,”	in	unusual	circumstances	on	the	Damascus	Road).
10
See,	for	example,	Millard	Erickson,	
Christian	Theology,	
p.	1084.
11
The	word	translated	“elder”	in	the	New	Testament	is	the	Greek	word	
presbyteros,	
which	also	was	used	in	other	contexts	to
mean	simply	an	older	person.
12
Some	have	suggested	that	perhaps	there	was	one	elder	in	every	“house	church”	in	a	town,	and	that	all	of	those	elders	from	the
different	house	churches	together	constituted	the	elders	that	Titus	was	to	appoint	in	each	town.	If	this	was	true,	perhaps	some
support	could	be	given	for	the	idea	of	one	pastor	(“elder”)	over	every	church.
In	response	to	this	suggestion,	we	must	note	that	this	is	a	theory	without	any	evidence	to	support	it,	for	no	verse	in	the	New
Testament	hints	at	the	idea	that	there	was	one	elder	in	each	“house	church.”	In	terms	of	supporting	evidence,	this	suggestion
stands	in	the	same	category	as	the	statement,	“Perhaps	all	the	elders	in	Crete	were	blind	in	the	left	eye.”	Of	course,	scholars	can
say	“perhaps”	to	any	event	for	which	there	is	no	evidence,	but	such	statements	should	carry	no	weight	in	our	attempts	to
determine	what	pattern	of	church	government	actually	existed	in	the	first	century.
13
The	phrase	“some	pastors	and	teachers”	has	one	definite	article	in	front	of	two	nouns	joined	by	
kai	
(“and”),	a	construction	that
always	in	Greek	indicates	that	the	two	nouns	are	viewed	by	the	writer	as	unified	in	some	way.	This	construction	often	is	used
where	two	nouns	refer	to	the	same	person	or	thing,	but	it	is	sometimes	used	of	two	different	persons	or	groups	viewed	as	a	unity.
In	either	case,	the	phrase	ties	together	“pastors”	and	“teachers”	more	closely	than	any	other	titles.
14
It	is	used	several	times	to	speak	of	a	“shepherd”	who	cares	for	his	sheep,	however.
15
The	English	word	
pastor	
is	derived	from	a	Latin	term	that	means	“one	who	cares	for	sheep,”	and	the	English	word	
pastor
earlier	meant	“shepherd”	in	the	literal	sense	of	one	who	took	care	of	sheep	(see	
Oxford	English	Dictionary,	
Vol.	P,	p.	
542).
16
The	NIV	regularly	uses	“overseer”	instead	of	“bishop”	to	translate	
episkopos.
17
Even	the	Anglican	scholar	J.	B.	Lightfoot,	says,	“It	is	a	fact	now	generally	recognised	by	theologians	of	all	shades	of	opinion,
that	in	the	language	of	the	New	Testament	the	same	officer	in	the	Church	is	called	indifferently	‘bishop’	(
episkopos
)	and	‘elder’	or
‘presbyter’	(
presbyteros
)”	(
St.	Paul’s	Epistle	to	the	Philippians	
[Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1953;	first	published	1868],	p.	
95;	on
pp.	95–99	Lightfoot	discusses	the	data	to	support	this	conclusion).
18
For	a	defense	of	the	view	that	church	officers	and	not	just	older	people	are	referred	to	in	1	Peter	5:5,	see	Wayne	Grudem,	
The
First	Epistle	of	Peter,	
pp.	192–93.
19
Paul	never	says	that	all	the	elders	are	to	be	able	to	teach	publicly	or	to	preach	sermons	to	the	congregation,	and	it	would	be
reasonable	to	think	that	an	“apt	teacher”	could	be	someone	who	is	able	to	explain	God’s	Word	privately.	So	perhaps	not	all	elders
are	called	to	do	public	teaching—perhaps	not	all	have	gifts	for	teaching	in	that	specific	way.	What	is	clear	here	is	that	Paul	wants
to	guarantee	that	elders	have	a	mature	and	sound	understanding	of	Scripture	and	can	explain	it	to	others.
20
The	Greek	expression	for	“having	been	married	only	once”	would	be	
hapax	gegamēmenos,	
using	the	word	“once”	(
hapax
)	plus
a	perfect	participle,	giving	the	sense,	“having	been	married	once	and	continuing	in	the	state	resulting	from	that	marriage.”	(Such	a
construction	is	found,	for	example,	in	Heb.	10:2,	and	a	similar	construction	is	found	in	Heb.	9:26.	Related	expressions	with	aorist
verbs	are	found	in	Heb.	6:4;	9:28;	and	Jude	3.)
Another	way	Paul	could	have	expressed	the	idea	of	having	been	married	only	once	is	using	a	perfect	participle	of	
ginomai	
to	say
“having	been	a	husband	of	one	wife”	(
gegonos	mias	gunaikos	andra
).	This	is,	in	fact,	the	force	of	the	requirement	for	widows	in	1
Tim.	5:9,	“having	been	the	wife	of	one	husband”	(the	force	of	the	perfect	participle	
gegonuia	
carries	over	from	the	previous
phrase,	and	all	the	qualifications	for	enrolling	widows	in	1	Tim.	5:9–10	speak	of	past	history	in	their	lives).	But	in	1	Tim.	3:2	and
Titus	1:6	the	sense	is	different,	because	present	tense	forms	of	
eimi	
(“to	be”)	are	used:	(literally)	“It	is	necessary	for	a	bishop	
to	be
blameless,	the	husband	of	one	wife.	.	.	.”
21
Some	interpreters	in	the	early	church	did	try	to	exclude	remarried	widowers	from	church	office	(see,	for	example,	
Apostolic
Constitutions	
2.2;	6.17	[third	or	fourth	century	A.D.],	and	
Apostolic	Canons	
17	[fourth	or	fifth	century	A.D.],	but	these	statements
reflect	not	a	biblical	perspective	but	a	false	asceticism	which	held	that	celibacy	in	general	was	superior	to	marriage.	(These	texts
can	be	found	in	the	
Ante-Nicene	Fathers	
series,	7:396,	457,	and	501.)
However,	Chrysostom	(d.	A.D.	407)	understood	1	Tim.	3:2	to	prohibit	polygamy,	not	second	marriages	after	death	or	divorce	(see
his	
Homilies	
on	1	Tim.	3:2).
22
Josephus,	
Antiquities	
17.14;	in	17.19	he	lists	the	nine	women	who	were	married	to	King	Herod	at	the	same	time.
23
See	Mishnah,	
Yebamoth	
4:11;	
Ketuboth	
10:1,	4,	5;	
Sanhedrin	
2:4;	
Kerithoth	
3:7;	
Kiddushin	
2:7;	
Bechoroth	
8:4.	Other	evidence
on	Jewish	polygamy	is	found	in	Justin	Martyr,	
Dialogue	with	Trypho,	
chapter	134.	Evidence	for	polygamy	among	non-Jews	is	not
as	extensive	but	is	indicated	in	Herodotus	(d.	420	B.C.)	1.135;	4.155;	2	Macc.	4:30	(about	170	B.C.);	Tertullian,	
Apology	
46.
24
We	have	not	discussed	the	office	held	by	Timothy	and	Titus	under	the	category	of	apostle	or	under	the	category	of	elder.	This	is
because	Timothy	and	Titus,	together	with	some	of	Paul’s	other	co-workers,	are	not	apostles,	but	neither	are	they	elders	or	deacons.
They	seem	to	fall	in	an	unusual	category	that	we	might	call	“apostolic	assistants,”	for	they	had	some	delegated	authority	from	the
apostles	to	supervise	early	churches	while	they	were	being	established.	Since	there	is	today	no	living	apostle	to	whom	people	like
this	would	be	accountable	and	from	whom	they	would	derive	their	authority,	we	should	not	expect	to	have	any	apostolic	assistants
like	this	in	the	church	today	either.
25
Some	have	argued	that	1	Tim.	3:11	refers	to	women	deacons:	“The	
women	likewise	
must	be	serious,	no	slanderers,	but
temperate,	faithful	in	all	things.”	However,	if	Timothy	and	the	church	at	Ephesus	knew	that	women	could	be	deacons,	it	would
seem	very	strange	for	Paul	to	have	to	add	a	separate	verse	that	talked	specifically	about	women	deacons,	and	then	specify	nothing
more	about	them	than	would	have	been	required	if	the	verse	had	not	been	there	at	all.	Moreover,	it	would	seem	very	odd	for	Paul
to	sandwich	only	one	verse	about	women	deacons	in	the	middle	of	five	verses	(three	preceding	and	two	following)	about	men	who
are	deacons.	On	the	other	hand,	a	verse	referring	to	the	wives	of	deacons	in	the	middle	of	a	list	of	qualifications	for	deacons	would
be	very	appropriate:	Paul	elsewhere	includes	family	conduct	as	one	aspect	of	the	requirement	for	church	office	(1	Tim.	3:2,	4–5).
It	is	true	that	Paul	simply	says	“the	wives”	rather	than	“their	wives,”	but	Greek	frequently	omits	possessive	adjectives	when	the
person	named	(brother,	sister,	father,	mother,	etc.)	would	have	an	obvious	relationship	to	the	person	being	discussed	in	the
immediate	context.
For	two	views	of	this	verse,	and	two	views	on	whether	women	should	be	deacons	today,	see	Thomas	R.	Schreiner,	“The	Valuable
Ministries	of	Women	in	the	Context	of	Male	Leadership:	A	Survey	of	Old	and	New	Testament	Examples	and	Teaching,”
Recovering	Biblical	Manhood	and	Womanhood,	
ed.	John	Piper	and	Wayne	Grudem	(Wheaton,	Ill.:	Crossway,	1991),	pp.	213–14,
219–221,	and	p.	
505,	n.	13;	and,	in	the	same	volume,	George	W.	Knight	III,	“The	Family	and	the	Church:	How	Should	Biblical
Manhood	and	Womanhood	Work	Out	in	Practice?”	pp.	353–54.
26
The	word	
hierarchy	
means	“government	by	priests,”	and	derives	from	the	Greek	words	for	“priest”	(
hierus
)	and	“rule”	(
archē
).
27
The	Methodist	Church	in	the	United	States	also	has	appointment	of	local	clergy	by	bishops,	and	has	some	similarities	to	the
Episcopal	Church,	from	which	it	came.
28
Of	course,	this	church	representative	
may	
have	been	appointed	only	by	officers	within	the	church,	but	there	is	no	statement	to
that	effect:	Paul	just	says	that	he	had	been	“appointed	by	the	churches,”	and	certainly	does	not	mention	any	higher	authority
outside	the	churches.
29
See	BAGD,	p.	
881.
30
However,	this	situation	also	has	a	potential	for	abuse	if	a	few	influential	members	exert	influence	to	keep	the	pastor	from
dealing	with	issues	of	sin	in	their	own	lives.
31
I	am	not	using	the	phrase	“checks	and	balances”	to	reflect	a	preference	for	an	American	form	of	civil	government	at	this	point,
but	intend	the	phrase	to	be	understood	in	a	broader	sense	to	mean	safeguards	that	prevent	excessive	power	from	being
concentrated	in	the	hands	of	any	one	individual	or	group.	(In	fact,	the	system	of	plural	elders	which	I	see	represented	in	the	New
Testament	is	very	different	from	the	concentration	of	power	found	in	the	office	of	the	President	of	the	United	States.)
32
When	I	mention	a	congregational	vote	I	do	not	mean	to	suggest	the	idea	of	a	competitive	election	such	as	is	found	in	secular
politics.	It	may	simply	involve	a	requirement	that	the	congregation	vote	to	ratify	candidates	who	have	been	nominated	by	a	mature
group	within	the	church	(such	as	the	present	elders),	or,	on	the	other	hand,	it	may	involve	a	church-wide	election,	or	other
processes	may	be	used.	Scripture	is	silent	regarding	the	actual	process;	therefore,	God	has	decided	to	leave	the	matter	to	the
wisdom	of	each	congregation	in	its	own	setting.
33
The	Roman	Catholic	Church	also	has	government	by	a	priesthood,	and	is	therefore	“episcopalian”	in	form	of	government.
Sometimes	an	episcopalian	form	of	government	is	called	a	“hierarchical”	government,	especially	when	referring	to	the	Roman
Catholic	Church.
34
However,	Episcopalians	understand	the	English	word	
priest	
to	be	equivalent	to	the	term	
presbyter	
(the	Greek	term	for	“elder”),
while	Roman	Catholics	understand	the	word	
priest	
differently,	relating	it	to	the	Old	Testament	priesthood	in	its	duty	of	offering
sacrifices	and	representing	the	people	to	God	and	God	to	the	people.
35
Edward	Arthur	Litton,	
Introduction	to	Dogmatic	Theology,	
ed.	by	Philip	E.	Hughes	(London:	James	Clarke,	1960;	first
published	in	2	vols.,	1882,	1892),	p.	
401.
36
Ibid.,	p.	
390.
37
Ibid.,	p.	
400.
38
Roman	Catholics	argue	that	Peter	had	greater	authority	than	the	other	apostles	from	the	beginning,	but	the	New	Testament
evidence	does	not	bear	this	out.	(On	the	“power	of	the	keys”	in	Matt.	16:19,	see	
chapter	46
.)
39
Episcopalians,	who	favor	appointment	of	officers	by	a	bishop,	would	of	course	not	agree	with	the	premise	of	this	last
consideration.
40
In	the	Christian	Reformed	Church,	the	form	of	government	is	similar	to	a	presbyterian	system,	but	the	names	of	the	governing
bodies	are	different:	the	elders	in	a	local	church	are	called	a	
consistory	
(instead	of	a	session),	the	regional	governing	body	is	called
a	
classis	
(instead	of	a	
presbytery
),	and	the	national	governing	assembly	is	called	a	
synod	
(instead	of	a	
general	assembly
).
41
A	fuller	defense	of	the	presbyterian	system	of	church	government	is	found	in	Louis	Berkhof,	
Systematic	Theology,	
pp.	581–92.
42
On	the	other	hand,	advocates	of	a	presbyterian	system	could	answer	that	nowhere	in	the	New	Testament	do	we	find	an	example
of	an	
independent	
church—every	church	in	the	New	Testament	is	subject	to	the	worldwide	governing	authority	of	the	apostles.	Of
course,	a	defender	of	independent	churches	might	answer	that	we	have	no	apostles	today	to	exercise	such	authority.	However,	if
we	are	looking	to	the	New	Testament	for	a	pattern,	the	fact	still	remains	that	
no	independent	churches	are	to	be	found	there,	
and
we	would	expect	that	something	rather	than	nothing	would	replace	a	government	by	the	apostles.	This	seems	to	me	to	indicate	that
some	sort	of	denominational	authority	over	local	churches	is	still	appropriate	(though	that	will	take	different	forms	in	different
denominations).
43
Berkhof,	
Systematic	Theology,	
p.	584.
44
Ibid.,	p.	
591.
45
A.	H.	Strong,	
Systematic	Theology	
(Valley	Forge,	Pa.:	Judson	Press,	1907),	pp.	914–17.	Strong	was	President	of	Rochester
Theological	Seminary	from	1872	to	1912.
46
Ibid.,	pp.	915–16.
47
Another	Baptist	theologian,	Millard	Erickson,	supports	Strong’s	claim	that	the	New	Testament	does	not	require	plural	elders	in
a	church.	He	says	that	the	New	Testament	examples	of	elders	are	“descriptive	passages”	that	tell	about	a	church	order	that	already
existed,	but	that	“churches	are	not	commanded	to	adopt	a	particular	form	of	church	order”	(
Christian	Theology,	
p.	1084).
Moreover,	Erickson	sees	no	one	pattern	of	church	government	in	the	New	Testament,	but	says,	“There	may	well	have	been	rather
wide	varieties	of	governmental	arrangements.	Each	church	adopted	a	pattern	which	fit	its	individual	situation”	(ibid.).
48
Strong,	
Systematic	Theology,	
p.	916.
49
See,	for	example,	C.	Peter	Wagner,	
Leading	Your	Church	to	Growth	
(Ventura,	Calif.:	Regal,	1984).	He	says,	“The	principal
argument	of	this	book	is	that	if	churches	are	going	to	maximize	their	growth	potential	they	need	pastors	who	are	strong
leaders.	.	.	.	Make	no	mistake	about	it:	it	is	a	rule”	(p.	
73).	The	book	is	filled	with	anecdotes	and	pronouncements	from	church
growth	experts	telling	the	reader	that	leadership	by	a	strong	single	pastor	is	essential	to	significant	church	growth.
50
Robert	H.	Mounce,	
The	Book	of	Revelation,	
NIC	(Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1977),	p.	
85.
51
In	terms	of	Greek	grammar,	the	use	of	the	definite	article	here	is	best	understood	as	a	“generic”	use,	which	is	defined	as	a	use	of
the	article	“to	select	a	normal	or	representative	individual”	(MHT	3,	p.	
180).	Paul’s	use	of	the	singular	was	natural	after	he	said,
“If	
any	one	
aspires	to	the	office	of	bishop,	he	desires	a	noble	task”	(1	Tim.	3:1),	or	“if	
any	man	
is	blameless	.	.	.”	(Titus	1:6).
The	RSV	gives	a	more	appropriate	translation	for	English	readers,	reflecting	this	generic	use,	at	these	two	verses:	“
a	
bishop.”
52
The	word	
angelos	
[“angel”]	in	Rev.	2:1	et	al.	can	mean	not	only	“angel”	but	also	just	“messenger.”
53
So	Robert	Mounce,	
The	Book	of	Revelation,	
p.	85.
54
Wagner	says	at	one	point	that	a	pastor	can	be	a	strong	leader	within	a	variety	of	kinds	of	church	government	(
Leading	Your
Church	to	Growth,	
pp.	94–95).	Therefore	it	is	not	appropriate	to	take	his	study	as	an	argument	that	solely	supports	a	single	elder
form	of	government.
55
If	the	church	has	more	than	one	pastor	who	is	paid	for	his	work,	these	other	associate	or	assistant	pastors	may	or	may	not	be
viewed	as	elders	(depending	on	the	qualifications	of	each	staff	member	and	the	policies	of	the	church),	but	in	either	case,	it	would
be	entirely	consistent	with	this	form	of	government	to	have	those	associate	pastors	accountable	to	the	senior	pastor	alone	in	their
day-to-day	work,	and	he	accountable	to	the	elder	board	with	respect	to	his	supervision	of	their	activity.
56
The	arguments	given	above	(
chapter	47,	section	B
)	for	restrictions	on	the	authority	of	church	officers	may	be	summarized	as
follows:	(1)	Church	officers	in	the	New	Testament	were	apparently	chosen	by	the	whole	congregation.	(2)	The	final	governing
authority	in	New	Testament	churches	seemed	to	rest	with	the	whole	church.	(3)	Accountability	to	the	congregation	provides	a
safeguard	against	temptations	to	sin.	(4)	Some	degree	of	control	by	the	entire	congregation	provides	a	safeguard	against	the
leadership	falling	into	doctrinal	error.	(5)	Government	works	best	with	the	consent	of	those	governed.	In	addition	to	those,	there	is
another	reason	for	restricting	the	authority	of	church	officers:	(6)	The	doctrine	of	the	clarity	of	Scripture	(see	
chapter	6
),	and	the
doctrine	of	the	priesthood	of	all	believers	(whereby	the	New	Testament	affirms	that	all	Christians	have	access	to	God’s	throne	in
prayer	and	all	share	as	members	in	a	“royal	priesthood”	[1	Peter	2:9;	cf.	Heb.	10:19–25;	12:22–24])	combine	to	indicate	that	all
Christians	have	some	ability	to	interpret	Scripture	and	some	responsibility	to	seek	God’s	wisdom	in	applying	it	to	situations.	All
have	access	directly	to	God	in	order	to	seek	to	know	his	will.	The	New	Testament	allows	for	no	special	class	of	Christians	who
have	greater	access	to	God	than	others.	Therefore,	it	is	right	to	include	all	believers	in	some	of	the	crucial	decision-making
processes	of	the	church.	“In	an	abundance	of	counselors	there	is	safety”	(Prov.	11:14).
57
It	should	be	noted	that	a	church	government	system	with	a	self-perpetuating	group	of	elders,	rather	than	one	elected	by	the
congregation,	would	be	very	similar	in	function	to	this	system,	but	would	not	be	as	extensive	in	the	checks	and	balances	put	on	the
authority	of	the	elders.	Such	a	church	may	still	wish	to	have	some	mechanism	whereby	the	congregation	could	remove	elders	who
strayed	from	faithfulness	to	Scripture	in	serious	ways.
58
When	this	kind	of	system	functions	in	a	large	church,	it	is	important	that	a	majority	of	the	elder	board	be	persons	
who	are	not
associate	pastors	in	the	church.	
This	is	because	the	associate	pastors	are	subject	to	the	senior	pastor	in	all	of	their	church	work	(he
usually	hires	and	fires	them	and	sets	their	pay,	and	they	report	to	him).	Therefore,	if	a	majority	of	the	elders	consists	of	these
associate	pastors,	the	interpersonal	dynamics	involved	will	make	it	impossible	for	the	senior	pastor	to	be	subject	to	the	authority
of	the	elders	as	a	group,	and	the	system	will	in	fact	function	as	a	(somewhat	disguised)	form	of	“single	pastor”	government,	not	as
a	plural	elder	government.
Someone	may	object	that	in	a	large	church	only	full-time	staff	members	know	enough	about	the	life	of	the	church	to	be	effective
elders,	but	this	is	not	a	persuasive	objection:	Government	by	boards	who	are	not	closely	involved	in	the	everyday	activities	of
those	whom	they	govern	works	well	in	many	realms	of	human	activity,	such	as	college	and	seminary	boards,	local	school	boards,
boards	of	directors	of	corporations,	and	even	state	and	national	governments.	All	of	these	governing	bodies	direct	policies	and
give	guidance	to	full-time	administrators,	and	they	are	able	to	obtain	detailed	information	about	specific	situations	when	the	need
arises.	(I	realize	that	all	these	systems	
can	
work	poorly,	but	my	point	is	simply	that	they	can	work	very	well	when	the	right	people
are	put	in	leadership	positions.)
59
See	William	Weinrich,	“Women	in	the	History	of	the	Church:	Learned	and	Holy,	But	Not	Pastors,”	in	
Recovering	Biblical
Manhood	and	Womanhood:	A	Response	to	Evangelical	Feminism,	
ed.	John	Piper	and	Wayne	Grudem	(Wheaton,	Ill.:	Crossway,
1991),	pp.	263–79.	See	also	Ruth	A.	Tucker	and	Walter	L.	Liefeld,	
Daughters	of	the	Church:	Women	and	Ministry	from	New
Testament	Times	to	the	Present	
(Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1987).
60
See	
Recovering	Biblical	Manhood	and	Womanhood,	
ed.	John	Piper	and	Wayne	Grudem.	The	position	I	have	taken	in	the
following	paragraphs	in	consistent	with	the	“Danvers	Statement”	issued	in	1988	by	the	Council	on	Biblical	Manhood	and
Womanhood,	P.O.	Box	317,	Wheaton,	IL	60189,	USA.
61
See	also	Raymond	C.	Ortlund,	Jr.,	“Male-Female	Equality	and	Male	Headship:	Gen.	1–3,”	in	
Recovering	Biblical	Manhood	and
Womanhood,	
pp.	95–112.
62
See	James	A.	Borland,	“Women	in	the	Life	and	Teachings	of	Jesus,”	in	
Recovering	Biblical	Manhood	and	Womanhood,	
pp.
113–23.
63
See	discussion	in	
section	2c
	of	this	chapter	regarding	the	teaching	and	ruling	functions	of	elders	in	a	church.
64
For	a	more	extensive	treatment	of	this	passage,	see	Douglas	Moo,	“What	Does	It	Mean	Not	to	Teach	or	Have	Authority	Over
Men?:	1	Tim.	2:11–15,”	in	
Recovering	Biblical	Manhood	and	Womanhood,	
pp.	179–93.
65
For	more	extensive	statements	of	these	objections	see	the	books	marked	“Favors	women	as	pastors”	in	the	bibliography	at	the
end	of	this	chapter,	especially	the	books	by	Mickelsen,	Spencer,	and	Bilezikian.
66
See	Piper	and	Grudem,	
Recovering	Biblical	Manhood	and	Womanhood,	
p.	82.
67
For	a	fuller	discussion	of	this	question,	see	D.	A.	Carson,	“	‘Silent	in	the	Churches’:	On	the	Role	of	Women	in	1	Cor.	14:33b–
36,”	in	
Recovering	Biblical	Manhood	and	Womanhood,	
pp.	140–153.	See	also	Wayne	Grudem,	
The	Gift	of	Prophecy	in	the	New
Testament	and	Today,	
pp.	217–24;	also	Wayne	Grudem,	“Prophecy—Yes,	but	Teaching—No:	Paul’s	Consistent	Advocacy	of
Women’s	Participation	Without	Governing	Authority,”	
JETS	
30/1	(March	1987),	pp.	11–23.
68
This	view	of	the	gift	of	prophecy	is	explained	more	fully	in	
chapter	53
.
69
One	recent	evangelical	objection	to	this	conclusion	on	1	Cor.	14:33–36	is	simply	to	say	that	these	verses	were	not	written	by
Paul	and	do	not	belong	in	the	text	of	1	Corinthians,	and	are	therefore	not	to	be	considered	authoritative	Scripture	for	us	today:	see
Gordon	Fee,	
The	First	Epistle	to	the	Corinthians,	
pp.	699–708.	Fee’s	basic	argument	is	that	it	is	impossible	to	reconcile	this
passage	with	1	Cor.	11:5,	where	Paul	clearly	allows	women	to	speak	in	the	church.	(He	also	places	much	weight	on	the	fact	that
vv.	34–35	are	moved	to	the	end	of	1	Cor.	14	in	some	ancient	manuscripts.)	But	Fee	does	not	give	adequate	consideration	to	the
view	represented	here,	namely,	that	Paul	is	simply	prohibiting	women	from	the	authoritative	task	of	judging	prophecies	in	the
assembled	church.	Fee’s	position	is	surprising	in	light	of	the	fact	that	no	ancient	manuscript	of	1	Corinthians	omits	these	verses.
(The	few	manuscripts	that	place	this	section	at	the	end	of	chapter	14	are	far	less	reliable	manuscripts	that	have	frequent	variations
elsewhere	in	1	Corinthians	as	well.)
70
For	further	discussion	of	this	point,	see	Vern	Poythress,	“The	Church	as	Family:	Why	Male	Leadership	in	the	Family	Requires
Male	Leadership	in	the	Church,”	in	
Recovering	Biblical	Manhood	and	Womanhood,	
pp.	233–47.
71
This	argument	and	the	following	one	are	taken	from	James	Borland,	“Women	in	the	Life	and	Teachings	of	Jesus,”	in
Recovering	Biblical	Manhood	and	Womanhood,	
pp.	120–22.
72
Regarding	“Junia”	or	“Junias”	in	Rom.	16:7,	see	the	beginning	of	
chapter	47
.
73
For	further	discussion	of	these	narrative	examples,	see	Thomas	R.	Schreiner,	“The	Valuable	Ministries	of	Women	in	the
Context	of	Male	Leadership:	A	Survey	of	Old	and	New	Testament	Examples	and	Teaching,”	in	
Recovering	Biblical	Manhood	and
Womanhood,	
pp.	209–24.	With	reference	to	Deborah	in	particular,	we	must	realize	that	the	historical	events	narrated	in	the	entire
book	of	Judges	require	great	care	in	interpretation	before	we	can	assume	that	they	should	be	taken	as	models	for	us	to	imitate.
And	Deborah	was	different	from	other	(male)	prophets	in	that	she	did	not	prophesy	in	public,	only	in	private	(Jud.	4:5;	Huldah
does	the	same	in	2	Kings	22:14–20);	she	handed	over	her	leadership	role	to	a	man	(Judg.	4:6–7);	and,	although	God	did	bring
blessing	through	her,	it	is	interesting	that	there	is	no	explicit	affirmation	of	the	fact	that	the	L
ORD
	raised	her	up—making	her
unlike	the	other	major	judges	such	as	Othniel	(3:9),	Ehud	(3:15),	Gideon	(6:14),	Jephthah	(11:29),	and	Samson	(13:25;	14:6),	for
whom	there	is	explicit	statement	of	their	calling	from	God.
74
See	the	previous	footnote.	Regarding	the	fact	that	women	could	prophesy	in	New	Testament	congregations,	see	the	discussion
under	
section	2
	above.
75
See	footnote	
59
	above.	A	number	of	recent	books	have	highlighted	the	neglected	contributions	that	women	have	made	to	the
church	throughout	its	history:	see	especially	Ruth	Tucker	and	Walter	Liefeld,	
Daughters	of	the	Church,	
a	book	that	is	a	treasure-
house	of	information	and	provides	extensive	additional	bibliography.	But	none	of	these	studies	overthrows	the	clear	conclusion
that	the	great	majority	of	the	church	throughout	its	history	has	not	accepted	women	as	pastors.
76
For	further	discussion,	see	
Recovering	Biblical	Manhood	and	Womanhood,	
esp.	pp.	60–92.	Fuller	statements	of	the	objections
listed	here	can	be	found	in	the	books	marked	“Favors	women	as	pastors”	in	the	bibliography	at	the	end	of	this	chapter,	esp.	the
volumes	by	Mickelsen,	Spencer,	and	Bilezikian.
77
For	further	discussion,	see	
Recovering	Biblical	Manhood	and	Womanhood,	
pp.	54–59.
78
See	also	the	discussion	of	the	authority	of	elders	in	
section	2c
,	above.
79
See	
section	B
	of	this	chapter,	for	arguments	in	favor	of	participation	by	the	entire	congregation	in	some	decision-making	in	the
church,	and	especially	in	the	selection	of	officers	in	the	church.
80
See	the	beginning	of	
chapter	47
	on	the	office	of	deacon.
81
See	footnote	
25
	above	for	information.
82
Note	that	Acts	6:3	also	requires	that	only	men	(Gk.	
anēr
)	be	selected	as	the	first	deacons	(if	we	understand	that	passage	to	be
speaking	of	the	office	of	deacon).
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	48
Means	of	Grace	Within	the	Church
What	are	the	different	activities	within	the	life	of	the	church	that
God	uses	to	bring	blessing	to	us?	What	do	we	miss	if	we	neglect
involvement	in	a	local	church?
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
A.	How	Many	Means	of	Grace	Are	Available	to	Us?
All	of	the	blessings	we	experience	in	this	life	are	ultimately
undeserved—they	are	all	of	
grace.	
In	fact,	for	Peter,	the	entire
Christian	life	is	lived	by	grace	(1	Peter	5:12).
But	are	there	any	special	
means	
that	God	uses	to	give	additional
grace	to	us?	Specifically,	
within	the	fellowship	of	the	church	
are
there	certain	means—that	is,	certain	activities,	ceremonies,	or
functions—that	God	uses	to	give	more	grace	to	us?	Another	way	of
formulating	that	question	is	to	ask	whether	there	are	certain	
means
through	which	the	Holy	Spirit	works	to	convey	blessings	into	the
life	of	the	believer.	Of	course,	personal	prayer,	worship,	and	Bible
study,	and	personal	faith,	are	all	means	through	which	God	works
to	bring	grace	to	us	as	individual	Christians.	But	in	this	chapter	we
are	dealing	with	the	doctrine	of	the	church,	and	we	are	asking
specifically	
within	the	fellowship	of	the	church	
what	the	means	of
grace	are	that	God	uses	to	bring	blessing	to	us.
We	may	define	the	means	of	grace	as	follows:	
The	means	of	grace
are	any	activities	within	the	fellowship	of	the	church	that	God	uses
to	give	more	grace	to	Christians.
In	the	history	of	the	discussion	of	“means	of	grace	within	the
church,”	some	theologians	have	restricted	them	to	three:	the
preaching	of	the	Word,	and	the	two	sacraments	(baptism	and	the
Lord’s	Supper).
1
But	is	it	wise	to	make	such	a	short	list	of	“means	of	grace”?	If	we
wish	to	list	and	discuss	all	the	means	of	receiving	the	Holy	Spirit’s
blessing	that	come	to	believers	specifically	through	the	fellowship
of	the	church,	then	it	does	not	seem	wise	to	limit	the	“means	of
grace”	to	three	activities	whose	administration	is	restricted	to	the
ordained	clergy	or	officers	of	the	church.	There	is	wisdom,	for
example,	in	Charles	Hodge’s	view	that	prayer	is	a	fourth	means	of
grace.
2
But	should	we	limit	our	discussion	of	the	means	of	grace	to	these
four	activities	only?	It	would	seem	more	helpful	to	list	all	of	the
many	varied	activities	
within	the	church	that	God	has	given	as
special	ways	of	receiving	his	“grace”	day	by	day	and	week	by
week.	Such	a	list	may	become	quite	long,	and,	depending	on	how	it
is	organized,	may	include	various	numbers	of	elements.	The
following	list	may	not	be	exhaustive,	but	it	does	include	most	of	the
means	of	grace	that	believers	have	access	to	within	the	fellowship
of	the	church:
	1.	Teaching	of	the	Word
	2.	Baptism
	3.	The	Lord’s	Supper
	4.	Prayer	for	one	another
	5.	Worship
	6.	Church	discipline
	7.	Giving
	8.	Spiritual	gifts
	9.	Fellowship
10.	Evangelism
11.	Personal	ministry	to	individuals
All	these	are	available	to	believers	
within	
the	church.	The	Holy
Spirit	works	through	all	of	them	to	bring	various	kinds	of	blessing
to	individuals.	Therefore,	departing	from	the	much	shorter	lists
usually	given	in	systematic	theologies,	I	have	decided	to	call	all	of
these	“means	of	grace”	within	the	church.
The	Roman	Catholic	Church	has	traditionally	believed	that	God’s
“grace”	comes	to	people	only	through	the	official	ministry	of	the
church,	particularly	through	the	priests	of	the	church.	Therefore,
when	it	specifies	the	means	of	grace	(what	it	calls	the
“sacraments”)	that	are	available	to	people	within	the	church,	it	has
in	view	activities	that	are	supervised	and/or	performed	by	only	the
priests	of	the	church.	The	seven	“sacraments”	in	Roman	Catholic
teaching	are	the	following:
1
.	
Baptism
2
.	
Confirmation
3
.	
Eucharist	(the	Lord’s	Supper	as	experienced	in	the	mass)
4
.	
Penance
5
.	
Extreme	unction	(popularly	known	as	the	“last	rites,”	the	anointing	with
oil	that	is	administered	to	a	dying	person)
6
.	
Holy	orders	(ordination	to	the	priesthood	or	diaconate)
7
.	
Matrimony
There	is	not	only	a	difference	in	the	lists	given	by	Catholics	and	Protestants;
there	is	also	a	difference	in	fundamental	meaning.	Catholics	view	these	as
“means	of	salvation”	that	make	people	more	fit	to	receive	justification	from
God.
3
	But	on	a	Protestant	view,	the	means	of	grace	are	simply	means	of
additional	blessing	within	the	Christian	life,	and	do	not	add	to	our	fitness	to
receive	justification	from	God.
4
	Catholics	teach	that	the	means	of	grace
impart	grace	whether	or	not	there	is	subjective	faith	on	the	part	of	the	minister
or	the	recipient,
5
	while	Protestants	hold	that	God	only	imparts	grace	when
there	is	faith	on	the	part	of	the	persons	administering	or	receiving	these
means.	And	while	the	Roman	Catholic	Church	firmly	restricts	the
administration	of	the	sacraments	to	the	clergy,	our	list	of	means	of	grace
includes	many	activities	that	are	carried	out	by	all	believers.
B.	Discussion	of	Specific	Means
1.
	Teaching	of	the	Word.
	Even	before	people	become	Christians,	the	Word
of	God	as	preached	and	taught	brings	God’s	grace	to	them	in	that	it	is	the
instrument	God	uses	to	impart	spiritual	life	to	them	and	bring	them	to
salvation.	Paul	says	that	the	gospel	is	the	“power	of	God	for	salvation”	(Rom.
1:16)	and	that	the	preaching	of	Christ	is	“the	power	of	God	and	the	wisdom	of
God”	(1	Cor.	1:24).	God	caused	us	to	be	born	again	or	“brought	.	.	.	forth	by
the	word	of	truth”	(James	1:18)	and	Peter	says,	“You	have	been	born	anew,
not	of	perishable	seed	but	of	imperishable,	through	the	living	and	abiding
word	of	God”	(1	Peter	1:23).	It	is	the	written	Word	of	God,	the	Bible,	that	is
“able	to	instruct	you	for	salvation	through	faith	in	Christ	Jesus”	(2	Tim.
3:15).
6
Moreover,	once	we	have	become	Christians,	Paul	reminds	us	that	it
is	the	Word	of	God	that	is	“able	to	build	you	up”	(Acts	20:32).	It	is
necessary	for	spiritual	nourishment	and	for	maintaining	spiritual
life,	because	we	do	not	live	on	bread	alone	but	on	“every	word	that
proceeds	from	the	mouth	of	God”	(Matt.	4:4).	Moses	speaks	of	the
absolute	necessity	of	the	written	Word	of	God	when	he	tells	the
people,	“It	is	no	trifle	for	you,	but	it	is	your	life,	and	thereby	you
shall	live	long	in	the	land	which	you	are	going	over	the	Jordan	to
possess”	(Deut.	32:47).
It	is	the	Word	of	God	that	convicts	us	of	sin	and	turns	us	to
righteousness,	for	it	is	profitable	“for	teaching,	for	reproof,	for
correction,	and	for	training	in	righteousness”	(2	Tim.	3:16).	It	gives
direction	and	
guidance	as	a	“lamp”	to	our	feet	and	a	“light”	to	our	path	(Ps.
119:105).	In	the	midst	of	an	ungodly	culture	Scripture	gives
wisdom	and	guidance	like	“a	lamp	shining	in	a	dark	place”	(2	Peter
1:19).	Moreover,	it	is	active	in	giving	wisdom	to	all,	even	“making
wise	the	simple”	(Ps.	19:7).	It	gives	hope	to	those	who	are	in
despair,	because	Paul	says	that	it	was	written	“that	by	steadfastness
and	by	the	encouragement	of	the	scriptures	we	might	have	hope”
(Rom.	15:4).
The	Word	of	God	is	not	weak	or	powerless	in	accomplishing	these
goals,	for	it	speaks	to	us	with	the	power	of	God	and	accomplishes
God’s	purposes.	The	Lord	says,
For	as	the	rain	and	the	snow	come	down	from	heaven,
and	return	not	thither	but	water	the	earth,
making	it	bring	forth	and	sprout,
giving	seed	to	the	sower	and	bread	to	the	eater,
so	shall	my	word	be	that	goes	forth	from	my	mouth;
it	shall	not	return	to	me	empty,
but	it	shall	accomplish	that	which	I	purpose,
and	prosper	in	the	thing	for	which	I	sent	it.	(Isa.	55:10–11)
God’s	Word	is	not	weak	but	has	his	divine	power	accompanying	it:	“Is	not	my
word	
like	fire,	
says	the	L
ORD
,	and	
like	a	hammer	
which	breaks	the	rock	in
pieces?”	(Jer.	23:29).	It	is	so	sharp	and	powerful	that	it	is	the	“
sword	
of	the
Spirit”	(Eph.	6:17),	and	it	is	so	effective	in	speaking	to	people’s	needs	that	the
author	of	Hebrews	says,	“the	word	of	God	is	living	and	active,	sharper	than
any	
two-edged	sword,	
piercing	to	the	division	of	soul	and	spirit,	of	joints	and
marrow,	and	discerning	the	thoughts	and	intentions	of	the	heart”	(Heb.	4:12).
So	closely	are	the	growth	and	strength	of	the	church	linked	to	the
reign	of	the	Word	of	God	in	people’s	lives	that	more	than	once	the
book	of	Acts	can	describe	the	growth	of	the	church	as	the	growth	of
the	Word	of	God:	“
And	the	word	of	God	increased;	
and	the	number
of	the	disciples	multiplied	greatly	in	Jerusalem”	(Acts	6:7);	“But
the	word	of	God	grew	and	multiplied”	
(Acts	12:24);	“And	
the	word
of	the	Lord	spread	
throughout	all	the	region”	(Acts	13:49).
So	important	is	the	Bible	as	the	primary	means	of	grace	that	God
gives	to	his	people	that	Charles	Hodge	reminds	us	that	throughout
history	true	Christianity	has	flourished	“just	in	proportion	to	the
degree	in	which	the	Bible	is	known,	and	its	truths	are	diffused
among	the	people.”	Moreover,	he	notes	that	there	are	no	evidences
of	salvation	or	sanctification	to	be	found	where	the	Word	of	God	is
not	known.	“The	nations	where	the	Bible	is	unknown	sit	in
darkness.”
7
It	is	appropriate	that	we	list	the	teaching	of	the	Word	as	the	first	and
most	important	means	of	grace	within	the	church.	But	we	should
add	that	such	teaching	includes	not	only	officially	recognized
teaching	by	ordained	clergy	in	the	church,	but	also	all	the	teaching
that	occurs	in	Bible	studies,	Sunday	School	classes,	the	reading	of
Christian	books	on	Scripture,	and	even	in	personal	Bible	study.
2.	Baptism.
	Since	Jesus	commanded	his	church	to	baptize	(Matt.	28:19),	we
would	expect	that	there	would	be	a	measure	of	blessing	connected	with
baptism,	because	all	obedience	to	God	by	Christians	brings	God’s	favor	with
it.	This	obedience	is	specifically	a	public	act	of	confessing	Jesus	as	Savior,	an
act	which	in	itself	brings	joy	and	blessing	to	a	believer.	Moreover,	it	is	a	sign
of	the	believer’s	death	and	resurrection	with	Christ	(see	Rom.	6:2–5;	Col.
2:12),	and	it	seems	fitting	that	the	Holy	Spirit	would	work	through	such	a	sign
to	increase	our	faith,	to	increase	our	experiential	realization	of	death	to	the
power	and	love	of	sin	in	our	lives,	and	to	increase	our	experience	of	the
power	of	new	resurrection	life	in	Christ	that	we	have	as	believers.	Since
baptism	is	a	physical	symbol	of	the	death	and	resurrection	of	Christ	and	our
participation	in	them,	it	should	also	give	additional	assurance	of	union	with
Christ	to	all	believers	who	are	present.	Finally,	since	water	baptism	is	an
outward	symbol	of	inward	spiritual	baptism	by	the	Holy	Spirit,	we	may
expect	that	the	Holy	Spirit	will	ordinarily	work	alongside	the	baptism,	giving
to	believers	an	increasing	realization	of	the	benefits	of	the	spiritual	baptism	to
which	it	points.
When	baptism	very	closely	accompanies	someone’s	initial
profession	of	faith	and	is	in	fact	the	outward	form	that	profession	of
faith	takes,	there	is	certainly	a	connection	between	baptism	and
receiving	the	gift	of	the	Holy	Spirit,	for	Peter	says	to	his	hearers	at
Pentecost,	“Repent,	and	be	baptized	every	one	of	you	in	the	name
of	Jesus	Christ	for	the	forgiveness	of	your	sins;	and	you	shall
receive	the	gift	of	the	Holy	Spirit”	(Acts	2:38).	Moreover,	Paul
says,	“You	were	buried	with	him	in	baptism,	in	which	you	were
also	raised	with	him	through	faith	in	the	working	of	God,	who
raised	him	from	the	dead”	(Col.	2:12).	The	statement	that	it	is
“
through	faith	
in	the	working	of	God”	that	this	happens	reminds	us
that	there	is	no	magical	property	in	the	act	of	baptism	itself,	which
causes	a	spiritual	result	to	come	about,	yet	the	verse	also	indicates
that	when	faith	accompanies	baptism	there	is	genuine	spiritual	work
in	the	life	of	the	person	being	baptized.	As	we	would	expect,
sometimes	great	spiritual	joy	follows	upon	baptism—a	great	joy	in
the	Lord	and	in	the	salvation	that	baptism	so	vividly	pictures	(see
Acts	8:39;	16:34).
Although	we	must	avoid	the	Roman	Catholic	teaching	that	grace	is
imparted	even	
apart	from	
the	faith	of	the	person	being	baptized,	we
must	not	react	so	strongly	to	this	error	that	we	say	that	there	is	no
spiritual	benefit	at	all	that	comes	from	baptism,	that	the	Holy	Spirit
does	not	
work	through	it	and	that	it	is	
merely	symbolic.	
It	is	better
to	say	that	where	there	is	genuine	faith	on	the	part	of	the	person
being	baptized,	and	where	the	faith	of	the	church	that	watches	the
baptism	is	stirred	up	and	encouraged	by	this	ceremony,	then	the
Holy	Spirit	certainly	does	work	through	baptism,	and	it	becomes	a
“means	of	grace”	through	which	the	Holy	Spirit	brings	blessing	to
the	person	being	baptized	and	to	the	church	as	well.	(Baptism	will
be	more	fully	discussed	in	the	next	chapter.)
3.	The	Lord’s	Supper.
	In	addition	to	baptism,	the	other	ordinance	or
ceremony	that	Jesus	commanded	the	church	to	carry	out	is	participation	in	the
Lord’s	Supper.	Although	this	subject	will	be	discussed	more	thoroughly	in
chapter	50,	it	is	appropriate	to	note	here	that	participation	in	the	Lord’s
Supper	is	also	very	clearly	a	means	of	grace	which	the	Holy	Spirit	uses	to
bring	blessing	to	the	church.	The	Lord’s	Supper	is	not	simply	an	ordinary
meal	among	human	beings—it	is	a	fellowship	with	Christ,	in	his	presence	and
at	his	table.
Once	again,	we	must	avoid	the	idea	that	any	automatic	or	magical
benefit	comes	from	sharing	in	the	Lord’s	Supper,	whether	a	person
participates	in	faith	or	not.
8
	But	when	a	person	participates	in	faith,
renewing	and	strengthening	his	or	her	own	trust	in	Christ	for
salvation,	and	believing	that	the	Holy	Spirit	will	bring	spiritual
blessing	through	such	participation,	then	certainly	additional
blessing	may	be	expected.	We	must	be	careful	here,	as	with
baptism,	to	avoid	the	mistake	of	overreacting	to	Roman	Catholic
teaching	and	maintaining	that	the	Lord’s	Supper	is	
merely	symbolic
and	not	a	means	of	grace.	Paul	says,	“The	cup	of	blessing	which	we
bless,	is	it	not	a	
participation	
(Gk.	
koinōnia,	
“sharing,”
“fellowship”)	in	the	blood	of	Christ?	The	bread	which	we	break,	is
it	not	a	
participation	
[
koinōnia
]	in	the	body	of	Christ?”	(1	Cor.
10:16).	Because	there	is	such	a	sharing	in	the	body	and	blood	of
Christ	(apparently	meaning	a	sharing	in	the	benefits	of	Christ’s
body	and	blood	given	for	us),	the	unity	of	believers	is	beautifully
exhibited	at	the	time	of	the	Lord’s	Supper:	“Because	there	is	one
bread,	we	who	are	many	are	one	body,	for	we	all	partake	of	the	one
bread”	(1	Cor.	10:17).	And	since	we	are	participants	at	“the	table	of
the	Lord”	(1	Cor.	10:21),	Paul	warns	the	Corinthians	that	they
cannot	participate	in	the	Lord’s	table	and	also	participate	in	idol
worship:	“You	cannot	partake	in	the	table	of	the	Lord	and	the	table
of	demons”	(1	Cor.	10:21).	There	is	a	spiritual	union	among
believers	and	with	the	Lord	that	is	strengthened	and	solidified	at	the
Lord’s	Supper,	and	it	is	not	to	be	taken	lightly.
This	is	why	the	Corinthians	were	experiencing	judgment	for	their
abuse	of	the	Lord’s	Supper	(1	Cor.	11:29–30:	“For	any	one	who
eats	and	drinks	without	discerning	the	body	eats	and	drinks
judgment	upon	himself.	That	is	why	many	of	you	are	weak	and	ill,
and	some	have	died”).	But	if	Paul	says	there	will	be	judgment	for
wrong	
participation	in	the	Lord’s	Supper,	then	certainly	we	should
expect	
blessing	
for	right	participation	in	the	Lord’s	Supper.	When
we	obey	Jesus’	command,	“Take,	eat”	(Matt.	26:26),	and	go
through	the	physical	activity	of	eating	and	drinking	at	the	Lord’s
table,	our	physical	action	
pictures	
a	corresponding	spiritual
nourishment,	a	nourishment	of	our	souls	that	will	occur	when	we
participate	in	obedience	and	faith.	Jesus	says,	“For	my	flesh	is	food
indeed,	and	my	blood	is	drink	indeed.	He	who	eats	my	flesh	and
drinks	my	blood	abides	in	me,	and	I	in	him”	(John	6:55–56;	cf.	vv.
52–54,	57–58;	also	vv.	27,	33–35,	48–51).
As	with	baptism,	therefore,	we	should	expect	that	the	Lord	would
give	spiritual	blessing	as	we	participate	in	the	Lord’s	Supper	in
faith	and	in	obedience	to	the	directions	laid	down	in	Scripture,	and
in	this	way	it	is	a	“means	of	grace”	which	the	Holy	Spirit	uses	to
convey	blessing	to	us.
4.	Prayer.
	We	have	already	studied	prayer	in	chapter	18,	so	we	need	only	note
here	that	corporate	prayer	within	the	church	as	it	assembles,	and	prayer	by
church	members	for	one	another,	are	powerful	means	which	the	Holy	Spirit
uses	daily	to	bring	blessing	to	Christians	within	the	church.	Certainly	we	are
to	
pray	together	
as	well	as	individually,	following	the	example	of	the	early
church.	When	they	heard	the	threats	of	the	Jewish	leaders,	“they	lifted	their
voices	
together	
to	God”	in	prayer	(Acts	4:24–30),	“And	when	they	had
prayed,	the	place	in	which	they	were	gathered	together	was	shaken;	and	they
were	all	filled	with	the	Holy	Spirit	and	spoke	the	word	of	God	with	boldness”
(Acts	4:31;	cf.	2:42).	When	Peter	was	put	in	prison,	“earnest	prayer	for	him
was	made	to	God	by	the	church”	(Acts	12:5).
If	prayer	from	the	church	is	not	simply	the	mouthing	of	words
without	heartfelt	intention,	but	is	the	genuine	expression	of	our
hearts	and	the	reflection	of	sincere	faith,	then	we	should	expect	that
the	Holy	Spirit	will	bring	a	great	blessing	through	it.	Certainly
when	prayer	is	done	“in	the	Spirit”	(Eph.	6:18;	cf.	Jude	20:	“pray	in
the	Holy	Spirit”),	it	involves	fellowship	with	the	Holy	Spirit	and
therefore	a	ministry	of	the	Holy	Spirit	to	the	people	praying.	And
the	author	of	Hebrews	reminds	us	that	as	we	“draw	near”	to	God	in
prayer	before	the	throne	of	grace,	we	do	so	“that	we	may	receive
mercy	and	find	grace	to	help	in	time	of	need”	(Heb.	4:16).
The	more	the	genuine	fellowship	of	a	church	increases,	the	more
there	ought	to	be	continual	prayer	for	one	another	within	the
church,	and	the	more	genuine	spiritual	blessing	from	the	Holy
Spirit	may	be	expected	to	flow	through	the	church.
5.	Worship.
	Genuine	worship	is	worship	“in	spirit”	(John	4:23–24;	Phil.	3:3),
which	probably	means	worship	that	is	in	the	spiritual	realm	of	activity	(not
merely	the	outward	physical	action	of	attendance	at	a	worship	service	or
singing	of	songs).
9
	When	we	enter	that	spiritual	realm	of	activity	and	minister
to	the	Lord	in	worship,	God	also	ministers	to	us.	So,	for	example,	in	the
church	at	Antioch,	it	was	“
While	they	were	worshiping	the	Lord	
and	fasting”
that	“the	Holy	Spirit	said,	‘Set	apart	for	me	Barnabas	and	Saul	for	the	work	to
which	I	have	called	them’	”	(Acts	13:2).	This	parallels	the	experience	of	the
people	of	Israel	in	the	Old	Testament	who	knew	the	presence	of	God	when
they	engaged	in	genuine	worship:
When	the	song	was	raised,	
with	trumpets	and	cymbals	and	other
musical	instruments,	
in	praise	to	the	L
ORD
,	
“For	he	is	good,	for	his
steadfast	love	endures	forever,”	the	house,	the	house	of	the	L
ORD
	was
filled	with	a	cloud,	so	that	the	priests	could	not	stand	to	minister
because	of	the	cloud;	for	
the	glory	of	the	L
ORD
	filled	the	house	of	God.
(2	Chron.	5:13–14).
When	God’s	people	worshiped,	he	came	in	a	very	visible	way	to	dwell	in	their
midst.	Similarly	in	the	New	Testament,	James	promises,	“Draw	near	to	God
and	
he	will	draw	near	to	you”	
(James	4:8).
In	fact,	as	God’s	people	worshiped,	he	delivered	them	from	their
enemies	(2	Chron.	20:18–23),	or	at	other	times	gave	them	true
spiritual	insight	into	the	nature	of	events	around	them	(Ps.	73:17:
“Until	I	went	into	the	sanctuary	of	God;	then	I	perceived	their
end”).
If	worship	is	genuinely	an	experience	of	drawing	near	to	God,
coming	into	his	presence,	and	giving	him	the	praise	he	deserves,
then	we	certainly	ought	to	count	it	one	of	the	primary	“means	of
grace”	available	to	the	church.	Through	genuine	congregational
worship	God	will	very	often	bring	great	blessing,	both	individually
and	corporately,	to	his	people.
6.	Church	Discipline.
	Because	church	discipline	is	a	means	by	which	the
purity	of	the	church	is	advanced	and	holiness	of	life	is	encouraged,	we
certainly	should	count	it	as	a	“means	of	grace”	as	well.	However,	blessing	is
not	automatically	given:	when	the	church	disciplines,	no	spiritual	good	comes
to	the	wrongdoer	unless	the	Holy	Spirit	convicts	him	or	her	of	sin	and	brings
about	a	“godly	grief”	that	“produces	a	repentance	that	leads	to	salvation	and
brings	no	regret”	(2	Cor.	7:10),	and	no	spiritual	good	comes	to	the	church
unless	the	Holy	Spirit	is	active	in	the	other	members’	lives	when	they	become
aware	of	the	process.	This	is	why	the	church	is	to	carry	out	discipline	with	the
knowledge	that	it	is	done	in	the	presence	of	the	Lord	(1	Cor.	5:4;	cf.	4:19–20),
and	with	the	assurance	that	it	has	heavenly	sanction	connected	with	it	(Matt.
16:19;	18:18–20).
10
It	would	be	very	healthy	for	the	church	to	begin	to	think	of	church
discipline	not	as	an	onerous	burden	placed	upon	it	by	the	Lord,	but
as	a	genuine	“means	of	grace”	by	which	great	blessing	can	come	to
the	church—in	reconciling	believers	to	one	another	and	to	God,	in
restoring	the	erring	brother	or	sister	to	walk	in	obedience,	in
warning	all	to	“stand	in	fear”	(1	Tim.	5:20),	in	increasing	moral
purity	in	the	church,	and	in	protecting	and	advancing	Christ’s
honor.	Though	sorrow	and	pain	are	often	connected	with	church
discipline,	when	it	is	rightly	done,	with	faith	that	the	Lord	is
working	through	it,	the	sorrow	will	“bring	no	regret”	(2	Cor.	7:10).
When	carried	out	in	this	way,	church	discipline	should	certainly	be
seen	as	a	means	of	grace	by	which	the	Holy	Spirit	will	bring
blessing	to	his	church.
11
7.	Giving.
	Giving	is	ordinarily	done	through	the	church	as	it	receives	and
distributes	gifts	to	the	various	ministries	and	needs	cared	for	by	the	church.
Once	again,	there	is	no	automatic	or	mechanical	bestowing	of	benefits	on
those	who	give.	Simon	the	sorcerer	was	strongly	rebuked	for	thinking	that	he
“could	obtain	the	gift	of	God	with	money”	(Acts	8:20).	But	if	giving	is	done
in	faith,	out	of	commitment	to	Christ	and	love	for	his	people,	then	certainly
there	will	be	great	blessing	in	it.	It	is	most	pleasing	to	God	when	gifts	of
money	are	accompanied	by	an	intensification	of	the	giver’s	own	personal
commitment	to	God,	as	was	the	case	among	the	Macedonians	who	“first	.	.	.
gave	themselves	
to	the	Lord	and	to	us	by	the	will	of	God”	(2	Cor.	8:5),	and
then	gave	to	help	the	poor	Christians	in	Jerusalem.	When	giving	is	carried	out
joyfully,	“not	reluctantly	or	under	compulsion,”	there	is	the	great	reward	of
God’s	favor	with	it,	“for	God	loves	a	cheerful	giver”	(2	Cor.	9:7).
Paul	views	the	giving	of	money	to	the	Lord’s	work	as	spiritual
sowing	that	will	lead	to	a	harvest:	“he	who	sows	sparingly	will	also
reap	sparingly,	and	he	who	sows	bountifully	will	also	reap
bountifully”	(2	Cor.	9:6).	And	Paul	expects	that	as	the	Corinthians
give	rightly	God	will	bless	them:	“And	God	is	able	to	make	
all
grace	abound	to	you,	
that	always	having	all	sufficiency	in
everything,	you	may	have	an	abundance	for	every	good	deed”	(2
Cor.	9:8	NASB).	He	tells	them,	“
You	will	be	enriched	in	every	way
for	great	generosity,	
which	through	us	will	produce	thanksgiving	to
God”	(2	Cor.	9:11).	Therefore	giving	blesses	the	
recipient	
in	that	his
or	her	needs	are	met	and	faith	and	thanksgiving	for	God’s	provision
are	increased;	it	blesses	the	
giver	
because	“God	loves	a	cheerful
giver”	and	will	grant	an	abundant	spiritual	harvest,	and	brings
blessing	to	
all	who	know	about	it	
since	it	produces	a	harvest	of
“many	thanksgivings	to	God”	(2	Cor.	9:12).	Rather	than	seeing
giving	as	an	unpleasant	obligation,	we	would	do	well	to	view	it	as	a
rich	means	of	grace	within	the	church,	and	to	expect	that	through	it
the	Holy	Spirit	will	bring	blessing.
8.	Spiritual	Gifts.
	Peter	views	spiritual	gifts	as	channels	through	which	God’s
grace	comes	to	the	church	because	he	says,	“As	each	has	received	a	gift,
employ	it	for	one	another,	
as	good	stewards	of	God’s	varied	grace”	
(1	Peter
4:10).	When	gifts	are	used	for	one	another	in	the	church,	God’s	grace	is
thereby	dispensed	to	those	for	whom	God	intended	it.	Great	blessing	will
come	to	the	church	through	proper	use	of	spiritual	gifts,	as	the	church	follows
Paul’s	command	to	use	the	gifts	to	“strive	to	excel	in	building	up	the	church”
(1	Cor.	14:12;	cf.	Eph.	4:11–16).
If	we	listed	all	the	spiritual	gifts	as	separate	means	of	grace,	our	list
of	the	means	of	grace	would	be	much	longer	than	eleven	items.	But
even	if	we	contain	them	all	in	this	one	category,	we	should
recognize	that	the	different	spiritual	gifts	in	the	church	are	all
means	by	which	the	Holy	Spirit	brings	blessing	through	individual
Christians.	This	should	remind	us	of	the	abundant	favor	that	God
has	given	us	as	undeserving	sinners,	and	should	also	make	us
realize	that	many	different	Christians,	with	diverse	gifts,	can	be	the
channels	through	which	grace	comes	to	us.	In	fact,	in	Peter’s
exhortation	to	use	spiritual	gifts	as	stewards	of	“God’s	
varied
grace”	(1	Peter	4:10),	the	word	translated	“varied”	(Gk.	
poikilos
)
means	“having	many	facets	or	aspects;	richly	varied;	having	great
diversity.”	Moreover,	we	should	remember	that	these	gifts	are
distributed	not	only	to	clergy	or	a	limited	number	of	Christians,	but
to	all	believers	who	have	the	Holy	Spirit	within	them	(1	Cor.	12:7,
11;	1	Peter	4:10).
12
9.	Fellowship.
	We	should	not	neglect	ordinary	Christian	fellowship	as	a
valuable	means	of	grace	within	the	church.	The	early	church	“devoted
themselves	to	the	apostles’	teaching	
and	fellowship,	
to	the	breaking	of	bread
and	the	prayers”	(Acts	2:42).	And	the	author	of	Hebrews	reminds	believers,
“Let	us	consider	how	to	stir	up	one	another	to	love	and	good	works,	
not
neglecting	to	meet	together,	
as	is	the	habit	of	some,	but	encouraging	one
another,	and	all	the	more	as	you	see	the	Day	drawing	near”	(Heb.	10:24–25).
In	the	fellowship	of	believers,	ordinary	friendship	and	affection	for	one
another	will	grow,	and	Jesus’	injunction	that	we	“love	one	another”	(John
15:12)	will	be	fulfilled.	Moreover,	as	believers	care	for	one	another,	they	will
“Bear	one	another’s	burdens,	and	so	fulfil	the	law	of	Christ”	(Gal.	6:2).
An	emphasis	on	the	fellowship	of	believers	with	one	another	as	a
means	of	grace	would	also	help	to	overcome	an	excessive	focus	on
the	ordained	clergy	as	the	primary	dispensers	of	grace	within	the
church,	and	particularly	when	the	church	as	a	whole	is	assembled.
It	would	also	be	healthy	for	Christians	to	recognize	that	a	measure
of	God’s	grace	is	experienced	when	Christians	talk	together	and	eat
together,	when	they	have	times	of	work	and	play	together,	enjoying
one	another’s	fellowship.	“And	day	by	day,	attending	the	temple
together	and	breaking	bread	in	their	homes,	they	partook	of	food
with	glad	and	generous	hearts,	praising	God	and	having	favor	with
all	the	people”	(Acts	2:46–47).
1
0.	Evangelism.
	In	Acts,	there	is	a	frequent	connection	between	proclaiming
the	gospel	(even	in	the	face	of	opposition)	and	being	filled	with	the	Holy
Spirit	(see	Acts	2:4	with	vv.	14–36;	4:8,	31;	9:17	with	v.	
20;	13:9,	52).
Evangelism	is	a	means	of	grace,	then,	not	only	in	the	sense	that	it	ministers
saving	grace	to	the	unsaved,	but	also	because	those	who	evangelize
experience	more	of	the	Holy	Spirit’s	presence	and	blessing	in	their	own	lives.
Sometimes	evangelism	is	carried	out	by	individuals,	but	at	other	times	it	is	a
corporate	activity	of	the	church	(as	in	evangelistic	campaigns).	And	even
individual	evangelism	often	involves	other	church	members	who	will
welcome	an	unbelieving	visitor	and	give	attention	to	his	or	her	needs.	So
evangelism	is	rightly	considered	a	means	of	grace	in	the	church.
11.
	Personal	Ministry	to	Individuals.
	Along	with	the	previous	ten	“means	of
grace”	within	the	church,	it	is	appropriate	to	list	one	more	specific	means	that
the	Holy	Spirit	very	frequently	uses	to	bring	blessing	to	individual	Christians.
This	means	of	grace	operates	when	one	or	more	Christians	within	the	church
take	time	to	minister,	in	various	ways,	to	very	specific	needs	of	another
individual	in	the	church.
Sometimes	this	ministry	takes	the	form	of	
words	of	encouragement
or	exhortation	or	wise	counsel.	
We	are	to	“teach	and	admonish	one
another	in	all	wisdom”	(Col.	3:16),	and	to	speak	words	that	“impart
grace	to	those	who	hear”	(Eph.	4:29).	We	are	to	attempt	to	bring
back	“a	sinner	from	the	error	of	his	way”	(James	5:20)	and	to
“consider	how	to	stir	up	one	another	to	love	and	good	works”	and
to	be	“encouraging	one	another”	(Heb.	10:24–25).	At	other	times
such	ministry	involves	
giving	to	assist	the	material	needs	of	a
brother	or	sister:	
James	rebukes	those	who	merely	say,	“Go	in
peace,	be	warmed	and	filled,”	without	“giving	them	the	things
needed	for	the	body”	(James	2:16).	John	warns	us,	“If	any	one	has
the	world’s	goods	and	sees	his	brother	in	need,	yet	closes	his	heart
against	him,	how	does	God’s	love	abide	in	him?”	(1	John	3:17).
Therefore	the	early	church	gave	readily	to	the	needs	of	poor
Christians,	so	that	“There	was	not	a	needy	person	among	them”
(Acts	4:34).	And	Paul	said	that	the	leaders	of	the	church	in
Jerusalem	“would	have	us	remember	the	poor,	which	very	thing	I
was	eager	to	do”	(Gal.	2:10).
Another	form	this	interpersonal	ministry	may	take	is	the	
anointing
with	oil	
in	conjunction	with	prayer	for	a	sick	person.	Jesus’
disciples	“anointed	with	oil	many	that	were	sick	and	healed	them”
(Mark	6:13).	Similarly,	James	says	that	a	sick	person	should	“call
for	the	elders	of	the	church,	and	let	them	pray	over	him,	anointing
him	with	oil	in	the	name	of	the	Lord”	(James	5:14).	In	these	cases
the	oil	seems	to	have	been	a	physical	symbol	of	the	healing	power
of	the	Holy	Spirit	coming	to	the	sick	person.
Finally,	one	more	means	of	exercising	personal	ministry	to
individuals	in	the	New	Testament	is	the	use	of	physical	touch,
particularly	the	
laying	on	of	hands	
in	connection	with	prayer	for
someone	in	need.	A	survey	of	the	New	Testament	may	bring
surprise	to	many	modern	Christians	(as	it	did	to	the	present	author)
when	they	see	how	frequently	the	laying	on	of	hands	and	other
kinds	of	physical	touch	are	seen	to	function	as	a	“means	of	grace”
in	the	ministry	of	Jesus	and	the	early	church.
It	seems	that	the	laying	on	of	hands	was	by	far	the	most	common
method	that	Jesus	used	to	pray	for	people.	When	crowds	came
bringing	people	“with	various	diseases”	to	him,	“
he	laid	his	hands
on	every	one	of	them	
and	healed	them”	(Luke	4:40).	Other	passages
specifically	describe	Jesus’	placing	his	hands	on	people	to	heal
them	(Matt.	8:3;	Mark	1:41;	6:5;	8:23–25;	Luke	5:13;	13:13).	But
more	significant	than	these	individual	passages	is	the	fact	that
people	who	came	to	Jesus	for	healing	would	come	specifically
asking	him	to	lay	his	hands	on	a	sick	person:	“
Come	and	lay	your
hand	on	her,	
and	she	will	live”	(Matt.	9:18),	or	“
Come	and	lay	your
hands	on	her,	
so	that	she	may	be	made	well,	and	live”	(Mark	5:23;
cf.	7:32).	The	fact	that	people	came	with	this	request	suggests	that
the	laying	on	of	hands	was	commonly	recognized	as	the	method
Jesus	usually	used	to	heal	people.	In	imitation	of	Jesus’	method	of
healing,	when	the	father	of	Publius	was	sick,	“Paul	visited	him	and
prayed,	and	
putting	his	hands	on	him	
healed	him”	(Acts	28:8).
13
In	other	cases	people	sought	more	generally	to	touch	Jesus,	or
asked	that	he	would	touch	them,	in	order	to	be	healed.	“And	some
people	brought	to	him	a	blind	man,	and	begged	him	to	
touch	
him”
(Mark	8:22).	Similarly,	people	“brought	to	him	all	that	were	sick,
and	besought	him	that	they	might	only	touch	the	fringe	of	his
garment;	and	as	many	as	touched	it	were	made	well”	(Matt.	14:35–
36).	This	was	because	the	power	of	the	Holy	Spirit	was	conveyed
through	Jesus’	physical	touch,	and	came	forth	and	healed	people.
“All	the	crowd	sought	to	
touch	
him,	for	power	came	forth	from	him
and	healed	them	all”	(Luke	6:19;	cf.	Matt.	9:20–22,	25;	20:34;
Mark	1:31;	5:41;	9:27;	Luke	7:14;	8:51;	22:51).
However,	it	was	not	simply	to	heal	that	Jesus	and	the	early	church
laid	on	hands	or	touched	people.	When	children	came	to	Jesus	“he
took	them	in	his	arms	and	blessed	them,	laying	his	hands	upon
them”	(Mark	10:16;	cf.	Matt.	19:13–15;	Luke	18:15).
When	Jesus	so	frequently	touched	people	to	bring	healing	or
otherwise	to	bring	blessing	to	them,	it	is	not	surprising	that	people
would	mention	the	miracles	done	by	his	hands:	“What	mighty
works	(Gk.	
dynamis,	
“miracle”)	are	wrought	
by	his	hands!”	
(Mark
6:2).
14
	Similarly,	when	Paul	and	Barnabas	were	on	their	first
missionary	journey,	the	Lord	“bore	witness	to	the	word	of	his	grace,
granting	signs	and	wonders	to	be	done	
by	their	hands”	
(Acts
14:3).
15
	In	the	same	way,	“God	did	extraordinary	miracles	by	the
hands	
of	Paul”	(Acts	19:11).
16
	Since	there	was,	as	with	the	other
means	of	grace,	no	automatic	or	magical	power	inherent	in	the
hands	of	the	early	Christians,	but	healing	and	other	kinds	of
blessing	only	came	as	God	himself	was	pleased	to	work	through	the
laying	on	of	hands,	it	is	not	surprising	that	the	early	church	prayed
specifically	that	God	would	stretch	forth	
his	hand	
to	heal.	They
prayed,	“And	now,	Lord,	look	upon	their	threats,	and	grant	to	your
servants	to	speak	your	word	with	all	boldness,	
while	you	stretch	out
your	hand	to	heal”	
(Acts	4:29–30).	They	realized	that	while	they
stretched	forth	their	hands	to	touch	those	who	were	sick	it	would
not	be	effective	at	all	unless	God’s	own	mighty	hand	of	power	was
working	through	their	hands.
At	other	times	the	laying	on	of	hands	was	done	for	some	other
purpose.	Apparently	it	was	done	in	connection	with	asking	God	to
empower	or	equip	people	for	some	service	or	ministry.	When	the
first	deacons	were	appointed,	the	church	brought	them	before	the
apostles,	“and	they	prayed	and	
laid	their	hands	upon	them”	
(Acts
6:6).	Similarly,	when	the	church	at	Antioch	sent	out	Paul	and
Barnabas,	“When	they	had	fasted	and	prayed	and	
laid	their	hands
on	them,	
they	sent	them	away”	(Acts	13:3	NASB).
When	the	gospel	came	to	a	new	group	of	people,	those	who
proclaimed	the	gospel	would	sometimes	lay	hands	on	the	new
believers	in	order	that	they	might	receive	the	new	covenant	power
of	the	Holy	Spirit.	At	Samaria,	the	apostles	“laid	their	hands	on
them	and	they	received	the	Holy	Spirit”	(Acts	8:17).	Ananias	laid
his	hands	on	Saul	in	order	that	he	might	regain	his	sight	and	“be
filled	with	the	Holy	Spirit”	(Acts	9:17).	When	Paul	“laid	his	hands
upon”	the	disciples	at	Ephesus	who	had	just	come	to	believe	in
Jesus,	“the	Holy	Spirit	came	on	them”	(Acts	19:6).
In	other	cases	the	laying	on	of	hands	resulted	in	the	impartation	of
some	spiritual	gift.	In	the	incident	just	mentioned,	the	disciples	at
Ephesus	also	“spoke	with	tongues	and	prophesied”	(Acts	19:6)	after
Paul	laid	his	hands	on	them.	Moreover,	he	reminds	Timothy,	“Do
not	neglect	the	gift	you	have,	which	was	given	you	by	prophetic
utterance	(literally,	“through	prophecy”)	when	the	council	of	elders
laid	their	hands	upon	you”	(1	Tim.	4:14).	Paul	may	have	been
referring	to	the	same	event	or	a	different	one	when	he	said	later,	“I
remind	you	to	rekindle	the	
gift	
of	God	that	is	within	you	
through
the	laying	on	of	my	hands”	
(2	Tim.	1:6).	(In	1	Timothy	5:22,	the
statement	“Do	not	be	hasty	in	the	laying	on	of	hands”	refers	to	the
ordination	of	elders;	see	chapter	47,	p.	
1120.)
If	people	in	the	early	church	were	frequently	praying	for	one
another’s	needs,	and	if	they	imitated	the	example	of	Jesus	and	his
disciples	in	the	laying	on	of	hands	to	pray	for	people	for	healing,
for	bringing	blessing,	for	receiving	the	Holy	Spirit	at	the	time	of
conversion,	for	receiving	spiritual	gifts,	or	for	empowering	for
ministry,	then	we	would	expect	that	instruction	given	to	new
Christians	would	have	included	the	teaching	that	prayer	for
individual	needs	would	ordinarily	be	accompanied	by	the	placing	of
a	hand	or	hands	upon	the	person	who	was	being	prayed	for.	If	this
were	so,	then	it	would	not	be	surprising	that	“the	laying	on	of
hands”	would	be	classified	as	an	“elementary”	doctrine,	something
that	belongs	to	the	“foundation”	of	Christian	instruction—which	is
in	fact	what	we	find	in	Hebrews	6:1–2.	Although	some	have
understood	this	to	refer	more	narrowly	to	the	laying	on	of	hands
that	accompanies	installation	in	some	specific	church	office,	that	is
only	one	small	aspect	of	the	pattern	of	situations	in	which	laying	on
of	hands	is	found	in	the	New	Testament.	It	seems	much	better	to
understand	this	phrase	in	Hebrews	6:2	to	refer	to	elementary
instruction	about	how	to	pray	for	others	in	various	situations	of
need	so	that	young	Christians	would	immediately	be	able	to	begin
ministering	to	others	as	well.
It	seems	appropriate,	then,	to	count	the	laying	on	of	hands	as	one
other	dimension	of	the	rich	diversity	of	“means	of	grace”	that	God
has	placed	within	the	church	to	bring	blessing	to	his	people.
1
2.	Should	Footwashing	Be	Practiced	As	a	Means	of	Grace	Within	the
Church?
	From	time	to	time	some	Christian	groups	have	practiced	a
ceremony	of	washing	one	another’s	feet	at	a	public	meeting	of	the	church.
They	have	based	this	practice	on	Jesus’s	command,	“If	I	then,	your	Lord	and
Teacher,	have	washed	your	feet,	
you	also	ought	to	wash	one	another’s	feet”
(John	13:14).	Those	who	advocate	footwashing	consider	it	a	ceremony	that
Jesus	commanded,	similar	to	the	ceremonies	of	baptism	and	the	Lord’s
Supper.
However,	there	are	several	reasons	why	we	should	not	think	that	in
John	13:14	Jesus	was	establishing	another	ceremony	for	the	church
in	addition	to	baptism	and	the	Lord’s	Supper.	(1)	Baptism	and	the
Lord’s	Supper	explicitly	symbolize	the	greatest	event	in	the	history
of	redemption,	Christ’s	death	and	resurrection	for	us,	but
footwashing	symbolizes	no	such	redemptive-historical	event.	(2)
Baptism	and	the	Lord’s	Supper	were	clearly	
symbolic	
actions,	but
when	Jesus	washed	the	disciples’	feet	it	was	clearly	
functional,	
not
merely	symbolic,	in	that	it	met	an	ordinary	human	need	of	the	day
(dirty	feet).	(3)	Baptism	and	the	Lord’s	Supper	are	appropriate
symbols	of	beginning	and	continuing	in	the	Christian	life,
17
	but	no
such	symbolism	attaches	to	footwashing.	(4)	To	make	footwashing
an	ordinance	like	baptism	and	the	Lord’s	Supper	reduces	it	to	a
symbol—and	if	it	is	a	symbol,	then	Jesus’	words	command	us	only
to	perform	a	symbol,	and	the	real	force	of	Jesus’	command	(to	act
in	humility	and	love)	is	lost.	(5)	Whereas	the	epistles	give	evidence
that	baptism	and	the	Lord’s	Supper	were	continuing	ordinances
observed	by	the	New	Testament	churches,	there	is	no	evidence	that
the	apostles	or	the	early	church	observed	footwashing	as	an
ordinance.	(6)	There	is	a	simple	and	straightforward	explanation	for
Jesus’	command:	he	is	telling	his	disciples	to	take	lowly	tasks	in
serving	one	another.	But	if	this	is	what	the	text	means	(and	the	vast
majority	of	the	church	through	history	has	understood	it	this	way),
then	we	need	not	look	for	an	additional	meaning	(that	Jesus	is	also
instituting	a	new	ceremony).	By	contrast,	the	New	Testament	texts
about	baptism	and	the	Lord’s	Supper	cannot	be	understood	to
command	something	
other	
than	a	ceremony.	Therefore,	while	all
Christians	would	profit	from	pondering	the	application	of	Jesus’
statement	about	footwashing	to	their	present	patterns	of	life,	none
should	think	that	Jesus	is	encouraging	them	to	practice	a	ceremony
of	footwashing.
C.	Conclusions
At	the	end	of	this	discussion	of	the	means	of	grace	within	the
church,	we	should	realize	first	of	all	that	when	any	of	these	are
carried	out	in	faith	and	obedience,	we	should	eagerly	expect	and
look	for	evidence	that	the	Holy	Spirit	is	actually	ministering	to
people	at	the	same	time	as	these	actions	are	being	done.	We	as
Christians	ought	not	to	neglect	to	“meet	together”	(Heb.	10:25),	but
ought	to	look	forward	eagerly	to	any	assembly	of	believers	in
which	any	of	these	means	would	occur,	expecting	that	God	will
bring	blessing	from	each	of	these	means!
On	the	other	hand,	we	must	realize	that	all	of	these	means	of	grace
occur	within	the	fellowship	of	the	church.	Those	who	neglect	the
fellowship	of	the	church	willfully	cut	themselves	off	from	all	of
these	means	of	grace	and	thereby	cut	themselves	off	from	most	of
the	ordinary	means	that	the	Holy	Spirit	uses	to	bring	blessing	to	his
people.
These	means	of	grace	ought	to	give	us	great	appreciation	for	the
amazing	privilege	of	being	members	of	the	body	of	Christ,	the
church.
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
Before	reading	this	chapter,	did	you	think	that	it	made	very	much
difference	if	a	Christian	continued	to	be	active	in	the	fellowship	of	the
church	or	not?	How	has	this	chapter	changed	your	perspective	on	that
question,	if	at	all?
2
.	
Which	of	the	means	of	grace	mentioned	in	this	chapter	has	been	most
helpful	to	you	in	your	own	Christian	life?
3
.	
Which	of	the	means	of	grace	mentioned	in	this	chapter	do	you	think	you
appreciated	least	before	reading	the	chapter?	How	has	your	appreciation
for	that	means	of	grace	increased?	How	do	you	think	this	will	affect	your
actions	from	now	on?
4
.	
As	you	look	over	the	list	of	means	of	grace,	are	there	some	areas	in
which	people	are	not	actually	experiencing	“grace”	or	blessing	in	your
own	church?	What	could	be	done	to	increase	the	effectiveness	of	these
weak	areas	as	means	of	grace	in	the	life	of	your	church?
5
.	
Which	of	the	means	of	grace	are	actually	least	helpful	in	your	own	life?
Are	there	some	that	have	become	rather	mechanical,	and	that	you	are
performing	only	as	an	outward	or	physical	activity,	without	any	real
participation	in	your	heart?	What	could	you	do	to	increase	the
effectiveness	of	those	means	in	your	life?
6
.	
As	you	look	over	the	list	of	the	means	of	grace	again,	name	one	or	more
in	which	you	could	begin	to	help	the	church	be	more	effective	in
bringing	blessing	to	its	people.
SPECIAL	TERMS
Eucharist
	
	
	
laying	on	of	hands
extreme	unction
	
	
	
means	of	grace
holy	orders
	
	
	
sacrament
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the
bibliography	to	chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be
found	n	
Appendix	4
.)
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92			Litton,	428–59
1930			Thomas,	313–38,	343–70,	447–51
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1875–76			Pope,	3:294–310,	335–59
1892–94			Miley,	2:392–94
1940			Wiley,	3:150–60
1960			Purkiser,	409–27
1983			Carter,	2:615
3.			Baptist
1767			Gill,	2:621,	660–82
1983–85			Erickson,	1003–15
4.			Dispensational
1949			Thiessen,	296–304
1986			Ryrie,	421,	427
5.			Lutheran
1917–24			Pieper,	3:104–215,	439–72
1934			Mueller,	441–69
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1559			Calvin,	2:1276–1302,	1448–84	(4.14,	19)
1861			Heppe,	590–610
1871–73			Hodge,	3:466–526
1878			Dabney,	726–57
1889			Shedd,	2b:561–87
1937–66			Murray,	
CW,	
2:366–69
1938			Berkhof,	604–21
1962			Buswell,	2:226–41
7.			Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988–92			Williams,	2:287–94,	3:159–63
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955			Ott,	325–472
2.			Roman	Catholic:	Post-Vatican	II
1980			McBrien,	2:731–49,	775–816
Other	Works
Hughes,	P.	E.	“Grace,	Means	of.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	482–83.
Milne,	Bruce.	
We	Belong	Together:	The	Meaning	of	Fellowship.
Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,	1978.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
Acts	2:41–42:	
So	those	who	received	his	word	were	baptized,	and	there	were
added	that	day	about	three	thousand	souls.	And	they	devoted	themselves	to
the	apostles’	teaching	and	fellowship,	to	the	breaking	of	bread	and	the
prayers.
HYMN
“I	Love	Thy	Kingdom,	Lord”
This	hymn	expresses	joy	at	the	privilege	of	being	in	the	church.	In
fact,	the	author	exclaims,	“Beyond	my	highest	joy	I	prize	her
heavenly	ways,	/Her	sweet	communion,	solemn	vows,	her	hymns	of
love	and	praise.”	Here	he	is	meditating	on	some	of	the	means	of
grace	within	the	church	(“her	heavenly	ways”),	particularly	the
fellowship	or	communion	that	comes	within	the	church,	the	vows	to
God	that	are	made	there,	and	the	hymns	that	are	sung	within	it.
Moreover,	using	the	figure	of	Mount	Zion	to	refer	to	the	church,	he
says	that	“to	Zion	shall	be	given	/The	brightest	glories	earth	can
yield,	and	brighter	bliss	of	heaven.”	When	we	sing	this	we	can
think	of	all	the	rich	blessings	that	the	Holy	Spirit	bestows	on	the
church	through	the	many	means	of	grace.
The	author	of	this	hymn,	Timothy	Dwight,	was	President	of	Yale
University	from	1795	to	1817,	during	which	time	he	reformed	the
administration	and	the	curriculum	and	tripled	the	enrollment.	He
also	was	Professor	of	Divinity,	and	under	his	preaching	a	revival
broke	out	in	1802,	in	which	a	third	of	the	students	were	converted.
I	love	thy	kingdom,	Lord,	the	house	of	thine	abode,
The	church	our	blest	Redeemer	saved	with	his	own	precious	blood.
I	love	thy	church,	O	God:	her	walls	before	thee	stand,
Dear	as	the	apple	of	thine	eye,	and	graven	on	thy	hand.
For	her	my	tears	shall	fall,	for	her	my	prayers	ascend;
To	her	my	cares	and	toils	be	giv’n,	till	toils	and	cares	shall	end.
Beyond	my	highest	joy	I	prize	her	heav’nly	ways,
Her	sweet	communion,	solemn	vows,	her	hymns	of	love	and	praise.
Jesus,	thou	Friend	divine,	our	Savior	and	our	King,
Thy	hand	from	ev’ry	snare	and	foe	shall	great	deliv’rance	bring.
Sure	as	thy	truth	shall	last,	to	Zion	shall	be	giv’n
The	brightest	glories	earth	can	yield,	and	brighter	bliss	of	heav’n.
AUTHOR:	TIMOTHY	DWIGHT,	1800
NOTES
1
This	is	the	position	of	Louis	Berkhof,	
Systematic	Theology,	
pp.	604–6.	He	calls	these	three	means	“objective	channels	which
Christ	has	instituted	in	the	church”	(pp.	604–5),	but	the	significant	criterion	in	Berkhof’s	thinking	appears	to	be	the	fact	that	these
three	are	the	special	functions	administered	by	the	ordained	clergy:	Berkhof	calls	these	“the	
official	
means	of	the	church	of	Jesus
Christ”	(p.	
605),	and	later	says,	“As	the	
official	
means	of	grace	placed	at	the	disposal	of	the	Church,	both	the	Word	and	the
sacraments	
can	only	be	administered	by	the	lawful	and	properly	qualified	officers	of	the	Church”	
(p.	610).	In	this	way,	he	clearly
restricts	the	“means	of	grace”	to	those	means	administered	by	the	ordained	clergy.
Although	those	who	follow	Berkhof	on	this	point	could	argue	that	this	procedure	is	wise	and	serves	the	interest	of	maintaining
good	order	in	the	church,	we	may	ask	whether	in	fact	this	restriction	carries	overtones	of	“sacerdotalism,”	the	view	of	the	Roman
Catholic	Church	(and,	to	a	lesser	degree,	the	Anglican	Church)	that	there	is	a	special	“priesthood”	of	ordained	people	within	the
church	who	have	a	special	authority	or	ability	to	extend	God’s	grace	to	people	in	the	church.
(See	
chapter	49
,	for	a	discussion	of	the	use	of	the	two	terms	
sacraments	
and	
ordinances	
to	refer	to	baptism	and	the	Lord’s
Supper.)
2
Hodge,	
Systematic	Theology,	
3:692–709.
3
See	
chapter	36
,	on	the	Roman	Catholic	view	of	justification.
4
However,	the	Anglican	Church	teaches	that	baptism	is	“generally	necessary”	for	salvation.
5
See	
chapter	49
,	on	the	Roman	Catholic	view	that	the	sacraments	work	
ex	opere	operato.
6
See	
chapter	33
	for	a	fuller	discussion	of	the	gospel	call.
7
Hodge,	
Systematic	Theology,	
3:468–69.
8
This	view	that	there	is	blessing	that	comes	automatically	from	participation	in	the	Lord’s	Supper	is	the	Roman	Catholic	doctrine
of	
ex	opere	operato	
(“by	the	work	performed”),	which	is	discussed	in	
chapter	50
.
9
See	the	discussion	of	worship	“in	spirit”	in	
chapter	51
.	(The	whole	of	chapter	51	discusses	worship	in	general.)
10
See	discussion	of	the	“power	of	the	keys”	in	
chapter	46
.
11
See	
chapter	46
,	for	a	more	full	discussion	of	church	discipline.
12
See	
chapters	52
	and	
53
	for	a	discussion	of	spiritual	gifts.
13
Although	the	longer	ending	of	Mark	is	doubtful	as	part	of	Scripture	(see	
chapter	17
),	Mark	16:18	certainly	does	represent	at
least	one	stream	of	early	tradition	within	the	church	as	well:	it	says	that	those	who	believe	in	Jesus	“will	lay	their	hands	on	the
sick,	and	they	will	recover.”
14
Because	the	gospels	so	frequently	emphasize	the	fact	that	Jesus	laid	hands	on	people	or	touched	them	with	his	hands,	this
expression	does	not	seem	to	be	simply	a	metaphor	meaning	“What	miracles	are	done	by	
him!”	
but	is	better	understood	to	be	a
reference	to	the	specific	way	in	which	Jesus’	hands	were	the	means	by	which	his	miracles	were	very	frequently	brought	about.
Unfortunately,	in	this	verse	and	several	others	mentioning	miracles	done	by	people’s	
hands,	
the	NIV	has	decided	a	literal
translation	is	not	important	and	has	given	the	English	reader	no	mention	of	hands.	For	example,	it	simply	translates	Mark	6:2,	“
He
even	does	miracles!”	But	the	Greek	text	specifically	says	that	miracles	are	done	
“through	his	hands”	
(
dia	tōn	cheirōn	autou
).	In
the	following	section	I	have	pointed	out	only	some	of	the	places	where	the	NIV	fails	to	translate	the	Greek	word	
cheir	
(“hand”),
but	it	is	present	in	the	Greek	text	in	all	the	verses	I	quote,	and	readers	who	do	not	find	it	in	their	NIV	translations	should	consult
another	translation,	such	as	the	RSV	or	NASB,	that	has	a	more	literal	translation	policy.
15
The	NIV	simply	translates,	“enabling	
them	
to	do	miraculous	signs	and	wonders”	(see	previous	footnote).
16
The	NIV	simply	says,	“God	did	extraordinary	miracles	
through	Paul”	
(see	previous	two	footnotes).
17
See	
chapter	49
,	on	the	symbolism	of	baptism,	and	
chapter	50
,	on	the	symbolism	of	the	Lord’s	Supper.
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	49
Baptism
Who	should	be	baptized?	How	should	it	be	done?	What	does	it
mean?
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
In	this	chapter	and	the	next	we	treat	baptism	and	the	Lord’s	Supper,
two	ceremonies	that	Jesus	commanded	his	church	to	perform.	But
before	we	begin	consideration	of	either	one	of	them	we	must	note
that	there	is	disagreement	among	Protestants	even	over	the	general
term	that	should	be	applied	to	them.	Because	the	Roman	Catholic
Church	calls	these	two	ceremonies	“sacraments,”	and	because	the
Catholic	Church	teaches	that	these	sacraments	
in	themselves
actually	
convey	grace	
to	people	(without	requiring	faith	from	the
persons	participating	in	them),	some	Protestants	(especially
Baptists)	have	refused	to	refer	to	baptism	and	the	Lord’s	Supper	as
“sacraments.”	They	have	preferred	the	word	
ordinances	
instead.
This	is	thought	to	be	an	appropriate	term	because	baptism	and	the
Lord’s	Supper	were	“ordained”	by	Christ.
1
	On	the	other	hand,	other
Protestants	such	as	those	in	the	Anglican,	Lutheran,	and	Reformed
traditions,	have	been	willing	to	use	the	word	“sacraments”	to	refer
to	baptism	and	the	Lord’s	Supper,	without	thereby	endorsing	the
Roman	Catholic	position.
It	does	not	seem	that	any	significant	point	is	at	issue	here	in	the
question	of	whether	to	call	baptism	and	the	Lord’s	Supper
“ordinances”	or	“sacraments.”	Since	Protestants	who	use	both
words	explain	clearly	what	they	mean	by	them,	the	argument	is	not
really	over	doctrine	but	over	the	meaning	of	an	English	word.	If	we
are	willing	to	explain	clearly	what	we	mean,	it	does	not	seem	to
make	any	difference	whether	we	use	the	word	
sacrament	
or	not.
2
	In
this	text,	when	referring	to	baptism	and	the	Lord’s	Supper	in
Protestant	teaching,	I	will	use	both	“ordinances”	and	“sacraments”
interchangeably,	and	regard	them	as	synonymous	in	meaning.
Before	beginning	our	discussion	of	baptism	we	must	recognize	that
there	has	been	historically,	and	is	today,	a	strong	difference	of
viewpoint	among	evangelical	Christians	regarding	this	subject.	The
position	advocated	in	this	book	is	that	baptism	is	not	a	“major”
doctrine	that	should	be	the	basis	of	division	among	genuine
Christians,
3
	but	it	is	nonetheless	a	matter	of	importance	for	ordinary
church	life,	and	it	is	appropriate	that	we	give	it	full	consideration.
The	position	advocated	in	this	chapter	is	“Baptistic”—namely,	that
baptism	is	appropriately	administered	only	to	those	who	give	a
believable	profession	of	faith	in	Jesus	Christ.	
During	the	discussion,
we	shall	interact	particularly	with	the	paedobaptist	(“infant	baptist”)
position	as	advocated	by	Louis	Berkhof	in	his	
Systematic	Theology,
since	this	is	a	careful	and	responsible	representation	of	the
paedobaptist	position,	and	it	is	in	a	widely	used	systematic	theology
text.
A.	The	Mode	and	Meaning	of	Baptism
The	practice	of	baptism	in	the	New	Testament	was	carried	out	in
one	way:	the	person	being	baptized	was	
immersed	
or	put
completely	under	the	water	and	then	brought	back	up	again.
Baptism	
by	immersion	
is	therefore	the	“mode”	of	baptism	or	the
way	in	which	baptism	was	carried	out	in	the	New	Testament.	This
is	evident	for	the	following	reasons:
(1)	The	Greek	word	
baptizō	
means	“to	plunge,	dip,	immerse”
something	in	water.	This	is	the	commonly	recognized	and	standard
meaning	of	the	term	in	ancient	Greek	literature	both	inside	and
outside	of	the	Bible.
4
(2)	The	sense	“immerse”	is	appropriate	and	probably	required	for
the	word	in	several	New	Testament	passages.	In	Mark	1:5,	people
were	baptized	by	John	“
in	
the	river	Jordan”	(the	Greek	text	has	
en,
“in,”	and	not	“beside”	or	“by”	or	“near”	the	river).
5
	Mark	also	tells
us	that	when	Jesus	had	been	baptized	“he	came	up	
out	of	the	water”
(Mark	1:10).	The	Greek	text	specifies	that	he	came	“out	of”	(
ek
)	the
water,	not	that	he	came	away	from	it	(this	would	be	expressed	by
Gk.	
apo
).	The	fact	that	John	and	Jesus	went	into	the	river	and	came
up	out	of	it	strongly	suggests	immersion,	since	sprinkling	or
pouring	of	water	could	much	more	readily	have	been	done	standing
beside	the	river,	particularly	because	multitudes	of	people	were
coming	for	baptism.	John’s	gospel	tells	us,	further,	that	John	the
Baptist	“was	baptizing	at	Aenon	near	Salim,	because	there	was
much	water	there”	(John	3:23).	Again,	it	would	not	take	“much
water”	to	baptize	people	by	sprinkling,	but	it	would	take	much
water	to	baptize	by	immersion.
When	Philip	had	shared	the	gospel	with	the	Ethiopian	eunuch,	“as
they	went	along	the	road	they	came	to	some	water,	and	the	eunuch
said,	‘See,	here	is	water!	What	is	to	prevent	my	being	baptized?’	”
(Acts	8:36).	Apparently	neither	of	them	thought	that	sprinkling	or
pouring	a	handful	of	water	from	the	container	of	drinking	water	that
would	have	been	carried	in	the	chariot	was	enough	to	constitute
baptism.	Rather,	they	waited	until	there	was	a	body	of	water	near
the	road.	Then	“he	commanded	the	chariot	to	stop,	and	they	both
went	
down	into	the	water,	
Philip	and	the	eunuch,	and	he	baptized
him.	And	when	they	came	
up	out	of	the	water,	
the	Spirit	of	the	Lord
caught	up	Philip;	and	the	eunuch	saw	him	no	more,	and	went	on	his
way	rejoicing”	(Acts	8:38–39).	As	in	the	case	of	Jesus,	this	baptism
occurred	when	Philip	and	the	eunuch	went	down	into	a	body	of
water,	and	after	the	baptism	they	came	up	out	of	that	body	of	water.
Once	again	baptism	by	immersion	is	the	only	satisfactory
explanation	of	this	narrative.
6
(3)	The	symbolism	of	union	with	Christ	in	his	death,	burial,	and
resurrection	seems	to	require	baptism	by	immersion.	Paul	says,
Do	you	not	know	that	all	of	us	who	have	been	baptized	into	Christ
Jesus	were	baptized	into	his	death?	We	were	buried	therefore	with
him	by	baptism	into	death,	so	that	as	Christ	was	raised	from	the	dead
by	the	glory	of	the	Father,	we	too	might	walk	in	newness	of	life.
(Rom.	6:3–4)
Similarly,	Paul	tells	the	Colossians,	“You	were	
buried	with	him	in	baptism,	
in
which	you	were	also	
raised	with	him	
through	faith	in	the	working	of	God,
who	raised	him	from	the	dead”	(Col.	2:12).
Now	this	truth	is	clearly	symbolized	in	baptism	by	immersion.
When	the	candidate	for	baptism	goes	down	into	the	water	it	is	a
picture	of	going	down	into	the	grave	and	being	buried.	Coming	up
out	of	the	water	is	then	a	picture	of	being	raised	with	Christ	to	walk
in	newness	of	life.	Baptism	thus	very	clearly	pictures	death	to	one’s
old	way	of	life	and	rising	to	a	new	kind	of	life	in	Christ.	But
baptism	by	sprinkling	or	pouring	simply	misses	this	symbolism.
7
Sometimes	it	is	objected	that	the	essential	thing	symbolized	in
baptism	is	not	death	and	resurrection	with	Christ	but	purification
and	cleansing	from	sins.	Certainly	it	is	true	that	water	is	an	evident
symbol	of	washing	and	cleansing,	and	the	waters	of	baptism	do
symbolize	washing	and	purification	from	sins	as	well	as	death	and
resurrection	with	Christ.	Titus	3:5	speaks	of	“the	washing	of
regeneration”	and,	even	though	the	word	
baptism	
is	not	used	in	this
text,	it	is	certainly	true	that	there	is	a	cleansing	from	sin	that	occurs
at	the	time	of	conversion.	Ananias	told	Saul,	“Rise	and	be	baptized,
and	
wash	away	your	sins,	
calling	on	his	name”	(Acts	22:16).
But	to	say	that	washing	away	of	sins	is	the	only	thing	(or	even	the
most	essential	thing)	pictured	in	baptism	does	not	faithfully
represent	New	Testament	teaching.	Both	washing	and	death	and
resurrection	with	Christ	are	symbolized	in	baptism,	but	Romans
6:1–11	and	Colossians	2:11–12	place	a	clear	emphasis	on	dying	and
rising	with	Christ.	Even	the	washing	is	much	more	effectively
symbolized	by	immersion	than	by	sprinkling	or	pouring,	and	death
and	resurrection	with	Christ	are	symbolized	only	by	immersion,	not
at	all	by	sprinkling	or	pouring.
What	then	is	the	positive	meaning	of	baptism?	In	all	the	discussion
over	the	mode	of	baptism	and	the	disputes	over	its	meaning,	it	is
easy	for	Christians	to	lose	sight	of	the	significance	and	beauty	of
baptism	and	to	disregard	the	tremendous	blessing	that	accompanies
this	ceremony.	The	amazing	truths	of	passing	through	the	waters	of
judgment	safely,	of	dying	and	rising	with	Christ,	and	of	having	our
sins	washed	away,	are	truths	of	momentous	and	eternal	proportion
and	ought	to	be	an	occasion	for	giving	great	glory	and	praise	to
God.	If	churches	would	teach	these	truths	more	clearly,	baptisms
would	be	the	occasion	of	much	more	blessing	in	the	church.
B.	The	Subjects	of	Baptism
The	pattern	revealed	at	several	places	in	the	New	Testament	is	that
only	those	who	give	a	believable	profession	of	faith	should	be
baptized.	This	view	is	often	called	“believers’	baptism,”	since	it
holds	that	only	those	who	have	themselves	believed	in	Christ	(or,
more	precisely,	those	who	have	given	reasonable	evidence	of
believing	in	Christ)	should	be	baptized.	This	is	because	baptism,
which	is	a	
symbol	of	beginning	the	Christian	life,	
should	only	be
given	to	those	who	have	
in	fact	
begun	the	Christian	life.
1.
	The	Argument	From	the	New	Testament	Narrative	Passages	on
Baptism.
	The	narrative	examples	of	those	who	were	baptized	suggest	that
baptism	was	administered	only	to	those	who	gave	a	believable	profession	of
faith.	After	Peter’s	sermon	at	Pentecost	we	read,	“
Those	who	received	his
word	
were	baptized”	(Acts	2:41).	The	text	specifies	that	baptism	was
administered	to	those	who	“received	his	word”	and	therefore	trusted	in	Christ
for	salvation.
8
	Similarly,	when	Philip	preached	the	gospel	in	Samaria,	we
read,	“
When	they	believed	
Philip	as	he	preached	good	news	about	the
kingdom	of	God	and	the	name	of	Jesus	Christ,	
they	were	baptized,	
both	men
and	women”	(Acts	8:12).	Likewise,	when	Peter	preached	to	the	Gentiles	in
Cornelius’	household,	he	allowed	baptism	for	those	who	had	
heard	
the	Word
and	
received	the	Holy	Spirit—
that	is,	for	those	who	had	given	persuasive
evidence	of	an	internal	work	of	regeneration.	While	Peter	was	preaching,	“the
Holy	Spirit	fell	on	all	who	heard	the	word”	and	Peter	and	his	companions
“heard	them	speaking	in	tongues	and	extolling	God”	(Acts	10:44–46).	Peter’s
response	was	that	baptism	is	appropriate	for	those	who	have	received	the
regenerating	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit:	“Can	any	one	forbid	water	for	baptizing
these	people	
who	have	received	the	Holy	Spirit	
just	as	we	have?”	Then	Peter
“commanded	them	to	be	baptized	in	the	name	of	Jesus	Christ”	(Acts	10:47–
48).	The	point	of	these	three	passages	is	that	baptism	is	appropriately	given	to
those	who	have	received	the	gospel	and	trusted	in	Christ	for	salvation.	There
are	other	texts	that	indicate	this	as	well—Acts	16:14–15	(Lydia	and	her
household,	after	“the	Lord	opened	her	heart”	to	believe);	Acts	16:32–33	(the
family	of	the	Philippian	jailer,	after	Peter	preached	“the	word	of	the	Lord	to
him	and	to	all	that	were	in	his	house”);	and	1	Corinthians	1:16	(the	household
of	Stephanas),	but	these	will	be	discussed	more	fully	below	when	we	look	at
the	question	of	“household	baptisms.”
2.	The	Argument	From	the	Meaning	of	Baptism.
	In	addition	to	these
indications	from	New	Testament	narratives	that	baptism	always	followed
upon	saving	faith,	there	is	a	second	consideration	that	argues	for	believers’
baptism:	the	outward	symbol	of	
beginning	
the	Christian	life	should	only	be
given	to	those	who	
show	evidence	
of	having	begun	the	Christian	life.	The
New	Testament	authors	wrote	as	though	they	clearly	assumed	that	everyone
who	was	baptized	had	also	personally	trusted	in	Christ	and	experienced
salvation.	For	example,	Paul	says,	“As	many	of	you	as	were	baptized	into
Christ	have	put	on	Christ”	(Gal.	3:27).	Paul	here	assumes	that	baptism	is	the
outward	sign	of	inward	regeneration.	This	simply	would	not	have	been	true	of
infants—Paul	could	not	have	said,	“As	many	
infants	
as	have	been	baptized
into	Christ	have	put	on	Christ,”	for	infants	have	not	yet	come	to	saving	faith
or	given	any	evidence	of	regeneration.
9
Paul	speaks	the	same	way	in	Romans	6:3–4:	“Do	you	not	know	that
all	of	us	who	have	been	baptized	into	Christ	Jesus	
were	baptized
into	his	death?	We	were	buried	therefore	with	him	by	baptism	into
death.”	Could	Paul	have	said	this	of	infants?
10
	Could	he	have	said
that	“all	infants	who	have	been	baptized	into	Christ	Jesus	were
baptized	into	his	death”	and	“were	buried	therefore	with	him	by
baptism	into	death,	so	that	as	Christ	was	raised	from	the	dead”?	But
if	Paul	could	not	have	said	those	things	about	infants,	then	those
who	advocate	infant	baptism	must	say	that	baptism	means
something	different	for	infants	than	what	Paul	says	it	means	for	“all
of	us	who	have	been	baptized	into	Christ	Jesus.”	Those	who	argue
for	infant	baptism	at	this	point	resort	to	what	seems	to	the	present
author	to	be	vague	language	about	infants	being	adopted	“into	the
covenant”	or	“into	the	covenant	community,”	but	the	New
Testament	does	not	speak	that	way	about	baptism.	Rather,	it	says
that	all	of	those	who	have	been	baptized	have	been	buried	with
Christ,	have	been	raised	with	him,	and	have	put	on	Christ.
A	similar	argument	can	be	made	from	Colossians	2:12:	“You	were
buried	with	him	in	baptism,	in	which	you	were	also	raised	with	him
through	faith	in	the	working	of	God,	who	raised	him	from	the
dead.”	But	it	could	not	be	said	of	infants	that	they	were	buried	with
Christ,	or	were	raised	with	him	through	faith,	since	they	were	not
yet	old	enough	to	exercise	faith	for	themselves.
3.	Alternative	#1:	The	Roman	Catholic	View.
	The	Roman	Catholic	Church
teaches	that	baptism	should	be	administered	to	infants.
11
	The	reason	for	this	is
that	the	Catholic	Church	believes	that	baptism	is	
necessary	
for	salvation,	and
that	the	act	of	baptism	itself	
causes	regeneration.	
Therefore,	in	this	view,
baptism	is	a	
means	
whereby	the	church	bestows	saving	grace	on	people.	And
if	it	is	this	kind	of	a	channel	of	saving	grace	it	should	be	given	to	all	people.
Ludwig	Ott,	in	his	
Fundamentals	of	Catholic	Dogma
12
	gives	the
following	explanations:
Baptism	is	that	Sacrament	in	which	man	being	washed	with	water	in
the	name	of	the	Three	Divine	Persons	is	spiritually	reborn.	(p.	
350;	Ott
gives	John	3:5;	Titus	3:5;	and	Eph.	5:26	in	support	of	this	statement)
Baptism,	provided	that	the	proper	dispositions	(Faith	and	sorrow	for
sin)	are	present,	effects:	a)	the	eradication	of	sins,	both	original	sin	and,
in	the	case	of	adults,	also	personal,	mortal	or	venial	sins;	b)	inner
sanctification	by	the	infusion	of	sanctifying	grace.	(p.	
354)
Even	if	it	be	unworthily	received,	valid	Baptism	imprints	on	the	soul	of
the	recipient	an	indelible	spiritual	mark,	the	Baptismal	Character.	.	.	.
The	baptized	person	is	incorporated,	by	the	Baptismal	Character,	into
the	Mystical	Body	of	Christ.	.	.	.	Every	validly	baptized	person,	even
one	baptized	outside	the	Catholic	Church,	becomes	a	member	of	the
One	Holy	Catholic	and	Apostolic	Church.	(p.	
355)
Ott	goes	on	to	explain	that	baptism	is	necessary	for	salvation	and	is
to	be	performed	only	by	priests:
Baptism	by	water	.	.	.	is,	since	the	promulgation	of	the	Gospel,
necessary	for	all	men	without	exception	for	salvation.	(p.	
356)
13
Ott	explains	that,	while	baptism	is	ordinarily	to	be	administered	by
a	priest,	in	unusual	circumstances	(such	as	when	a	child	is	in	danger
of	dying	soon	after	birth)	it	may	be	performed	by	a	deacon	or	a
layperson.	Even	baptism	performed	by	unbelievers	is	thought	to	be
valid,	for	Ott	says:
Yea,	even	a	pagan	or	a	heretic	can	baptise,	provided	he	adheres	to	the
form	of	the	Church	and	has	the	intention	of	doing	what	the	Church
does.	(p.	
358)
Though	infants	cannot	exercise	saving	faith	themselves,	the	Roman
Catholic	Church	teaches	that	the	baptism	of	infants	is	valid:
Faith,	as	it	is	not	the	effective	cause	of	justification	.	.	.	need	not	be
present.	The	faith	which	infants	lack	is	.	.	.	replaced	by	the	faith	of	the
Church.	(p.	
359)
Essential	to	understanding	the	Roman	Catholic	view	of	baptism	is
the	realization	that	Catholics	hold	that	the	sacraments	work	apart
from	the	faith	of	the	people	participating	in	the	sacrament.	And	if
this	is	so,	then	it	follows	that	baptism	would	confer	grace	even	on
infants	who	do	not	have	the	ability	to	exercise	faith.	Several
statements	in	Ott’s	book	make	this	clear:
The	Catholic	Church	teaches	that	the	Sacraments	have	an	objective
efficacy,	that	is,	an	efficacy	independent	of	the	subjective	disposition	of
the	recipient	or	of	the	minister.	.	.	.	The	Sacraments	confer	grace
immediately,	that	is,	without	the	mediation	of	Fiducial	faith.	(pp.	328–
29)
The	Sacraments	of	the	New	Covenant	contain	the	grace	which	they
signify,	and	bestow	it	on	those	who	do	not	hinder	it.	(p.	
328)
The	Sacraments	work	
ex	opere	operato.	.	.	.	
That	is,	the	Sacraments
operate	by	the	power	of	the	completed	sacramental	rite.	(p.	
329)
14
The	formula	
“ex	opere	operato”	
asserts,	negatively	that	the
sacramental	grace	is	not	conferred	by	reason	of	the	subjective	activity
of	the	recipient,	and	positively,	that	the	sacramental	grace	is	caused	by
the	validly	operated	sacramental	sign.	(p.	
330)
However,	Ott	is	careful	to	explain	that	the	Catholic	teaching	must
not	be	interpreted	“in	the	sense	of	mechanical	or	magical	efficacy”
(p.	
330).	He	says,
On	the	contrary,	in	the	case	of	the	adult	recipient	faith	is	expressly
demanded	.	.	.	nevertheless	the	subjective	disposition	of	the	recipient
is	not	the	cause	of	grace;	it	is	merely	an	indispensable	precondition	of
the	communication	of	grace	.	.	.	The	measure	of	the	grace	effected	
ex
opere	operato	
even	depends	on	the	grade	of	the	subjective	disposition.
(p.	
330)
In	giving	a	response	to	this	Roman	Catholic	teaching,	we	should
remember	that	the	Reformation	centered	upon	this	issue.	Martin
Luther’s	great	concern	was	to	teach	that	salvation	depends	on	faith
alone,	not	on	faith	
plus	works.	
But	if	baptism	and	participating	in
the	other	sacraments	are	
necessary	for	salvation	
because	they	are
necessary	
for	receiving	saving	grace,	then	salvation	really	is	based
on	faith	plus	works.	In	contrast	to	this,	the	clear	New	Testament
message	is	that	justification	is	by	faith	
alone.	
“By	grace	you	have
been	saved	
through	faith;	
and	this	is	not	your	own	doing,	it	is	the
gift	of	God—
not	because	of	works,	
lest	any	man	should	boast”
(Eph.	2:8–9).	Moreover,	“the	
free	gift	
of	God	is	eternal	life	in	Christ
Jesus	our	Lord”	(Rom.	6:23).
The	Roman	Catholic	argument	that	baptism	is	necessary	for
salvation	is	very	similar	to	the	argument	of	Paul’s	opponents	in
Galatia	who	said	that	circumcision	was	necessary	for	salvation.
Paul’s	response	is	that	those	who	require	circumcision	are
preaching	“a	different	gospel”	(Gal.	1:6).	He	says	that	“all	who	rely
on	works	of	the	law	are	under	a	curse”	(Gal.	3:10),	and	speaks	very
severely	to	those	who	attempt	to	add	any	form	of	obedience	as	a
requirement	for	justification:	“You	are	severed	from	Christ,	you
who	would	be	justified	by	the	law;	you	have	fallen	away	from
grace”	(Gal.	5:4).	Therefore,	we	must	conclude	that	no	
work	
is
necessary	for	salvation.	And	therefore	
baptism	
is	not	necessary	for
salvation.
But	what	about	John	3:5,	“Unless	one	is	
born	of	water	
and	the
Spirit,	he	cannot	enter	the	kingdom	of	God”?	Although	some	have
understood	this	as	a	reference	to	baptism,	it	is	better	understood
against	the	background	of	the	promise	of	the	new	covenant	in
Ezekiel	36:
I	will	sprinkle	clean	water	upon	you,	
and	you	shall	be	clean	from	all
your	uncleannesses,	and	from	all	your	idols	I	will	cleanse	you.	A	new
heart	I	will	give	you,	and	a	new	spirit	I	will	put	within	you;	and	I	will
take	out	of	your	flesh	the	heart	of	stone	and	give	you	a	heart	of	flesh.
And	I	will	put	my	spirit	within	you,	and	cause	you	to	walk	in	my
statutes	and	be	careful	to	observe	my	ordinances.	(Ezek.	36:25–27)
Ezekiel	here	speaks	of	a	“spiritual”	washing	that	will	come	in	the
days	of	the	new	covenant	when	God	puts	his	Spirit	within	his
people.	In	the	light	of	this,	to	be	born	of	water	and	the	Spirit	is	a
“spiritual”	washing	that	occurs	when	we	are	born	again,	just	as	we
receive	a	spiritual,	not	a	physical,	“new	heart”	at	that	time	as	well.
Similarly,	Titus	3:5	specifies	not	water	baptism	but	“the	washing	of
regeneration,”	explicitly	stating	that	it	is	a	
spiritual	
giving	of	new
life.	Water	baptism	is	simply	not	mentioned	in	this	passage.	A
spiritual	rather	than	literal	washing	is	also	referred	to	in	Ephesians
5:26,	where	Paul	says	that	Christ	gave	himself	up	for	the	church
“that	he	might	sanctify	her,	having	cleansed	her	by	the	washing	of
water	with	the	word.”	It	is	the	Word	of	God	that	does	the	washing
referred	to	here,	not	physical	water.
As	for	the	Roman	Catholic	view	that	baptism	conveys	grace	apart
from	the	subjective	disposition	of	the	recipient	or	the	minister	(a
position	that	is	consistent	with	baptizing	infants,	who	do	not
exercise	faith	for	themselves),	we	must	recognize	that	no	New
Testament	examples	exist	to	prove	this	view,	nor	is	there	New
Testament	testimony	to	indicate	this.	Rather,	the	narrative	accounts
of	those	who	were	baptized	indicate	that	they	had	first	come	to
saving	faith	(see	above).	And	when	there	are	doctrinal	statements
about	baptism	they	also	indicate	the	need	of	saving	faith.	When
Paul	says,	“You	were	buried	with	him	in	baptism,	in	which	you
were	also	raised	with	him,”	he	immediately	specifies	“
through	faith
in	the	working	of	God,	who	raised	him	from	the	dead”	(Col.	2:12).
Finally,	what	about	1	Peter	3:21,	where	Peter	says,	
“Baptism	.	.	.
now	saves	you”?	
Does	this	not	give	clear	support	to	the	Roman
Catholic	view	that	baptism	itself	brings	saving	grace	to	the
recipient?
15
	No,	for	when	Peter	uses	this	phrase	he	continues	in	the
same	sentence	to	explain	exactly	what	he	means	by	it.	He	says	that
baptism	saves	you	
“not	as	a	removal	of	dirt	from	the	body”	
(that	is,
not	as	an	outward,	physical	act	which	washes	dirt	from	the	body—
that	is	not	the	part	which	saves	you),	
“but	as	an	appeal	to	God	for	a
clear	conscience”	
(that	is,	as	an	inward,	spiritual	transaction
between	God	and	the	individual,	a	transaction	symbolized	by	the
outward	ceremony	of	baptism).	We	could	paraphrase	Peter’s
statement	by	saying,	“Baptism	now	saves	you—not	the	
outward
physical	ceremony	of	baptism	but	the	
inward	
spiritual	reality	which
baptism	represents.”	In	this	way,	Peter	guards	against	any	view	of
baptism	that	would	attribute	automatic	saving	power	to	the	physical
ceremony	itself.
Peter’s	phrase,	“an	appeal	to	God	for	a	clear	conscience,”	is	another
way	of	saying	“a	request	for	forgiveness	of	sins	and	a	new	heart.”
When	God	gives	a	sinner	a	“clear	conscience,”	that	person	has	the
assurance	that	every	sin	has	been	forgiven	and	that	he	or	she	stands
in	a	right	relationship	with	God	(Heb.	9:14	and	10:22	speak	this
way	about	the	cleansing	of	one’s	conscience	through	Christ).	To	be
baptized	rightly	is	to	make	such	an	“appeal”	to	God:	it	is	to	say,	in
effect,	“Please,	God,	as	I	enter	this	baptism	which	will	cleanse	my
body	outwardly	I	am	asking	you	to	cleanse	my	heart	inwardly,
forgive	my	sins,	and	make	me	right	before	you.”	Understood	in	this
way,	baptism	is	an	appropriate	symbol	for	the	beginning	of	the
Christian	life.
16
So	1	Peter	3:21	certainly	does	not	teach	that	baptism	saves	people
automatically	or	confers	grace	
ex	opere	operato.	
It	does	not	even
teach	that	the	act	of	baptism	itself	has	saving	power,	but	rather	that
salvation	comes	about	through	the	inward	exercise	of	faith	that	is
represented	by	baptism	(cf.	Col.	2:12).	In	fact,	Protestants	who
advocate	believers’	baptism	might	well	see	in	1	Peter	3:21	some
support	for	their	position:	baptism,	it	might	be	argued,	is
appropriately	administered	to	anyone	who	is	old	enough	personally
to	make	“an	appeal	to	God	for	a	clear	conscience.”
17
In	conclusion,	the	Roman	Catholic	teachings	that	baptism	is
necessary	for	salvation,	that	the	act	of	baptism	in	itself	confers
saving	grace,	and	that	baptism	is	therefore	appropriately
administered	to	infants,	are	not	persuasive	in	the	light	of	New
Testament	teachings.
4.	Alternative	#2:	The	Protestant	Paedobaptist	View.
	In	contrast	both	to
the	Baptist	position	defended	in	the	earlier	part	of	this	chapter	and	to	the
Roman	Catholic	view	just	discussed,	another	important	view	is	that	baptism	is
rightly	administered	to	
all	infant	children	of	believing	parents.	
This	is	a
common	view	in	many	Protestant	groups	(especially	Lutheran,	Episcopalian,
Methodist,	Presbyterian	and	Reformed	churches).	This	view	is	sometimes
known	as	the	covenant	argument	for	paedobaptism.	It	is	called	a	“covenant”
argument	because	it	depends	on	seeing	infants	born	to	believers	as	part	of	the
“covenant	community”	of	God’s	people.	The	word	“paedobaptism”	means	the
practice	of	baptizing	infants	(the	prefix	
paido-	
means	“child”	and	is	derived
from	the	Greek	word	
pais,	
“child”).
18
	I	will	be	interacting	primarily	with	the
arguments	put	forth	by	Louis	Berkhof,	who	explains	clearly	and	defends	well
the	paedobaptist	position.
The	argument	that	infants	of	believers	should	be	baptized	depends
primarily	on	the	following	three	points:
a.	Infants	Were	Circumcised	in	the	Old	Covenant:
	In	the	Old	Testament,
circumcision	was	the	outward	
sign	
of	entrance	into	the	covenant	community
or	the	community	of	God’s	people.	Circumcision	was	administered	to	all
Israelite	children	(that	is,	male	children)	when	they	were	eight	days	old.
b.	Baptism	Is	Parallel	to	Circumcision:
	In	the	New	Testament,	the	outward
sign	of	entrance	into	the	“covenant	community”	is	baptism.	Therefore
baptism	is	the	New	Testament	counterpart	to	circumcision.	It	follows	that
baptism	should	be	administered	to	all	infant	children	of	believing	parents.	To
deny	them	this	benefit	is	to	deprive	them	of	them	a	privilege	and	benefit	that
is	rightfully	theirs—the	
sign	
of	belonging	to	the	community	of	God’s	people,
the	“covenant	community.”	The	parallel	between	circumcision	and	baptism	is
seen	quite	clearly	in	Colossians	2:
In	him	also	
you	were	circumcised	
with	a	circumcision	made	without
hands,	by	putting	off	the	body	of	flesh	in	the	circumcision	of	Christ;
and	
you	were	buried	with	him	in	baptism,	
in	which	you	were	also
raised	with	him	through	faith	in	the	working	of	God,	who	raised	him
from	the	dead.	(Col.	2:11–12)
Here	it	is	said	that	Paul	makes	an	explicit	connection	between	circumcision
and	baptism.
c.	Household	Baptisms:
	Further	support	for	the	practice	of	baptizing	infants
is	found	in	the	“household	baptisms”	reported	in	Acts	and	the	epistles,
particularly	the	baptism	of	the	household	of	Lydia	(Acts	16:15),	the	family	of
the	Philippian	jailer	(Acts	16:33),	and	the	household	of	Stephanas	(1	Cor.
1:16).	It	is	also	claimed	that	Acts	2:39,	which	declares	that	the	promised
blessing	of	the	gospel	is	“to	you	and	to	your	children,”	supports	this	practice.
In	response	to	these	arguments	for	paedobaptism,	the	following	points	may	be
made:
(1)	It	is	certainly	true	that	baptism	and	circumcision	are	in	many
ways	similar,	but	we	must	not	forget	that	what	they	symbolize	is
also	different	in	some	important	ways.	The	old	covenant	had	a
physical,	external	means	of	entrance	
into	the	“covenant
community.”	One	became	a	Jew	by	being	born	of	Jewish	parents.
Therefore	all	Jewish	males	were	circumcised.	Circumcision	was	not
restricted	to	people	who	had	true	inward	spiritual	life,	but	rather
was	given	to	
all	who	lived	among	the	people	of	Israel.	
God	said:
Every	male	among	you	shall	be	circumcised.	.	.	.	He	that	is	eight	days
old	among	you	shall	be	circumcised;	every	male	throughout	your
generations,	whether	born	in	your	house,	or	bought	with	your	money
from	any	foreigner	who	is	not	of	your	offspring,	both	
he	that	is	born
in	your	house	and	he	that	is	bought	with	your	money,	
shall	be
circumcised.	(Gen.	17:10–13)
It	was	not	only	the	physical	descendants	of	the	people	of	Israel	who
were	circumcised,	but	also	those	
servants	
who	were	purchased	by
them	and	lived	among	them.	The	presence	or	absence	of	inward
spiritual	life	made	no	difference	whatsoever	in	the	question	of
whether	one	was	circumcised.	So	“Abraham	took	Ishmael	his	son
and	all	the	slaves	born	in	his	house	or	bought	with	his	money,	
every
male	among	the	men	of	Abraham’s	house,	and	he	circumcised	the
flesh	of	their	foreskins	that	very	day,	as	God	had	said	to	him”	(Gen.
17:23;	cf.	Josh.	5:4).
We	should	realize	that	circumcision	was	given	to	every	male	living
among	the	people	of	Israel	even	though	
true	circumcision	
is
something	inward	and	spiritual:	“Real	circumcision	is	a	matter	of
the	heart,	spiritual	and	not	literal”	(Rom.	2:29).	Moreover,	Paul	in
the	New	Testament	explicitly	states	that	“not	all	who	are	descended
from	Israel	belong	to	Israel”	(Rom.	9:6).	But	even	though	there	was
at	the	time	of	the	Old	Testament	(and	more	fully	in	the	time	of	the
New	Testament)	a	realization	of	the	inward	spiritual	reality	that
circumcision	was	intended	to	represent,	there	was	
no	attempt	
to
restrict	circumcision	only	to	those	whose	hearts	were	
actually
circumcised	spiritually	
and	who	had	genuine	saving	faith.	Even
among	the	adult	males,	circumcision	was	applied	to	everyone,	not
just	those	who	gave	evidence	of	inward	faith.
(2)	But	under	the	new	covenant	the	situation	is	very	different.	The
New	Testament	does	not	talk	about	a	“covenant	community”	made
up	of	believers	
and	
their	unbelieving	children	and	relatives	and
servants	who	happen	to	live	among	them.	(In	fact,	in	the	discussion
of	baptism,	the	phrase	“covenant	community”	as	used	by
paedobaptists	often	tends	to	function	as	a	broad	and	vague	term	that
blurs	the	differences	between	the	Old	Testament	and	the	New
Testament	on	this	matter.)	In	the	New	Testament	church,	the	only
question	that	matters	is	whether	one	has	saving	faith	and	has	been
spiritually	incorporated	into	the	body	of	Christ,	the	true	church.	The
only	“covenant	community”	discussed	is	
the	church,	
the	fellowship
of	the	redeemed.
But	how	does	one	become	a	member	of	the	church?	The	means	of
entrance	into	the	church	is	
voluntary,	spiritual,	and	internal.	
One
becomes	a	member	of	the	true	church	by	being	
born	again	
and	by
having	
saving	faith,	
not	by	physical	birth.	It	comes	about	not	by	an
external	act,	but	by	internal	faith	in	one’s	heart.	It	is	certainly	true
that	baptism	is	the	sign	of	entrance	into	the	church,	but	this	means
that	it	should	only	be	given	to	those	who	
give	evidence	
of
membership	in	the	church,	only	to	those	who	profess	faith	in
Christ.
19
We	should	not	be	surprised	that	there	was	a	change	from	the	way
the	covenant	community	was	entered	in	the	Old	Testament
(physical	birth)	to	the	way	the	church	is	entered	in	the	New
Testament	(spiritual	birth).	There	are	many	analogous	changes
between	the	old	and	new	covenants	in	other	areas	as	well.	While
the	Israelites	fed	on	physical	manna	in	the	wilderness,	New
Testament	believers	feed	on	Jesus	Christ,	the	true	bread	that	comes
down	from	heaven	(John	6:48–51).	The	Israelites	drank	physical
water	that	gushed	from	the	rock	in	the	wilderness,	but	those	who
believe	in	Christ	drink	of	the	living	water	of	eternal	life	that	he
gives	(John	4:10–14).	The	old	covenant	had	a	physical	temple	to
which	Israel	came	for	worship,	but	in	the	new	covenant	believers
are	built	into	a	spiritual	temple	(1	Peter	2:5).	Old	covenant	believers
offered	physical	sacrifices	of	animals	and	crops	upon	an	altar,	but
New	Testament	believers	offer	“spiritual	sacrifices	acceptable	to
God	through	Jesus	Christ”	(1	Peter	2:5;	cf.	Heb.	13:15–16).	Old
covenant	believers	received	from	God	the	physical	land	of	Israel
which	he	had	promised	to	them,	but	New	Testament	believers
receive	“a	better	country,	that	is,	a	heavenly	one”	(Heb.	11:16).	In
the	same	way,	in	the	old	covenant	those	who	were	the	physical	seed
or	descendants	of	Abraham	were	members	of	the	people	of	Israel,
but	in	the	New	Testament	those	who	are	the	spiritual	“seed”	or
descendants	of	Abraham	by	faith	are	members	of	the	church	(Gal.
3:29;	cf.	Rom.	4:11–12).
In	all	these	contrasts	we	see	the	truth	of	the	distinction	that	Paul
emphasizes	between	the	old	covenant	and	the	new	covenant.	The
physical	elements	and	activities	of	the	old	covenant	were	“only	a
shadow	of	what	is	to	come,”	but	the	true	reality,	the	“substance,”	is
found	in	the	new	covenant	relationship	which	we	have	in	Christ
(Col.	2:17).	Therefore	it	is	consistent	with	this	change	of	systems
that	infant	(male)	children	would	automatically	be	circumcised	in
the	old	covenant,	since	their	physical	descent	and	physical	presence
in	the	community	of	Jewish	people	meant	that	they	were	members
of	that	community	in	which	faith	was	not	an	entrance	requirement.
But	in	the	new	covenant	it	is	appropriate	that	infants	
not	
be
baptized,	and	that	baptism	only	be	given	to	those	who	give
evidence	of	genuine	saving	faith,	because	membership	in	the
church	is	based	on	an	internal	spiritual	reality,	not	on	physical
descent.
(3)	The	examples	of	household	baptisms	in	the	New	Testament	are
really	not	decisive	for	one	position	or	another.	When	we	look	at	the
actual	examples	more	closely,	we	see	that	in	a	number	of	them
there	are	indications	of	saving	faith	on	the	part	of	all	of	those
baptized.	For	example,	it	is	true	that	the	family	of	the	Philippian
jailer	was	baptized	(Acts	16:33),	but	it	is	also	true	that	Paul	and
Silas	“spoke	the	word	of	the	Lord	to	him	and	
to	all	that	were	in	his
house”	
(Acts	16:32).	If	the	Word	of	the	Lord	was	spoken	to	all	in
the	house,	there	is	an	assumption	that	all	were	old	enough	to
understand	the	word	and	believe	it.	Moreover,	after	the	family	had
been	baptized,	we	read	that	the	Philippian	jailer	
“rejoiced	with	all
his	household	
that	he	had	believed	in	God”	(Acts	16:34).	So	we
have	not	only	a	household	baptism	but	also	a	household	reception
of	the	Word	of	God	and	a	household	rejoicing	in	faith	in	God.
These	facts	suggest	quite	strongly	that	the	entire	household	had
individually	come	to	faith	in	Christ.
With	regard	to	the	fact	that	Paul	baptized	“the	household	of
Stephanas”	(1	Cor.	1:16),	we	must	also	note	that	Paul	says	at	the
end	of	1	Corinthians	that	“the	household	of	Stephanas	were	the	first
converts	in	Achaia,	and	they	have	devoted	themselves	to	the	service
of	the	saints”	(1	Cor.	16:15).	So	they	were	not	only	baptized;	they
were	also	converted	and	had	worked	at	serving	other	believers.
Once	again	the	example	of	
household	baptism	
gives	indication	of
household	faith.
In	fact,	there	are	other	instances	where	baptism	is	not	mentioned
but	where	we	see	explicit	testimony	to	the	fact	that	an	entire
household	had	come	to	faith.	After	Jesus	healed	the	official’s	son,
we	read	that	the	father	“himself	believed,	
and	all	his	household”
(John	4:53).	Similarly,	when	Paul	preached	at	Corinth,	“Crispus,
the	ruler	of	the	synagogue,	
believed	
in	the	Lord,	
together	with	all
his	household”	
(Acts	18:8).
This	means	that	of	all	the	examples	of	“household	baptisms”	in	the
New	Testament,	the	only	one	that	does	not	have	some	indication	of
household	faith	as	well	is	Acts	16:14–15,	speaking	of	Lydia:	“The
Lord	opened	her	heart	to	give	heed	to	what	was	said	by	Paul.	And
when	she	was	baptized,	with	her	household.”	The	text	simply	does
not	contain	any	information	about	whether	there	were	infants	in	her
household	or	not.	It	is	ambiguous	and	certainly	not	weighty
evidence	for	infant	baptism.	It	must	be	considered	inconclusive	in
itself.
With	regard	to	Peter’s	statement	at	Pentecost	that	“the	promise	is	to
you	and	to	your	children,”	we	should	note	that	the	sentence
continues	as	follows:	“For	the	promise	is	to	you	and	to	your
children	and	to	all	that	are	far	off,	
every	one	whom	the	Lord	our
God	calls	to	him”	
(Acts	2:39).	Moreover,	the	same	paragraph
specifies	not	that	believers	and	unbelieving	children	were	baptized,
but	that	“
those	who	received	his	word	
were	baptized,	and	there	were
added	that	day	about	three	thousand	souls”	(Acts	2:41).
(4)	A	further	argument	in	objection	to	the	paedobaptist	position	can
be	made	when	we	ask	the	simple	question,	“What	does	baptism
do?”	
In	other	words,	we	might	ask,	“What	does	it	actually
accomplish?	What	benefit	does	it	bring?”
Roman	Catholics	have	a	clear	answer	to	this	question:	Baptism
causes	
regeneration.	And	Baptists	have	a	clear	answer:	Baptism
symbolizes	
the	fact	that	inward	regeneration	has	occurred.	But
paedobaptists	cannot	adopt	either	of	these	answers.	They	do	not
want	to	say	that	baptism	causes	regeneration,	nor	are	they	able	to
say	(with	respect	to	infants)	that	it	symbolizes	a	regeneration	that
has	already	occurred.
20
	The	only	alternative	seems	to	be	to	say	that
it	symbolizes	a	regeneration	that	will	occur	in	the	future,	when	the
infant	is	old	enough	to	come	to	saving	faith.	But	even	that	is	not
quite	accurate,	because	it	is	not	certain	that	the	infant	will	be
regenerated	in	the	future—some	infants	who	are	baptized	never
come	to	saving	faith	later.	So	the	most	accurate	paedobaptist
explanation	of	what	baptism	symbolizes	is	that	it	symbolizes
probable	future	regeneration.
21
	It	does	not	cause	regeneration,	nor
does	it	symbolize	actual	regeneration;	therefore	it	must	be
understood	as	symbolizing	probable	regeneration	at	some	time	in
the	future.
But	at	this	point	it	seems	apparent	that	the	paedobaptist
understanding	of	baptism	is	quite	different	from	that	of	the	New
Testament.	The	New	Testament	never	views	baptism	as	something
that	symbolizes	a	probable	future	regeneration.	The	New	Testament
authors	do	not	say,	“Can	anyone	forbid	water	for	baptizing	those
who	will	probably	someday	be	saved?”	(cf.	Acts	10:47),	or,	“As
many	of	you	as	were	baptized	into	Christ	will	probably	someday
put	on	Christ”	(cf.	Gal.	3:27),	or	“Do	you	not	know	that	all	of	us
who	have	been	baptized	into	Christ	Jesus	will	probably	someday	be
baptized	into	his	death?”	(cf.	Rom.	6:3).	This	is	simply	not	the	way
the	New	Testament	speaks	of	baptism.	Baptism	in	the	New
Testament	is	a	sign	of	being	born	again,	being	cleansed	from	sin,
and	beginning	the	Christian	life.	It	seems	fitting	to	reserve	this	sign
for	those	who	give	evidence	that	that	is	actually	true	in	their	lives.
One	other	perspective	on	the	symbolism	of	baptism	is	given	by
Michael	Green.
22
	He	says:
Infant	baptism	stresses	the	objectivity	of	the	gospel.	It	points	to	the
solid	achievement	of	Christ	crucified	and	risen,	whether	or	not	we
respond	to	it.	.	.	.	Not	that	we	gain	anything	from	it	unless	we	repent
and	believe.	But	it	is	the	standing	demonstration	that	our	salvation
does	not	depend	on	our	own	very	fallible	faith;	it	depends	on	what
God	has	done	for	us.	(
chapter	3
)
He	goes	on	to	say:
Infant	baptism	stresses	the	initiative	of	God	in	salvation.	.	.	.	Should	it
be	attached	primarily	to	man’s	response,	or	to	God’s	initiative?	That	is
the	heart	of	the	question.	.	.	.	For	the	Baptist,	baptism	primarily	bears
witness	to	what	
we	do	
in	responding	to	the	grace	of	God.	For	the
paedobaptist,	it	primarily	bears	witness	to	what	
God	has	done	
to	make
it	all	possible.	(
chapter	3
,	emphasis	his)
But	several	points	can	be	noted	in	response	to	Green.	(a)	His
analysis	at	this	point	overlooks	the	fact	that	baptism	does	not	
only
symbolize	Christ’s	death	and	resurrection;	as	we	have	seen	in	the
foregoing	analysis	of	New	Testament	texts,	it	
also	
symbolizes	the
application	of	redemption	to	us,	as	a	result	of	our	response	of	faith.
Baptism	pictures	the	fact	that	we	have	been	united	with	Christ	in
his	death	and	resurrection,	and	the	washing	with	water	symbolizes
that	we	have	been	cleansed	from	our	sins.	In	saying	that	the
paedobaptist	stresses	God’s	initiative	and	the	Baptist	stresses	man’s
response,	Green	has	presented	the	reader	with	two	incorrect
alternatives	from	which	to	choose,	because	baptism	pictures	both	of
these	and	more.	Baptism	pictures	(i)	Christ’s	redemptive	work,	(ii)
my	response	in	faith	(as	I	come	to	be	baptized),	and	(iii)	God’s
application	of	the	benefits	of	redemption	to	my	life.	Believers’
baptism	pictures	all	three	aspects	(not	just	my	faith,	as	Green
suggests),	but	according	to	Green’s	view	paedobaptism	pictures
only	the	first	one.	It	is	not	a	question	of	which	is	“primary”;	it	is	a
question	of	which	view	of	baptism	includes	all	that	baptism	stands
for.
(b)	When	Green	says	that	our	salvation	does	not	depend	on	our
faith	but	on	God’s	work,	the	expression	“depend	on”	is	capable	of
various	interpretations.	If	“depend	on”	means	“what	we	rely	on,”
then	of	course	both	sides	would	agree	that	we	rely	on	Christ’s	work,
not	on	our	faith.	If	“depend	on”	means	that	faith	does	not	have	any
merit	in	itself	whereby	we	can	earn	favor	with	God,	then	also	both
sides	would	agree.	But	if	“depend	on”	means	it	makes	no	difference
to	our	salvation	whether	we	believe	or	not,	then	neither	side	would
agree:	Green	himself	says	in	the	previous	sentence	that	baptism
does	us	no	good	unless	we	repent	and	believe.	Therefore	if	baptism
in	any	way	represents	the	application	of	redemption	to	a	person’s
life,	then	it	is	not	enough	to	practice	a	form	of	baptism	that	
only
pictures	Christ’s	death	and	resurrection;	we	should	also	picture	our
response	in	faith	and	the	subsequent	application	of	redemption	to
us.	By	contrast,	on	Green’s	view,	there	is	a	real	danger	of
portraying	a	view	(which	Green	would	disagree	with)	that	people
will	have	salvation	applied	to	them	by	God	whether	they	believe	or
not.
(5)	Finally,	those	who	advocate	believers’	baptism	often	express
concern	about	the	practical	consequences	of	paedobaptism.	They
argue	that	the	practice	of	paedobaptism	in	actual	church	life
frequently	leads	persons	baptized	in	infancy	to	presume	that	they
have	been	regenerated,	and	thereby	they	fail	to	feel	the	urgency	of
their	need	to	come	to	personal	faith	in	Christ.	Over	a	period	of
years,	this	tendency	is	likely	to	result	in	more	and	more
unconverted	
members	of	the	“covenant	community”—members
who	are	not	truly	members	of	Christ’s	church.	Of	course,	this
would	not	make	a	paedobaptist	church	a	false	church,	but	it	would
make	it	a	less-pure	church,	and	one	that	will	frequently	be	fighting
tendencies	toward	liberal	doctrine	or	other	kinds	of	unbelief	that	are
brought	in	by	the	unregenerate	sector	of	the	membership.
C.	The	Effect	of	Baptism
We	have	argued	above	that	baptism	symbolizes	regeneration	or
spiritual	rebirth.	But	does	it	only	symbolize?	Or	is	there	some	way
in	which	it	is	also	a	“means	of	grace,”	that	is,	a	means	that	the	Holy
Spirit	uses	to	bring	blessing	to	people?	We	have	already	discussed
this	question	in	the	previous	chapter,
23
	so	here	it	only	is	necessary
to	say	that	when	baptism	is	properly	carried	out	then	of	course	it
brings	some	spiritual	benefit	to	believers	as	well.	There	is	the
blessing	of	God’s	favor	that	comes	with	all	obedience,	as	well	as
the	joy	that	comes	through	public	profession	of	one’s	faith,	and	the
reassurance	of	having	a	clear	physical	picture	of	dying	and	rising
with	Christ	and	of	washing	away	sins.	Certainly	the	Lord	gave	us
baptism	to	strengthen	and	encourage	our	faith—and	it	should	do	so
for	everyone	who	is	baptized	and	for	every	believer	who	witnesses
a	baptism.
D.	The	Necessity	of	Baptism
While	we	recognize	that	Jesus	commanded	baptism	(Matt.	28:19),
as	did	the	apostles	(Acts	2:38),	we	should	not	say	that	baptism	is
necessary	
for	salvation.
24
	This	question	was	discussed	to	some
extent	above	under	the	response	to	the	Roman	Catholic	view	of
baptism.	To	say	that	baptism	or	any	other	action	is	
necessary	
for
salvation	is	to	say	that	we	are	not	justified	by	faith	alone,	but	by
faith	plus	a	certain	“work,”	the	work	of	baptism.	The	apostle	Paul
would	have	opposed	the	idea	that	baptism	is	necessary	for	salvation
just	as	strongly	as	he	opposed	the	similar	idea	that	circumcision
was	necessary	for	salvation	(see	Gal.	5:1–12).
Those	who	argue	that	baptism	is	necessary	for	salvation	often	point
to	Mark	16:16:	“
He	who	believes	and	is	baptized	will	be	saved;	
but
he	who	does	not	believe	will	be	condemned.”	But	the	very	evident
answer	to	this	is	simply	to	say	that	the	verse	says	nothing	about
those	who	
believe	
and	
are	not	baptized.	
The	verse	is	simply	talking
about	general	cases	without	making	a	pedantic	qualification	for	the
unusual	case	of	someone	who	believes	and	is	not	baptized.	But
certainly	the	verse	should	not	be	pressed	into	service	and	made	to
speak	of	something	it	is	not	talking	about.
25
More	to	the	point	is	Jesus’	statement	to	the	dying	thief	on	the	cross,
“Today	you	will	be	with	me	in	Paradise”	(Luke	23:43).	The	thief
could	not	be	baptized	before	he	died	on	the	cross,	but	he	was
certainly	saved	that	day.	Moreover,	the	force	of	this	point	cannot	be
evaded	by	arguing	that	the	thief	was	saved	under	the	old	covenant
(under	which	baptism	was	not	necessary	to	salvation),	because	the
new	covenant	took	effect	at	the	death	of	Jesus	(see	Heb.	9:17),	and
Jesus	died	
before	
either	of	the	two	thieves	who	were	crucified	with
him	(see	John	19:32–33).
Another	reason	why	baptism	is	not	necessary	for	salvation	is	that
our	justification	from	sins	takes	place	at	the	point	of	saving	faith,
not	at	the	point	of	water	baptism,	which	usually	occurs	later.
26
	But
if	a	person	is	already	justified	and	has	sins	forgiven	eternally	at	the
point	of	saving	faith,	then	baptism	is	not	necessary	for	forgiveness
of	sins,	or	for	the	bestowal	of	new	spiritual	life.
27
Baptism,	then,	is	not	necessary	for	salvation.	But	it	is	necessary	if
we	are	to	be	obedient	to	Christ,	for	he	commanded	baptism	for	all
who	believe	in	him.
E.	The	Age	for	Baptism
Those	who	are	convinced	by	the	arguments	for	believers’	baptism
must	then	begin	to	ask,	“How	old	should	children	be	before	they
are	baptized?”
The	most	direct	answer	is	that	they	should	be	old	enough	to	give	a
believable	
profession	of	faith.	It	is	impossible	to	set	a	precise	age
that	will	apply	to	every	child,	but	when	parents	see	convincing
evidence	of	genuine	spiritual	life,	and	also	some	degree	of
understanding	regarding	the	meaning	of	trusting	in	Christ,	then
baptism	is	appropriate.	Of	course,	this	will	require	careful
administration	by	the	church,	as	well	as	a	good	explanation	by
parents	in	their	homes.	The	exact	age	for	baptism	will	vary	from
child	to	child,	and	somewhat	from	church	to	church	as	well.
28
F.	Remaining	Questions
1.
	Do	Churches	Need	to	Be	Divided	Over	Baptism?
	In	spite	of	many	years
of	division	over	this	question	among	Protestants,	is	there	a	way	in	which
Christians	who	differ	on	baptism	can	demonstrate	greater	unity	of	fellowship?
And	is	there	a	way	that	progress	can	be	made	in	bringing	the	church	closer	to
unity	on	this	question?
One	way	forward	could	be	for	paedobaptists	and	advocates	of
believers’	baptism	both	to	come	to	a	common	admission	that
baptism	is	not	a	major	doctrine	of	the	faith,	and	that	they	are	willing
to	live	with	each	other’s	views	on	this	matter	and	not	allow
differences	over	baptism	to	be	a	cause	for	division	within	the	body
of	Christ.
29
	Specifically,	this	would	mean	allowing	both	views	of
baptism	to	be	taught	and	practiced	in	denominations	on	both	sides
of	the	question.
No	doubt	this	would	be	a	difficult	thing	to	do	both	for	Baptist
denominations	and	for	paedobaptist	denominations,	because	they
have	long	traditions	of	arguing	for	one	side	or	the	other	on	this
question.	Certainly	Christians	are	entitled	to	make	up	their	own
minds	regarding	baptism,	but	it	does	not	seem	appropriate	that
denominational	divisions	should	depend	on	and	reinforce	these
differences,	nor	does	it	seem	right	that	churches	require	one	view	or
another	on	baptism	for	those	who	wish	to	be	ordained	or	to	function
as	teachers	within	the	church.
30
	Specifically,	this	would	mean	that
Baptist	churches	would	have	to	be	willing	to	allow	into
membership	those	who	had	been	baptized	as	infants	and	whose
conviction	of	conscience,	after	careful	consideration,	is	that	their
infant	baptism	was	valid	and	should	not	be	repeated.	Of	course,
Baptist	churches	could	be	free	to	teach	and	to	attempt	to	persuade
prospective	church	members	that	they	should	be	baptized	as
believers,	but	if	some,	after	careful	consideration,	are	simply	not
persuaded,	it	does	not	seem	appropriate	to	make	this	a	barrier	to
membership.	What	good	is	accomplished	by	such	a	barrier?	And
certainly	much	harm	can	be	accomplished	in	failure	to	demonstrate
the	unity	of	the	church	and	in	barring	from	full	participation	in	the
church	those	whom	the	Lord	has	in	fact	brought	into	that
fellowship.
On	the	other	hand,	those	who	believe	in	paedobaptism	would	have
to	agree	not	to	put	undue	pressure	upon	parents	who	do	not	wish	to
have	their	infants	baptized	and	not	to	count	those	parents	as
somehow	disobedient	to	the	Lord.	There	might	need	to	be	a
willingness	to	have	some	kind	of	brief	ceremony	of	dedication	of
children	to	the	Lord	shortly	after	they	are	born,	instead	of	a
ceremony	of	baptism,	if	the	parents	so	desired.	And	of	course	both
sides	would	have	to	agree	not	to	make	one	view	on	baptism	a
criterion	for	church	office	or	for	ordination.
31
If	such	concessions	in	actual	practice	were	made	by	both	sides	on
this	question,	the	issue	might	in	fact	diminish	the	level	of
controversy	within	a	generation,	and	baptism	might	eventually
cease	to	be	a	point	of	division	at	all	among	Christians.
2.	Who	Can	Baptize?
	Finally,	we	may	ask,	“Who	can	perform	the	ceremony
of	baptism?	Can	only	ordained	clergy	perform	this	ceremony?”
We	should	recognize	here	that	Scripture	simply	does	not	specify
any	restrictions	on	who	can	perform	the	ceremony	of	baptism.
Those	churches	that	have	a	special	priesthood	through	which
certain	actions	(and	blessings)	come	(such	as	Roman	Catholics,	and
to	some	extent	Anglicans)	will	wish	to	insist	that	only	properly
ordained	clergy	should	baptize	in	ordinary	circumstances	(though
exceptions	could	be	made	in	unusual	circumstances).	But	if	we
truly	believe	in	the	priesthood	of	all	believers	(see	1	Peter	2:4–10),
then	there	seems	to	be	no	need	
in	principle	
to	restrict	the	right	to
perform	baptism	only	to	ordained	clergy.
However,	another	consideration	arises:	Since	baptism	is	the	sign	of
entrance	into	the	body	of	Christ,	the	church	(cf.	1	Cor.	12:13	on
inward	spiritual	baptism),	then	it	seems	appropriate	that	it	be	done
within	the	fellowship	of	the	church	
wherever	possible,	so	that	the
church	as	a	whole	can	rejoice	with	the	person	being	baptized	and	so
that	the	faith	of	all	believers	in	that	church	might	be	built	up.
32
Moreover,	since	baptism	is	a	sign	of	beginning	the	Christian	life
and	therefore	of	beginning	life	in	the	true	church	as	well,	it	is	fitting
that	the	local	church	be	assembled	to	give	testimony	to	this	fact	and
to	give	visible	welcome	to	the	baptized	person.	Also,	in	order	that
the	people	being	baptized	have	a	right	understanding	of	what
actually	is	happening,	it	is	right	for	the	church	to	safeguard	the
practice	of	baptism	and	keep	it	from	abuse.	Finally,	if	baptism	is	the
sign	of	entering	the	fellowship	of	the	visible	church,	then	it	seems
appropriate	that	some	officially	designated	representative	or
representatives	of	the	church	be	selected	to	administer	it.	For	these
reasons	it	is	usually	the	ordained	clergy	who	baptize,	but	there
seems	to	be	no	reason	why	the	church	from	time	to	time,	and	where
it	deems	it	appropriate,	might	not	call	on	other	church	officers	or
mature	believers	to	baptize	new	converts.	For	example,	someone
effective	in	evangelism	in	a	local	church	may	be	an	appropriately
designated	person	to	baptize	people	who	have	come	to	Christ
through	the	practice	of	that	person’s	evangelistic	ministry.	(Note	in
Acts	8:12	that	Philip	preached	the	gospel	in	Samaria	and	then
apparently	baptized	those	who	came	to	faith	in	Christ.)
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
Have	you	been	baptized?	When?	If	you	were	baptized	as	a	believer,	what
was	the	effect	of	the	baptism	on	your	Christian	life	(if	any)?	If	you	were
baptized	as	an	infant,	what	effect	did	the	knowledge	of	your	baptism
have	in	your	own	thinking	when	you	eventually	learned	that	you	had
been	baptized	as	an	infant?
2
.	
What	aspects	of	the	meaning	of	baptism	have	you	come	to	appreciate
more	as	a	result	of	reading	this	chapter	(if	any)?	What	aspects	of	the
meaning	of	baptism	would	you	like	to	see	taught	more	clearly	in	your
church?
3
.	
When	baptisms	occur	in	your	church,	are	they	a	time	of	rejoicing	and
praise	to	God?	What	do	you	think	is	happening	to	the	person	being
baptized	at	that	moment	(if	anything)?	What	do	you	think	should	be
happening?
4
.	
Have	you	modified	your	own	view	on	the	question	of	infant	baptism
versus	believers’	baptism	as	a	result	of	reading	this	chapter?	In	what
way?
5
.	
What	practical	suggestions	can	you	make	for	helping	to	overcome	the
differences	among	Christians	on	the	question	of	baptism?
6
.	
How	can	baptism	be	an	effective	help	to	evangelism	in	your	church?
Have	you	seen	it	function	in	this	way?
SPECIAL	TERMS
believable	profession	of	faith
ex	opere	operato
believers’	baptism
immersion
covenant	community
paedobaptism
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the
bibliography	to	chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be
found	in	
Appendix	4
.)
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92			Litton,	459–74
1930			Thomas,	371–87,	521–22
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1875–76			Pope,	3:310–24
1892–94			Miley,	2:395–410
1940			Wiley,	3:161–89
1960			Purkiser,	409–11
1983			Carter,	2:616
3.			Baptist
1767			Gill,	4:621–47
1907			Strong,	931–59
1983–85			Erickson,	1089–1106
4.			Dispensational
1947			Chafer,	7:32–43
1949			Thiessen,	319–22
1986			Ryrie,	421–25
5.			Lutheran
1917–24			Pieper,	7:253–89
1934			Mueller,	486–505
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1559			Calvin,	2:1303–58	(4.15–16)
1861			Heppe,	611–26
1871–73			Hodge,	3:526–611
1878			Dabney,	758–99
1887–1921			Warfield,	
SWW,	
1:325–31
1889			Shedd,	2b:574–87
1937–66			Murray,	
CW,	
2:370–75
1938			Berkhof,	622–43
1962			Buswell,	2:241–66
7.			Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988–92			Williams,	2:278–87,	3:136–39,	221–41
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955			Ott,	350–61
2.			Roman	Catholic:	Post-Vatican	II
1980			McBrien,	1:248–52;	2:349–54
Other	Works
Beasley-Murray,	G.	R.	
Baptism	in	the	New	Testament.	
Grand	Rapids:
Eerdmans,	1962.
_____,	and	R.	F.	G.	Burnish.	“Baptism.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	69–73.
Berkouwer,	G.	C.	
The	Sacraments.	
Trans.	by	Hugo	Bekker.	Grand
Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1969.
Bridge,	Donald,	and	David	Phypers.	
The	Water	That	Divides.	
Downers
Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,	1977.
Bromiley,	G.	W.	“Baptism.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	112–14.
_____.	
The	Baptism	of	Infants.	
London:	Vine	Books,	1955.
_____.	
Children	of	Promise.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1979.
Brown,	R.	“Baptist	Theology.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	75–76.
Cottrell,	Jack.	
Baptism:	A	Biblical	Study.	
Joplin,	Mo.:	College	Press,
1989.	(Written	from	a	Churches	of	Christ	perspective,	understanding
baptism	as	necessary	for	salvation.)
Green,	Michael.	
Baptism:	Its	Purpose,	Practice,	and	Power.	
London:
Hodder	and	Stoughton,	and	Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,
1987.
Jewett,	Paul	K.	
Infant	Baptism	and	the	Covenant	of	Grace.	
Grand
Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1978.
Kingdon,	David.	
Children	of	Abraham:	A	Reformed	Baptist	View	of
Baptism,	the	Covenant,	and	Children.	
Haywards	Heath,	England:	Carey
Publications,	1973.
Marcel,	Pierre	Ch.	
The	Biblical	Doctrine	of	Infant	Baptism.	
Trans.	by
Philip	E.	Hughes.	London:	J.	Clarke,	1953.
Murray,	John.	
Christian	Baptism.	
Philadelphia:	Presbyterian	and
Reformed,	1970.
Watson,	T.	E.	
Baptism	Not	for	Infants.	
Worthing,	England:	Henry	E.
Walter,	1962.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
Romans	6:3–4:	
Do	you	not	know	that	all	of	us	who	have	been	baptized	into
Christ	Jesus	were	baptized	into	his	death?	We	were	buried	therefore	with	him
by	baptism	into	death,	so	that	as	Christ	was	raised	from	the	dead	by	the	glory
of	the	Father,	we	too	might	walk	in	newness	of	life.
HYMN
“Up	From	the	Grave	He	Arose”
There	are	few	familiar	hymns	written	specifically	to	be	used	during
a	baptismal	service.	It	would	be	helpful	for	the	church	if	more	were
written.
This	hymn	is	appropriate	for	the	topic	of	baptism,	because	it	speaks
triumphantly	of	Christ’s	resurrection.	When	we	sing	it,	we	should
realize	that	Jesus	not	only	triumphed	over	death	and	the	grave	for
himself,	but	also	for	all	of	us	who	believe	in	him.	This	fact	is
vividly	symbolized	in	the	ceremony	of	baptism.
Alternative	hymn:	Most	paedobaptist	hymnals	contain	hymns	to	be
sung	at	the	baptism	of	infants,	but	I	did	not	find	any	that	were
widely	familiar.
Low	in	the	grave	he	lay—Jesus,	my	Savior,
Waiting	the	coming	day—Jesus,	my	Lord.
Refrain:
Up	from	the	grave	he	arose,
With	a	mighty	triumph	o’er	his	foes.
He	arose	a	Victor	from	the	dark	domain,
And	he	lives	forever	with	his	saints	to	reign.
He	arose!	He	arose!	Hallelujah!	Christ	arose!
Vainly	they	watch	his	bed—Jesus,	my	Savior;
Vainly	they	seal	the	dead—Jesus,	my	Lord.
Death	cannot	keep	his	prey—Jesus,	my	Savior;
He	tore	the	bars	away—Jesus,	my	Lord.
AUTHOR:	ROBERT	LOWREY,	1874.
NOTES
1
A.	H.	Strong,	
Systematic	Theology,	
says,	“No	ordinance	is	a	sacrament	in	the	Romanist	sense	of	conferring	grace”	(p.	
930).	He
also	says,	“The	Romanist	regards	the	ordinances	as	actually	conferring	grace	and	producing	holiness”	(ibid.).
2
The	
American	Heritage	Dictionary	
(Boston:	Houghton	Mifflen,	1981)	allows	a	range	of	meanings,	defining	a	sacrament	as	a	rite
considered	as	“a	testament	to	inner	grace	
or	
a	channel	that	mediates	grace”	(p.	
1141).	Even	the	most	conscientious	Baptist	would
not	object	to	calling	baptism	“a	testament	to	inner	grace”	while	Catholics	would	not	object	to	calling	baptism	“a	channel	that
mediates	grace.”
3
See	
chapter	1
,	for	a	discussion	of	major	and	minor	doctrines.	Not	all	Christians	agree	with	my	view	that	this	is	a	minor	doctrine.
Many	Christians	in	previous	generations	were	persecuted	and	even	put	to	death	because	they	differed	with	the	official	state	church
and	its	practice	of	infant	baptism.	For	them,	the	issue	was	not	merely	a	ceremony:	it	was	the	right	to	have	a	believers’	church,	one
that	did	not	automatically	include	all	the	people	born	in	a	geographical	region.	Viewed	in	this	light,	the	controversy	over	baptism
involves	a	larger	difference	over	the	nature	of	the	church:	does	one	become	part	of	the	church	by	birth	into	a	believing	family,	or
by	voluntary	profession	of	faith?
4
So	
LSJ,	
p.	305:	“plunge”;	passive,	“to	be	drowned.”	Similarly,	BAGD,	p.	
131:	“dip,	immerse,”	and	middle,	“dip	oneself,	wash
(in	non-Christian	literature	also	‘plunge,	sink,	drench,	overwhelm’).”	Also	Albrecht	Oepke,	“
baptō,	baptizō,	
etc.,”	in	
TDNT,
1:530:	“to	immerse	.	.	.	to	sink	the	ship”	passive,	“to	sink	.	.	.	to	suffer	shipwreck,	to	drown	(the	sense	of	‘to	bathe’	or	‘to	wash’	is
only	occasionally	found	in	Hellenism	.	.	.	the	idea	of	going	under	or	perishing	is	nearer	the	general	usage)”	(ibid.).	A.	H.	Strong,
Systematic	Theology,	
pp.	933–35	gives	much	additional	evidence	to	this	effect.
Berkhof,	
Systematic	Theology,	
p.	630,	objects	and	gives	some	counter-examples,	but	his	evidence	is	unconvincing	because	he
indiscriminately	mixes	examples	of	
baptizō	
with	a	related	but	different	word,	
baptō.	
(Passages	that	speak	of	“bathing”	or	washing
[in	the	Septuagint,	Judith	12:7,	for	example,	and	in	the	New	Testament,	Mark	7:4]	would	most	likely	involve	covering	one’s	body
[or	hands,	in	Mark	7:4]	completely	with	water.)
If	any	New	Testament	author	had	wanted	to	indicate	that	people	were	sprinkled	with	water,	a	perfectly	good	Greek	word	meaning
“to	sprinkle”	was	available:	
rhantizō	
is	used	in	this	sense	in	Heb.	9:13,	19,	21;	10:22;	see	BAGD,	p.	
734.
5
Berkhof	asks,	“Was	John	the	Baptist	capable	of	the	enormous	task	of	immersing	the	multitudes	that	flocked	unto	him	at	the	river
Jordan.	.	.	?”	(p.	
630).	Certainly	over	a	period	of	several	days	he	would	have	been	capable	of	immersing	many	hundreds	of	people,
but	it	is	also	possible	that	his	disciples	(Matt.	9:14;	et	al.)	assisted	him	with	some	of	the	baptisms.
6
Berkhof	(pp.	630–631)	objects	that	in	Acts	8:38	the	Greek	word	
eis	
can	mean	“to”	and	not	necessarily	“into.”	It	is	true	that	the
word	can	take	either	meaning,	but	we	must	also	note	v.	
39,	where	
ek	
certainly	means	“out	of,”	not	“away	from,”	which	would	be
expressed	by	
apo.	
And	the	going	down	and	coming	up	(
katabainō	
and	
anabainō
)	are	not	going	down	from	the	chariot	and	going
back	up	into	the	chariot,	but	are	specifically	said	to	be	going	down	
into	the	water	
and	coming	up	
out	of	the	water.
7
In	fact,	the	waters	of	baptism	have	an	even	richer	symbolism	than	simply	the	symbolism	of	the	grave.	The	waters	also	remind	us
of	the	waters	of	God’s	judgment	that	came	upon	unbelievers	at	the	time	of	the	flood	(Gen.	7:6–24),	or	the	drowning	of	the
Egyptians	in	the	Exodus	(Ex.	14:26–29).	Similarly,	when	Jonah	was	thrown	into	the	deep	(Jonah	1:7–16),	he	was	thrown	down	to
the	place	of	death	because	of	God’s	judgment	on	his	disobedience—even	though	he	was	miraculously	rescued	and	thus	became	a
sign	of	the	resurrection.	Therefore	those	who	go	down	into	the	waters	of	baptism	really	are	going	down	into	the	waters	of
judgment	and	death,	death	that	they	deserve	from	God	for	their	sins.	When	they	come	back	up	out	of	the	waters	of	baptism	it
shows	that	they	have	come	safely	through	God’s	judgment	only	because	of	the	merits	of	Jesus	Christ,	with	whom	they	are	united
in	his	death	and	resurrection.	This	is	why	Peter	can	say	in	1	Peter	3:21	that	baptism	“corresponds	to”	the	saving	of	Noah	and	his
family	from	the	waters	of	judgment	in	the	flood.
Douglas	Moo,	in	Romans	1–8,	
Wycliffe	Exegetical	Commentary	
(Chicago:	Moody	Press,	1991),	argues	that	baptism	in	Rom.	6
“functions	as	shorthand	for	the	conversion	experience	as	a	whole.	.	.	.	It	is	not,	then,	that	baptism	is	a	symbol	of	dying	and	rising
with	Christ.”	(p.	
371).	He	says	that	“there	is	no	evidence	in	Romans	6,	or	in	the	NT,	that	the	actual	physical	movements,
immersion,	and	emersion,	involved	in	baptism	were	accorded	symbolical	significance”	(p.	
379).	While	I	agree	that	baptism	in
Rom.	6	functions	as	shorthand	for	the	conversion	experience	as	a	whole,	it	does	not	seem	to	me	that	we	can	exclude	the
symbolism	of	dying	and	rising	with	Christ,	for	the	following	reasons:	(1)	The	physical	actions	of	going	
down	into	
the	water
(where	human	beings	cannot	live	for	more	than	a	few	minutes)	and	coming	
up	out	of	
the	water	are	so	closely	parallel	to	the
actions	of	going	down	into	the	grave	and	coming	up	out	of	the	grave	that	the	connection	is	evident	from	the	surface	appearance	of
the	actions,	and	no	detailed	explanation	would	be	necessary.	(2)	The	Old	Testament	background	of	being	immersed	by	waters	of
God’s	judgment	confirms	this.	(3)	When	Paul	says,	“You	were	buried	with	him	in	baptism,	in	which	you	were	also	raised	with
him	through	faith	in	the	working	of	God,	who	raised	him	from	the	dead”	(Col.	2:12),	it	is	hard	to	imagine	that	any	of	Paul’s
readers,	even	children,	would	have	missed	the	evident	parallel	between	the	actions	of	baptism	and	dying	and	rising	with	Christ.
(This	would	be	true	even	if,	with	Moo,	we	translate	Col.	2:12	“
by	means	of	
baptism.”)
8
Berkhof	cautions	against	making	too	much	of	the	silence	of	Scripture	regarding	infant	baptism.	Commenting	on	the	fact	that	in
some	cases	whole	households	were	baptized,	he	says,	“And	if	there	were	infants,	it	is	morally	certain	that	they	were	baptized
along	with	the	parents”	(p.	
634).	But	this	is	not	what	Acts	2:41	says:	it	specifies	that	“
those	who	received	his	word	
were	baptized,”
not	those	who	did	not	receive	his	word	but	were	infants	belonging	to	the	households	of	those	who	received	his	word.
9
This	is	not	to	argue	that	
no	
infants	can	be	regenerated	(see	
chapter	24
),	but	simply	that	Paul	could	have	no	theological	basis	for
saying	that	
all	
infants	who	have	been	baptized	have	begun	the	Christian	life.	He	is	talking	in	Gal.	3:27	of	“as	many	of	you	as	were
baptized	into	Christ.”
10
See	
section	3
	below	for	a	response	to	the	Roman	Catholic	view	that	baptism	causes	regeneration.
11
The	act	of	baptizing	an	infant,	including	giving	a	name	to	the	infant	at	that	time,	is	sometimes	called	“christening,”	especially	in
Roman	Catholic	and	Episcopalian	churches.
12
Trans.	by	Patrick	Lynch,	ed.	by	James	Bastible,	4th	ed.	(Rockford,	Ill.:	Tan	Books,	1960).
13
In	extreme	cases	Ott	and	the	teaching	of	the	Catholic	Church	allow	for	baptism	of	desire	(for	one	who	sincerely	longs	to	be
baptized	but	cannot	be)	or	baptism	by	blood	(in	martyrdom).
14
The	phrase	
ex	opere	operato	
represents	an	essential	part	of	Roman	Catholic	teaching	on	the	sacraments.	This	Latin	phrase
literally	means	“by	work	performed,”	and	it	means	that	the	sacraments	work	in	virtue	of	the	actual	activity	done,	and	that	the
power	of	the	sacraments	does	not	depend	on	any	subjective	attitude	of	faith	in	the	people	participating	in	them.
15
The	next	three	paragraphs	are	adapted	from	Wayne	Grudem,	
The	First	Epistle	of	Peter,	
TNTC	(Leicester:	IVP,	and	Grand
Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1988),	pp.	163–65,	and	are	used	by	permission.
16
Some	have	argued	that	“pledge”	is	a	better	word	than	“appeal”	in	this	verse.	Thus,	the	NIV	translates,	“the	
pledge	
of	a	good
conscience	towards	God.”	The	data	from	other	examples	of	the	word	is	slim	with	regard	to	both	meanings,	and	no	conclusions	can
be	drawn	from	an	examination	of	other	uses	of	the	word	alone	(see	discussion	in	W.	Grudem,	
1	Peter,	
p.	164).
But	much	more	significant	is	the	fact	that	the	translation	“pledge”	introduces	a	theological	problem.	If	baptism	is	a	“pledge	to
God”	to	maintain	a	good	conscience	(or	a	pledge	to	live	an	obedient	life,	which	flows	from	a	good	conscience),	then	the	emphasis
is	no	longer	on	dependence	on	God	to	give	salvation,	but	is	rather	on	dependence	on	one’s	own	effort	or	strength	of	resolve.	And
since	this	phrase	in	1	Peter	3:21	is	so	clearly	connected	with	the	beginning	of	the	Christian	life	and	identified	as	the	feature	of
baptism	that	“saves	you,”	the	translation	“pledge”	seems	to	be	inconsistent	with	the	New	Testament	teaching	on	salvation	by	faith
alone;	it	would	be	the	only	place	where	a	promise	to	be	righteous	is	said	to	be	the	thing	that	“saves	you.”	And	since	the	lexical
data	are	inconclusive	for	both	senses	(while	suggesting	that	both	senses	are	apparently	possible),	it	is	better	to	adopt	the
translation	“appeal”	as	a	sense	much	more	in	accord	with	the	doctrinal	teaching	of	the	rest	of	the	New	Testament.
17
Col.	2:12	can	be	used	in	the	same	manner:	Paul	says	that	in	baptism	Christians	were	“raised	with	[Christ]	
through	faith	
in	the
working	of	God,	who	raised	him	from	the	dead.”	This	presupposes	that	those	who	were	baptized	were	exercising	faith	when	they
were	baptized—that	is,	that	they	were	old	enough	to	believe.
18
Roman	Catholics	are	also	paedobaptists,	but	their	supporting	arguments	are	different,	as	explained	above	(they	teach	that
baptism	causes	regeneration).	In	the	material	that	follows,	I	will	be	comparing	a	Protestant	defense	of	
paedobaptism	
with	a
Protestant	defense	of	
believers’	baptism.	
Therefore,	I	will	use	the	term	
paedobaptist	
to	refer	to	Protestant	paedobaptists	who	hold
to	a	covenant	paedobaptist	position.
19
At	this	point	an	advocate	of	paedobaptism	may	ask	whether	we	should	not	have	an	idea	of	a	“covenant	community”	in	the	New
Testament	church	which	is	broader	than	the	church	and	includes	unbelieving	children	who	belong	to	church	families.	But	the	New
Testament	speaks	of	no	such	community,	nor	does	it	give	indication	that	unbelieving	children	of	believing	parents	are	members	of
the	new	covenant.	And	it	certainly	does	not	speak	of	baptism	as	a	sign	of	entrance	into	such	a	broader	group.	Baptism	symbolizes
new	birth	and	entrance	into	the	church.
20
However,	some	Protestant	paedobaptists	will	
presume	
that	regeneration	has	occurred	(and	the	evidence	will	be	seen	later).
Others,	including	many	Episcopalians	and	Lutherans,	would	say	that	regeneration	occurs	at	the	time	of	baptism.
21
This	is	not	a	quotation	from	any	specific	paedobaptist	writer,	but	is	my	own	conclusion	from	the	logic	of	the	paedobaptist
position,	which	would	seem	to	require	this	understanding	of	what	paedobaptism	signifies	with	respect	to	regeneration.
22
Michael	Green,	
Baptism:	Its	Purpose,	Practice,	and	Power	
(London:	Hodder	and	Stoughton,	and	Downers	Grove,	Ill.:
InterVarsity	Press,	1987).	This	book	contains	an	excellent	statement	of	a	paedobaptist	position,	and	also	contains	much	helpful
analysis	of	the	biblical	teaching	about	baptism	which	both	sides	could	endorse.
23
See	
chapter	48
.
24
At	this	point	I	am	differing	not	only	with	Roman	Catholic	teaching,	but	also	with	the	teaching	of	several	Protestant
denominations	that	teach	that,	in	some	sense,	baptism	is	necessary	for	salvation.	Although	there	are	different	nuances	in	their
teaching,	such	a	position	is	held	by	many	Episcopalians,	many	Lutherans,	and	by	the	Churches	of	Christ.
25
Moreover,	it	is	doubtful	whether	this	verse	should	be	used	in	support	of	a	theological	position	at	all,	since	there	are	many
ancient	manuscripts	that	do	not	have	this	verse	(or	Mark	16:9–20),	and	it	seems	most	likely	that	this	verse	was	not	in	the	gospel	as
Mark	originally	wrote	it.	(See	discussion	of	Mark	16:9–20	in	
chapter	17
.)
26
See	discussion	of	justification	in	
chapter	36
.
27
See	
chapter	34
,	for	a	discussion	of	regeneration.
28
I	participated	in	baptizing	my	own	three	children	at	a	time	when	each	was	between	seven	and	ten	years	old	and	showed	a	fair
degree	of	understanding	of	the	gospel	together	with	genuine	evidence	of	faith	in	Christ.	In	all	three	cases,	I	think	they	could	have
been	baptized	somewhat	earlier,	but	we	delayed	out	of	deference	to	the	ordinary	pattern	followed	by	the	churches	we	were	in,
whereby	children	under	seven	were	not	usually	baptized.	(Among	Baptists	in	the	United	Kingdom	it	is	customary	to	wait	until
children	are	somewhat	older	than	this,	however.)
29
I	realize	that	some	readers	will	object	to	this	sentence	and	will	say	that	baptism	is	
very	important	
because	of	what	the	differing
positions	represent:	differing	views	of	the	nature	of	the	church.	Many	Baptists	would	argue	that	
practicing	
infant	baptism	is
inherently	inconsistent	with	the	idea	of	a	church	made	up	of	believers	only,	and	many	paedobaptists	would	argue	that	
not
practicing	
infant	baptism	is	inherently	inconsistent	with	the	idea	of	a	covenant	community	that	includes	the	children	of	believers.
I	would	encourage	those	who	reason	this	way	to	consider	how	much	they	hold	in	common	with	evangelical	believers	on	the	other
side	of	this	issue—not	necessarily	with	those	far	from	them	on	other	matters	as	well,	but	especially	with	those	on	the	other	side
who	agree	with	them	on	most	other	aspects	of	the	Christian	life.	Many	Baptists	
do	
encourage	and	demonstrate	a	valued	place	for
their	children	within	their	churches,	and	many	paedobaptists	
do	
pray	for	the	salvation	of	their	
baptized	
children	with	the	same
fervency	with	which	Baptist	parents	pray	for	the	salvation	of	their	
unbaptized	
children.	Regarding	church	membership,
evangelical	paedobaptists	
do	
require	a	believable	profession	of	faith	before	children	can	become	full	members	of	the	church	(their
term	is	“communicant	members”	that	is,	those	who	take	Communion).	They	also	require	a	believable	profession	of	faith	before
any	adults	are	allowed	to	join	the	church.
When	these	procedures	are	functioning	well,	both	Baptists	and	paedobaptists	use	very	similar	procedures	as	they	seek	to	have	a
church	membership	consisting	of	believers	only,	and	both	love	and	teach	and	pray	for	their	children	as	most	precious	members	of
the	larger	church	family	who	they	hope	will	someday	become	true	members	of	the	body	of	Christ.
30
In	the	United	States,	the	Evangelical	Free	Church	denomination	has	functioned	quite	well	for	many	decades	while	allowing
both	paedobaptists	and	advocates	of	believers’	baptism	to	be	members	of	their	churches	and	to	be	ordained	as	pastors	in	their
churches.
31
Note	that	my	proposed	first	steps	toward	less	divisiveness	over	this	question	do	not	include	asking	individuals	on	either	side	to
act	in	a	way	that	would	violate	their	own	personal	convictions:	I	am	not	suggesting	that	those	who	hold	a	Baptist	view	personally
begin	baptizing	infants	when	the	parents	request	it,	or	that	those	who	hold	a	paedobaptist	view	personally	begin	baptizing	those
who	make	a	profession	of	faith	and	request	baptism,	even	though	they	had	been	baptized	as	infants.
32
The	fact	that	baptism	is	an	outward	sign	of	
entrance	
into	the	church,	the	body	of	Christ,	would	also	make	it	appropriate	to
require	baptism	before	someone	is	counted	as	a	member	of	a	local	church.
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	50
The	Lord’s	Supper
What	is	the	meaning	of	the	Lord’s	Supper?	How	should	it	be
observed?
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
The	Lord	Jesus	instituted	two	ordinances	(or	sacraments)	to	be
observed	by	the	church.	The	previous	chapter	discussed	
baptism,	
an
ordinance	that	is	only	observed	once	by	each	person,	as	a	sign	of
the	beginning	of	his	or	her	Christian	life.	This	chapter	discusses	
the
Lord’s	Supper,	
an	ordinance	that	is	to	be	observed	repeatedly
throughout	our	Christian	lives,	as	a	sign	of	continuing	in	fellowship
with	Christ.
A.	Background	in	the	History	of	Redemption
Jesus	instituted	the	Lord’s	Supper	in	the	following	way:
Now	as	they	were	eating,	Jesus	took	bread,	and	blessed,	and	broke	it,
and	gave	it	to	the	disciples	and	said,	“Take,	eat;	this	is	my	body.”	And
he	took	a	cup,	and	when	he	had	given	thanks	he	gave	it	to	them,
saying,	“Drink	of	it,	all	of	you;	for	this	is	my	blood	of	the	covenant,
which	is	poured	out	for	many	for	the	forgiveness	of	sins.	I	tell	you	I
shall	not	drink	again	of	this	fruit	of	the	vine	until	that	day	when	I
drink	it	new	with	you	in	my	Father’s	kingdom.	(Matt.	26:26–29)
Paul	adds	the	following	sentences	from	the	tradition	he	received	(1	Cor.
11:23):
This	cup	is	the	new	covenant	in	my	blood.	Do	this,	as	often	as	you
drink	it,	in	remembrance	of	me.	(1	Cor.	11:25)
Is	there	a	background	to	this	ceremony	in	the	Old	Testament?	It
seems	that	there	is,	for	there	were	instances	of	eating	and	drinking
in	the	presence	of	God	in	the	old	covenant	as	well.	For	example,
when	the	people	of	Israel	were	camped	before	Mount	Sinai,	just
after	God	had	given	the	Ten	Commandments,	God	called	the
leaders	of	Israel	up	to	the	mountain	to	meet	with	him:
Then	Moses	and	Aaron,	Nadab,	and	Abihu,	and	seventy	of	the	elders
of	Israel	went	up,	and	they	saw	the	God	of	Israel	.	.	.	
they	beheld	God,
and	ate	and	drank.	
(Ex.	24:9–11)
Moreover,	every	year	the	people	of	Israel	were	to	tithe	(give	one-
tenth	of)	all	their	crops.	Then	the	law	of	Moses	specified,
Before	the	L
ORD
	your	God,	
in	the	place	which	he	will	choose,	to	make
his	name	dwell	there,	
you	shall	eat	the	tithe	of	your	grain,	of	your
wine,	and	of	your	oil,	and	the	firstlings	of	your	herd	and	flock;	
that
you	may	learn	to	fear	the	L
ORD
	your	God	always.	.	.	.	
You	shall	eat
there	before	the	L
ORD
	your	God	and	rejoice,	
you	and	your	household.
(Deut.	14:23,	26)
But	even	earlier	than	that,	God	had	put	Adam	and	Eve	in	the
Garden	of	Eden	and	given	them	all	of	its	abundance	to	eat	(except
the	fruit	of	the	tree	of	the	knowledge	of	good	and	evil).	Since	there
was	no	sin	in	that	situation,	and	since	God	had	created	them	for
fellowship	with	himself	and	to	glorify	himself,	then	every	meal	that
Adam	and	Eve	ate	would	have	been	a	meal	of	feasting	in	the
presence	of	the	Lord.
When	this	fellowship	in	God’s	presence	was	later	broken	by	sin,
God	still	allowed	some	meals	(such	as	the	tithe	of	fruits	mentioned
above)	that	the	people	would	eat	in	his	presence.	These	meals	were
a	partial	restoration	of	the	fellowship	with	God	that	Adam	and	Eve
enjoyed	before	the	Fall,	even	though	it	was	marred	by	sin.	But	the
fellowship	of	eating	in	the	presence	of	the	Lord	that	we	find	in	the
Lord’s	Supper	is	far	better.	The	Old	Testament	sacrificial	meals
continually	pointed	to	the	fact	that	sins	were	not	yet	paid	for,
because	the	sacrifices	in	them	were	repeated	year	after	year,	and
because	they	looked	forward	to	the	Messiah	who	was	to	come	and
take	away	sin	(see	Heb.	10:1–4).	The	Lord’s	Supper,	however,
reminds	us	that	Jesus’	payment	for	our	sins	has	already	been
accomplished,	so	we	now	eat	in	the	Lord’s	presence	with	great
rejoicing.
Yet	even	the	Lord’s	Supper	looks	forward	to	a	more	wonderful
fellowship	meal	in	God’s	presence	in	the	future,	when	the
fellowship	of	Eden	will	be	restored	and	there	will	be	even	greater
joy,	because	those	who	eat	in	God’s	presence	will	be	forgiven
sinners	now	confirmed	in	righteousness,	never	able	to	sin	again.
That	future	time	of	great	rejoicing	and	eating	in	the	presence	of
God	is	hinted	at	by	Jesus	when	he	says,	“I	tell	you	I	shall	not	drink
again	of	this	fruit	of	the	vine	
until	that	day	when	I	drink	it	new	with
you	
in	my	Father’s	kingdom”	(Matt.	26:29).	We	are	told	more
explicitly	in	Revelation	about	the	marriage	supper	of	the	Lamb:
“And	the	angel	said	to	me,	‘Write	this:	Blessed	are	those	who	are
invited	to	the	marriage	supper	of	the	Lamb’	”	(Rev.	19:9).	This	will
be	a	time	of	great	rejoicing	in	the	presence	of	the	Lord,	as	well	as	a
time	of	reverence	and	awe	before	him.
From	Genesis	to	Revelation,	then,	God’s	aim	has	been	to	bring	his
people	into	fellowship	with	himself,	and	one	of	the	great	joys	of
experiencing	that	fellowship	is	the	fact	that	we	can	eat	and	drink	in
the	presence	of	the	Lord.	It	would	be	healthy	for	the	church	today
to	recapture	a	more	vivid	sense	of	God’s	presence	at	the	table	of	the
Lord.
B.	The	Meaning	of	the	Lord’s	Supper
The	meaning	of	the	Lord’s	Supper	is	complex,	rich,	and	full.	There
are	several	things	symbolized	and	affirmed	in	the	Lord’s	Supper.
1.
	Christ’s	Death.
	When	we	participate	in	the	Lord’s	supper	we	symbolize
the	death	of	Christ	because	our	actions	give	a	picture	of	his	death	for	us.
When	the	bread	is	broken	it	symbolizes	the	breaking	of	Christ’s	body,	and
when	the	cup	is	poured	out	it	symbolizes	the	pouring	out	of	Christ’s	blood	for
us.	This	is	why	participating	in	the	Lord’s	Supper	is	also	a	kind	of
proclamation:	“For	as	often	as	you	eat	this	bread	and	drink	the	cup,	
you
proclaim	the	Lord’s	death	
until	he	comes”	(1	Cor.	11:26).
2.	Our	Participation	in	the	Benefits	of	Christ’s	Death.
	Jesus	commanded
his	disciples,	“Take,	eat;	this	is	my	body”	(Matt.	26:26).	As	we	individually
reach	out	and	take	the	cup	for	ourselves,	each	one	of	us	is	by	that	action
proclaiming,	“I	am	taking	the	benefits	of	Christ’s	death	to	myself.”	When	we
do	this	we	give	a	symbol	of	the	fact	that	we	participate	in	or	share	in	the
benefits	earned	for	us	by	the	death	of	Jesus.
3.	Spiritual	Nourishment.
	Just	as	ordinary	food	nourishes	our	physical
bodies,	so	the	bread	and	wine	of	the	Lord’s	Supper	give	nourishment	to	us.
But	they	also	picture	the	fact	that	there	is	spiritual	nourishment	and
refreshment	that	Christ	is	giving	to	our	souls—indeed,	the	ceremony	that
Jesus	instituted	is	in	its	very	nature	designed	to	teach	us	this.	Jesus	said,
Unless	you	eat	the	flesh	of	the	Son	of	man	and	drink	his	blood,	you
have	no	life	in	you;	he	who	eats	my	flesh	and	drinks	my	blood	has
eternal	life,	and	I	will	raise	him	up	at	the	last	day.	For	my	flesh	is	food
indeed,	and	my	blood	is	drink	indeed.	He	who	eats	my	flesh	and
drinks	my	blood	abides	in	me,	and	I	in	him.	As	the	living	Father	sent
me,	and	I	live	because	of	the	Father,	so	he	who	eats	me	will	live
because	of	me.	(John	6:53–57)
Certainly	Jesus	is	not	speaking	of	a	literal	eating	of	his	flesh	and	blood.	But	if
he	is	not	speaking	of	a	literal	eating	and	drinking,	then	he	must	have	in	mind	a
spiritual	participation	in	the	benefits	of	the	redemption	he	earns.	This	spiritual
nourishment,	so	necessary	for	our	souls,	is	both	symbolized	and	experienced
in	our	participation	in	the	Lord’s	Supper.
4.	The	Unity	of	Believers.
	When	Christians	participate	in	the	Lord’s	Supper
together	they	also	give	a	clear	sign	of	their	unity	with	one	another.	In	fact,
Paul	says,	“Because	there	is	one	bread,	we	who	are	many	are	one	body,	for
we	all	partake	of	the	one	bread”	(1	Cor.	10:17).
When	we	put	these	four	things	together,	we	begin	to	realize	some	of
the	rich	meaning	of	the	Lord’s	Supper:	when	I	participate	I	come
into	the	presence	of	Christ;	I	remember	that	he	died	for	me;	I
participate	in	the	benefits	of	his	death;	I	receive	spiritual
nourishment;	and	I	am	united	with	all	other	believers	who
participate	in	this	Supper.	What	great	cause	for	thanksgiving	and
joy	is	to	be	found	in	this	Supper	of	the	Lord!
But	in	addition	to	these	truths	visibly	portrayed	by	the	Lord’s
Supper,	the	fact	that	Christ	has	instituted	this	ceremony	for	us
means	that	by	it	he	is	also	promising	or	affirming	certain	things	to
us	as	well.	When	we	participate	in	the	Lord’s	Supper,	we	should	be
reminded	again	and	again	of	the	following	affirmations	that	Christ
is	making	to	us:
5.	Christ	Affirms	His	Love	for	Me.
	The	fact	that	I	am	able	to	participate	in
the	Lord’s	Supper—indeed,	that	Jesus	
invites	me	
to	come—is	a	vivid
reminder	and	visual	reassurance	that	Jesus	Christ	loves	
me,	
individually	and
personally.	When	I	come	to	take	of	the	Lord’s	Supper	I	thereby	find
reassurance	again	and	again	of	Christ’s	personal	love	for	me.
6.	Christ	Affirms	That	All	the	Blessings	of	Salvation	Are	Reserved	for
Me.
	When	I	come	at	Christ’s	invitation	to	the	Lord’s	Supper,	the	fact	that	he
has	invited	me	into	his	presence	assures	me	that	he	has	abundant	blessings	for
me.	In	this	Supper	I	am	actually	eating	and	drinking	at	a	foretaste	of	the	great
banquet	table	of	the	King.	I	come	to	his	table	as	a	member	of	his	
eternal
family.	When	the	Lord	welcomes	me	to	this	table,	he	assures	me	that	he	will
welcome	me	to	all	the	other	blessings	of	earth	and	heaven	as	well,	and
especially	to	the	great	marriage	supper	of	the	Lamb,	at	which	a	place	has	been
reserved	for	me.
7.	I	Affirm	My	Faith	in	Christ.
	Finally,	as	I	take	the	bread	and	cup	for
myself,	by	my	actions	I	am	proclaiming,	“I	need	you	and	trust	you,	Lord
Jesus,	to	forgive	my	sins	and	give	life	and	health	to	my	soul,	for	only	by	your
broken	body	and	shed	blood	can	I	be	saved.”	In	fact,	as	I	partake	in	the
breaking	of	the	bread	when	I	eat	it	and	the	pouring	out	of	the	cup	when	I
drink	from	it,	I	proclaim	again	and	again	that	
my	sins	
were	part	of	the	cause	of
Jesus’	suffering	and	death.	In	this	way	sorrow,	joy,	thanksgiving,	and	deep
love	for	Christ	are	richly	intermingled	in	the	beauty	of	the	Lord’s	Supper.
C.	How	Is	Christ	Present	in	the	Lord’s	Supper?
1.
	The	Roman	Catholic	View:	Transubstantiation.
	According	to	the
teaching	of	the	Roman	Catholic	Church,	the	bread	and	wine	
actually	become
the	body	and	blood	of	Christ.	This	happens	at	the	moment	the	priest	says,
“This	is	my	body”	during	the	celebration	of	the	mass.	At	the	same	time	as	the
priest	says	this,	the	bread	is	raised	up	(elevated)	and	adored.	This	action	of
elevating	the	bread	and	pronouncing	it	to	be	Christ’s	body	can	only	be
performed	by	a	priest.
When	this	happens,	according	to	Roman	Catholic	teaching,	grace	is
imparted	to	those	present	
ex	opere	operato,	
that	is,	“by	the	work
performed,”
1
	but	the	amount	of	grace	dispensed	is	in	proportion	to
the	subjective	disposition	of	the	recipient	of	grace.
2
	Moreover,
every	time	the	mass	is	celebrated,	the	sacrifice	of	Christ	is	repeated
(in	some	sense),	and	the	Catholic	church	is	careful	to	affirm	that
this	is	a	real	sacrifice,	even	though	it	is	not	the	same	as	the	sacrifice
that	Christ	paid	on	the	cross.
So	Ludwig	Ott’s	
Fundamentals	of	Catholic	Dogma	
teaches	as
follows:
Christ	becomes	present	in	the	Sacrament	of	the	Altar	by	the
transformation	of	the	whole	substance	of	the	bread	into	His	Body	and
of	the	whole	substance	of	the	wine	into	His	Blood.	.	.	.	This
transformation	is	called	Transubstantiation.	(p.	
379)
The	power	of	consecration	resides	in	a	validly	consecrated	priest	only.
(p.	
397)
The	Worship	of	Adoration	(Latria)	must	be	given	to	Christ	present	in
the	Eucharist.	.	.	.	It	follows	from	the	wholeness	and	permanence	of	the
Real	Presence	that	the	absolute	worship	of	adoration	(Cultus	Latriae)	is
due	to	Christ	present	in	the	Eucharist.	(p.	
387)
3
In	Catholic	teaching,	because	the	elements	of	bread	and	wine	literally	become
the	body	and	blood	of	Christ,	the	church	for	many	centuries	did	not	allow	the
lay	people	to	drink	from	the	cup	of	the	Lord’s	Supper	(for	fear	that	the	blood
of	Christ	would	be	spilled)	but	only	to	eat	the	bread.
4
	Ott’s	textbook	tells	us,
Communion	under	two	forms	is	not	necessary	for	any	individual
member	of	the	Faithful,	either	by	reason	of	Divine	precept	or	as	a
means	of	salvation.	.	.	.	The	reason	is	that	Christ	is	whole	and	entire
under	each	species.	.	.	.	The	abolition	of	the	reception	from	the	chalice
in	the	Middle	Ages	(12th	and	13th	centuries)	was	enjoined	for
practical	reasons,	particularly	danger	of	profanation	of	the	Sacrament.
(p.	
397)
With	respect	to	the	actual	sacrifice	of	Christ	in	the	mass,	Ott’s	textbook	says,
The	Holy	Mass	is	a	true	and	proper	Sacrifice.	(p.	
402)
In	the	Sacrifice	of	the	Mass	and	in	the	Sacrifice	of	the	Cross	the
Sacrificial	Gift	and	the	Primary	Sacrificing	Priest	are	identical;	only	the
nature	and	mode	of	the	offering	are	different.	.	.	.	The	Sacrificial	Gift	is
the	Body	and	Blood	of	Christ.	.	.	.	The	Primary	Sacrificing	Priest	is
Jesus	Christ,	who	utilizes	the	human	priest	as	His	servant	and
representative	and	fulfills	the	consecration	through	him.	According	to
the	Thomistic	view,	
in	every	Mass	Christ	also	performs	an	actual
immediate	sacrificial	activity	
which,	however,	must	not	be	conceived	as
a	totality	of	many	successive	acts	but	as	one	single	uninterrupted
sacrificial	act	of	the	Transfigured	Christ.
The	purpose	of	the	Sacrifice	is	the	same	in	the	Sacrifice	of	the	Mass	as
in	the	Sacrifice	of	the	Cross;	primarily	the	glorification	of	God,
secondarily	atonement,	thanksgiving	and	appeal.	(p.	
408)
As	a	propitiatory	sacrifice	.	.	.	the	Sacrifice	of	the	Mass	effects	the
remission	of	sins	and	the	punishment	for	sins;	
as	a	sacrifice	of	appeal
.	.	.	it	brings	about	the	conferring	of	supernatural	and	natural	gifts.	The
Eucharistic	Sacrifice	of	propitiation	can,	as	the	Council	of	Trent
expressly	asserted,	be	offered,	not	merely	for	the	living,	but	also	for	the
poor	souls	in	Purgatory.	(pp.	412–13)
In	response	to	the	Roman	Catholic	teaching	on	the	Lord’s	Supper,	it
must	be	said	that	it	first	fails	to	recognize	the	symbolic	character	of
Jesus’	statements	when	he	declared,	“This	is	my	body,”	or,	“This	is
my	blood.”	Jesus	spoke	in	symbolic	ways	many	times	when
speaking	of	himself.	He	said,	for	example,	
“I	am	the	true	vine”
(John	15:1),	or	“
I	am	the	door;	
if	any	one	enters	by	me,	he	will	be
saved”	(John	10:9),	or	“I	am	the	bread	which	came	down	from
heaven”	(John	6:41).	In	a	similar	way,	when	Jesus	says,	“This	is	my
body,”	he	means	it	in	a	symbolic	way,	not	in	an	actual,	literal,
physical	way.	In	fact,	as	he	was	sitting	with	his	disciples	holding
the	bread,	the	bread	was	in	his	hand	but	it	was	distinct	from	his
body,	and	that	was,	of	course,	evident	to	the	disciples.	None	of	the
disciples	present	would	have	thought	that	the	loaf	of	bread	that
Jesus	held	in	his	hand	was	actually	his	physical	body,	for	they	could
see	his	body	before	their	eyes.	They	would	have	naturally
understood	Jesus’	statement	in	a	symbolic	way.	Similarly,	when
Jesus	said,	“
This	cup	
which	is	poured	out	for	you	
is	the	new
covenant	
in	my	blood”	(Luke	22:20),	he	certainly	did	not	mean	that
the	cup	was	actually	the	new	covenant,	but	that	the	cup	
represented
the	new	covenant.
Moreover,	the	Roman	Catholic	view	fails	to	recognize	the	clear
New	Testament	teaching	on	the	
finality	
and	
completeness	
of
Christ’s	sacrifice	once	for	all	time	for	our	sins:	the	book	of	Hebrews
emphasizes	this	many	times,	as	when	it	says,	“
Nor	was	it	to	offer
himself	repeatedly,	
as	the	high	priest	enters	the	Holy	Place	yearly
with	blood	not	his	own;	for	then	he	would	have	had	to	suffer
repeatedly	since	the	foundation	of	the	world.	But	as	it	is,	he	has
appeared	
once	
for	all	at	the	end	of	the	age	to	put	away	sin	by	the
sacrifice	of	himself	.	.	.	Christ,	having	been	offered	
once	
to	bear	the
sins	of	many”	(Heb.	9:25–28).	To	say	that	Christ’s	sacrifice
continues	or	is	repeated	in	the	mass	has	been,	since	the
Reformation,	one	of	the	most	objectionable	Roman	Catholic
doctrines	from	the	standpoint	of	Protestants.	When	we	realize	that
Christ’s	sacrifice	for	our	sins	is	finished	and	completed	(
“It	is
finished,”	
John	19:30;	cf.	Heb.	1:3),	it	gives	great	assurance	to	us
that	our	sins	are	all	paid	for,	and	there	remains	no	sacrifice	yet	to	be
paid.	But	the	idea	of	a	continuation	of	Christ’s	sacrifice	destroys
our	assurance	that	the	payment	has	been	made	by	Christ	and
accepted	by	God	the	Father,	and	that	there	is	“no	condemnation”
(Rom.	8:1)	now	remaining	for	us.
For	Protestants	the	idea	that	the	mass	is	in	any	sense	a	repetition	of
the	death	of	Christ	seems	to	mark	a	return	to	the	repeated	sacrifices
of	the	old	covenant,	which	were	“a	reminder	of	sin	year	after	year”
(Heb.	10:3).	Instead	of	the	assurance	of	complete	forgiveness	of
sins	through	the	once	for	all	sacrifice	of	Christ	(Heb.	10:12),	the
idea	that	the	mass	is	a	repeated	sacrifice	gives	a	constant	reminder
of	sins	and	remaining	guilt	to	be	atoned	for	week	after	week.
5
With	regard	to	the	teaching	that	only	priests	can	officiate	at	the
Lord’s	Supper,	the	New	Testament	gives	no	instructions	at	all	that
place	restrictions	on	the	people	who	can	preside	at	Communion.
And	since	Scripture	places	no	such	restrictions	on	us,	it	would	not
seem	to	be	justified	to	say	that	only	priests	can	dispense	the
elements	of	the	Lord’s	Supper.	Moreover,	since	the	New	Testament
teaches	that	all	believers	are	priests	and	members	of	a	“royal
priesthood”	(1	Peter	2:9;	cf.	Heb.	4:16;	10:19–22),	we	should	not
specify	a	certain	class	of	people	who	have	the	rights	of	priests,	as	in
the	old	covenant,	but	we	should	emphasize	that	all	believers	share
the	great	spiritual	privilege	of	coming	near	to	God.
Finally,	any	continuation	of	the	restriction	that	will	not	allow
laypersons	to	drink	of	the	cup	of	the	Lord’s	Supper	would	be
arguing	from	caution	and	tradition	to	justify	disobedience	to	Jesus’
direct	commands,	not	only	the	command	to	his	disciples	where	he
said,	“Drink	of	it,	
all	of	you”	
(Matt.	26:27),	but	also	the	direction
Paul	recorded,	in	which	Jesus	said,	“Do	this,	as	often	as	
you	drink
it,	
in	remembrance	of	me”	(1	Cor.	11:25).
2.	The	Lutheran	View:	Consubstantiation.
	Martin	Luther	rejected	the
Roman	Catholic	view	of	the	Lord’s	Supper,	yet	he	insisted	that	the	phrase
“This	is	my	body”	had	to	be	taken	in	some	sense	as	a	literal	statement.	His
conclusion	was	not	that	the	bread	actually	
becomes	
the	physical	body	of
Christ,	but	that	the	physical	body	of	Christ	
is	present	
“in,	with,	and	under”	the
bread	of	the	Lord’s	Supper.	The	example	sometimes	given	is	to	say	that
Christ’s	body	is	present	in	the	bread	as	water	is	present	in	a	sponge—the
water	is	not	the	sponge,	but	is	present	“in,	with,	and	under”	a	sponge,	and	is
present	wherever	the	sponge	is	present.	Other	examples	given	are	that	of
magnetism	in	a	magnet	or	a	soul	in	the	body.
The	Lutheran	understanding	of	the	Lord’s	Supper	is	found	in	the
textbook	of	Francis	Pieper,	
Christian	Dogmatics.
6
	He	quotes
Luther’s	Small	Catechism:	“What	is	the	Sacrament	of	the	Altar?	It
is	the	true	body	and	blood	of	our	Lord	Jesus	Christ,	under	the	bread
and	wine,	for	us	Christians	to	eat	and	to	drink,	instituted	by	Christ
Himself.”
7
	Similarly,	the	Augsburg	Confession,	Article	X,	says,
“Of	the	Supper	of	the	Lord	they	teach	that	the	Body	and	Blood	of
Christ	are	truly	present,	and	are	distributed	to	those	who	eat	in	the
Supper	of	the	Lord.”
8
One	passage	that	may	be	thought	to	give	support	to	this	position	is
1	Corinthians	10:16,	“The	bread	which	we	break,	is	it	not	a
participation	in	the	body	of	Christ?”
However,	in	order	to	affirm	this	doctrine,	Luther	had	to	answer	an
important	question:	How	can	Christ’s	physical	body,	or	more
generally	Christ’s	human	nature,	be	everywhere	present?	Is	it	not
true	that	Jesus	in	his	human	nature	ascended	into	heaven	and
remains	there	until	his	return?	Did	he	not	say	that	he	was	leaving
the	earth	and	would	no	longer	be	in	the	world	but	was	going	to	the
Father	(John	16:28;	17:11)?	In	answer	to	this	problem	Luther	taught
the	
ubiquity	
of	Christ’s	human	nature	after	his	ascension—that	is,
that	Christ’s	human	nature	was	present	everywhere	(“ubiquitous”).
But	theologians	ever	since	Luther’s	time	have	suspected	that	he
taught	the	ubiquity	of	Christ’s	human	nature,	not	because	it	is	found
anywhere	in	Scripture,	but	because	he	needed	it	to	explain	how	his
view	of	consubstantiation	could	be	true.
In	response	to	the	Lutheran	view,	it	can	be	said	that	it	too	fails	to
realize	that	Jesus	is	speaking	of	a	
spiritual	
reality	but	using	
physical
objects	to	teach	us	when	he	says,	“This	is	my	body.”	We	should
take	this	no	more	literally	than	we	take	the	corresponding	sentence,
“
This	cup	
which	is	poured	out	for	you	
is	the	new	covenant	
in	my
blood”	(Luke	22:20).	In	fact,	Luther	does	not	really	do	justice	to
Jesus’	words	in	a	literal	sense	at	all.	Berkhof	rightly	objects	that
Luther	really	makes	the	words	of	Jesus	mean,	“This	accompanies
my	body.”
9
	In	this	matter	it	would	help	to	read	again	John	6:27–59,
where	the	context	shows	that	Jesus	is	talking	in	literal,	physical
terms	about	bread,	but	he	is	continually	explaining	it	in	terms	of
spiritual	reality.
3.	The	Rest	of	Protestantism:	A	Symbolic	and	Spiritual	Presence	of
Christ.
	In	distinction	from	Martin	Luther,	John	Calvin	and	other	Reformers
argued	that	the	bread	and	wine	of	the	Lord’s	Supper	did	not	change	into	the
body	and	blood	of	Christ,	nor	did	they	somehow	contain	the	body	and	blood
of	Christ.	Rather,	the	bread	and	wine	
symbolized	
the	body	and	blood	of
Christ,	and	they	gave	a	visible	sign	of	the	fact	that	Christ	himself	was	truly
present.
10
	Calvin	said:
By	the	showing	of	the	symbol	the	thing	itself	is	also	shown.	For
unless	a	man	means	to	call	God	a	deceiver,	he	would	never	dare	assert
that	an	empty	symbol	is	set	forth	by	him.	.	.	.	And	the	godly	ought	by
all	means	to	keep	this	rule:	whenever	they	see	symbols	appointed	by
the	Lord,	to	think	and	be	persuaded	that	the	truth	of	the	thing	signified
is	surely	present	there.	For	why	would	the	Lord	put	in	your	hand	the
symbol	of	his	body,	except	to	assure	you	of	a	true	participation	in	it?
(
Institutes,	
4.17.10;	p.	
1371)
Yet	Calvin	was	careful	to	differ	both	with	Roman	Catholic	teaching
(which	said	that	the	bread	became	Christ’s	body)	and	with	Lutheran
teaching	(which	said	that	the	bread	contained	Christ’s	body).
But	we	must	establish	such	a	presence	of	Christ	in	the	Supper	as	may
neither	fasten	him	to	the	element	of	bread,	nor	enclose	him	in	bread,
nor	circumscribe	him	in	any	way	(all	which	things,	it	is	clear,	detract
from	his	heavenly	glory).	(
Institutes,	
4.17.19;	p.	
1381)
Today	most	Protestants	would	say,	in	addition	to	the	fact	that	the
bread	and	wine	symbolize	the	body	and	blood	of	Christ,	that	Christ
is	also	
spiritually	present	
in	a	special	way	as	we	partake	of	the
bread	and	wine.	Indeed,	Jesus	promised	to	be	present	whenever
believers	worship:	“Where	two	or	three	are	gathered	in	my	name,
there	am	I	in	the	midst	of	them”	(Matt.	18:20).
11
	And	if	he	is
especially	present	when	Christians	gather	to	worship,	then	we
would	expect	that	he	will	be	present	in	a	special	way	in	the	Lord’s
Supper:
12
	We	meet	him	at	
his	
table,	to	which	he	comes	to	give
himself	to	us.	As	we	receive	the	elements	of	bread	and	wine	in	the
presence	of	Christ,	so	we	partake	of	him	and	all	his	benefits.	We
“feed	upon	him	in	our	hearts”	with	thanksgiving.	Indeed,	even	a
child	who	knows	Christ	will	understand	this	without	being	told	and
will	expect	to	receive	a	special	blessing	from	the	Lord	during	this
ceremony,	because	the	meaning	of	it	is	so	inherent	in	the	very
actions	of	eating	and	drinking.	Yet	we	must	not	say	that	Christ	is
present	apart	from	our	personal	faith,	but	only	meets	and	blesses	us
there	in	accordance	with	our	faith	in	him.
In	what	way	is	Christ	present	then?	Certainly	there	is	a	symbolic
presence	of	Christ,	but	it	is	also	a	genuine	spiritual	presence	and
there	is	genuine	spiritual	blessing	in	this	ceremony.
D.	Who	Should	Participate	in	the	Lord’s	Supper?
Despite	differences	over	some	aspects	of	the	Lord’s	Supper,	most
Protestants	would	agree,	first,	that	
only	those	who	believe	in	Christ
should	participate	in	it,	because	it	is	a	sign	of	being	a	Christian	and
continuing	in	the	Christian	life.
13
	Paul	warns	that	those	who	eat	and
drink	unworthily	face	serious	consequences:	“For	any	one	who	eats
and	drinks	without	discerning	the	body	eats	and	drinks	judgment
upon	himself.	That	is	why	many	of	you	are	weak	and	ill,	and	some
have	died”	(1	Cor.	11:29–30).
Second,	many	Protestants	would	argue	from	the	meaning	of
baptism	and	the	meaning	of	the	Lord’s	Supper	that,	ordinarily,	
only
those	who	have	been	baptized	
should	participate	in	the	Lord’s
Supper.	This	is	because	baptism	is	so	clearly	a	symbol	of	
beginning
the	Christian	life,	while	the	Lord’s	Supper	is	clearly	a	symbol	of
continuing	
the	Christian	life.	Therefore	if	someone	is	taking	the
Lord’s	Supper	and	thereby	giving	public	proclamation	that	he	or
she	is	continuing	in	the	Christian	life,	then	that	person	should	be
asked,	“Wouldn’t	it	be	good	to	be	baptized	now	and	thereby	give	a
symbol	that	you	are	beginning	the	Christian	life?”
But	others,	including	the	present	author,	would	object	to	such	a
restriction	as	follows:	A	different	problem	arises	if	someone	who	is
a	genuine	believer,	but	not	yet	baptized,	is	
not	
allowed	to
participate	in	the	Lord’s	Supper	when	Christians	get	together.	In
that	case	the	person’s	nonparticipation	symbolizes	that	he	or	she	is
not	
a	member	of	the	body	of	Christ	which	is	coming	together	to
observe	the	Lord’s	Supper	in	a	unified	fellowship	(see	1	Cor.	10:17:
“Because	there	is	one	bread,	we	who	are	many	are	one	body,	for	we
all	partake	of	the	one	bread”).	Therefore	churches	may	think	it	best
to	allow	non-baptized	believers	to	participate	in	the	Lord’s	Supper
but	to	urge	them	to	be	baptized	as	soon	as	possible.	For	if	they	are
willing	to	participate	in	one	outward	symbol	of	being	a	Christian,
there	seems	no	reason	why	they	should	not	be	willing	to	participate
in	the	other,	a	symbol	that	appropriately	comes	first.
Of	course,	the	problems	that	arise	in	both	situations	(when
unbaptized	believers	take	Communion	and	when	they	do	not)	can
all	be	avoided	if	new	Christians	are	regularly	baptized	shortly	after
coming	to	faith.	And,	whichever	position	a	church	takes	on	the
question	of	whether	unbaptized	believers	should	take	Communion,
in	the	teaching	ministry	of	the	church,	it	would	seem	wise	to	teach
that	the	ideal	situation	is	for	new	believers	first	to	be	baptized	and
then	to	partake	of	the	Lord’s	Supper.
The	third	qualification	for	participation	is	that	
self-examination:
Whoever,	therefore,	eats	the	bread	or	drinks	the	cup	of	the	Lord	in	an
unworthy	manner	will	be	guilty	of	profaning	the	body	and	blood	of
the	Lord.	
Let	a	man	examine	himself,	and	so	eat	of	the	bread	and
drink	of	the	cup.	
For	any	one	who	eats	and	drinks	without	discerning
the	body	eats	and	drinks	judgment	upon	himself.	(1	Cor.	11:27–29)
In	the	context	of	1	Corinthians	11	Paul	is	rebuking	the	Corinthians	for	their
selfish	and	inconsiderate	conduct	when	they	come	together	as	a	church:
“When	you	meet	together,	it	is	not	the	Lord’s	supper	that	you	eat.	For	in
eating,	each	one	goes	ahead	with	his	own	meal,	and	one	is	hungry	and	another
is	drunk”	(1	Cor.	11:20–21).	This	helps	us	understand	what	Paul	means	when
he	talks	about	those	who	eat	and	drink	“without	discerning	the	body”	(1	Cor.
11:29).	The	problem	at	Corinth	was	
not	
a	failure	to	understand	that	the	bread
and	cup	represented	the	body	and	blood	of	the	Lord—they	certainly	knew
that.	The	problem	rather	was	their	selfish,	inconsiderate	conduct	toward	each
other	while	they	were	at	the	Lord’s	table.	They	were	not	understanding	or
“discerning”	the	true	nature	of	the	church	
as	one	body.	
This	interpretation	of
“without	discerning	the	body”	is	supported	by	Paul’s	mention	of	the	church	as
the	body	of	Christ	just	a	bit	earlier,	in	1	Corinthians	10:17:	“Because	there	is
one	bread,	we	who	are	many	
are	one	
body,	for	we	all	partake	of	the	one
bread.”
14
	So	the	phrase	“not	discerning	the	
body”	
means	“not	understanding
the	unity	and	interdependence	of	people	in	the	church,	which	is	the	body	of
Christ.”	It	means	not	taking	thought	for	our	brothers	and	sisters	when	we
come	to	the	
Lord’s	
Supper,	at	which	we	ought	to	reflect	his	character.
15
What	does	it	mean,	then,	to	eat	or	drink	“in	an	unworthy	manner”
(1	Cor.	11:27)?	We	might	at	first	think	the	words	apply	rather
narrowly	and	pertain	only	to	the	way	we	conduct	ourselves	when
we	actually	eat	and	drink	the	bread	and	wine.	But	when	Paul
explains	that	unworthy	participation	involves	“not	discerning	the
body,”	he	indicates	that	we	are	to	take	thought	for	all	of	our
relationships	within	the	body	of	Christ:	are	we	acting	in	ways	that
vividly	portray	not	the	unity	of	the	one	bread	and	one	body,	but
disunity?	Are	we	conducting	ourselves	in	ways	that	proclaim	not
the	self-giving	sacrifice	of	our	Lord,	but	enmity	and	selfishness?	In
a	broad	sense,	then,	“Let	a	man	examine	himself”	means	that	we
ought	to	ask	whether	our	relationships	in	the	body	of	Christ	are	in
fact	reflecting	the	character	of	the	Lord	whom	we	meet	there	and
whom	we	represent.
In	this	connection,	Jesus’	teaching	about	coming	to	worship	in
general	should	also	be	mentioned:
So	if	you	are	offering	your	gift	at	the	altar,	and	there	remember	that
your	brother	has	something	against	you,	leave	your	gift	there	before
the	altar	and	go;	first	be	reconciled	to	your	brother,	and	then	come	and
offer	your	gift.	(Matt.	5:23–24)
Jesus	here	tells	us	that	whenever	we	come	to	worship	we	should	be	sure	that
our	relationships	with	others	are	right,	and	if	they	are	not,	we	should	act
quickly	to	make	them	right	and	then	come	to	worship	God.	This	admonition
ought	to	be	especially	true	when	we	come	to	the	Lord’s	Supper.
Of	course,	no	pastor	or	church	leader	will	know	whether	people	are
examining	themselves	or	not	(except	in	cases	where	clearly
offensive	or	sinful	conduct	becomes	evident	to	others).	For	the	most
part,	the	church	must	depend	on	the	pastors	and	teachers	to	explain
clearly	the	meaning	of	the	Lord’s	Supper	and	to	warn	of	the	dangers
of	participating	unworthily.	Then	people	will	have	the
responsibility	to	examine	their	own	lives,	in	accordance	with	what
Paul	says.	Indeed,	Paul	does	not	say	that	the	pastors	should
examine	everyone	else’s	lives,	but	encourages	individual	self-
examination	instead:	“Let	a	man	examine	himself”	(1	Cor.	11:28).
16
E.	Other	Questions
Who	should	administer	the	Lord’s	Supper?	Scripture	gives	no
explicit	teaching	on	this	question,	so	we	are	left	simply	to	decide
what	is	wise	and	appropriate	for	the	benefit	of	the	believers	in	the
church.	In	order	to	guard	against	abuse	of	the	Lord’s	Supper,	a
responsible	leader	ought	to	be	in	charge	administering	it,	but	it	does
not	seem	that	Scripture	requires	that	only	ordained	clergy	or
selected	church	officers	could	do	this.	In	ordinary	situations,	of
course,	the	pastor	or	other	leader	who	ordinarily	officiates	at	the
worship	services	of	the	church	would	appropriately	officiate	at
Communion	as	well.	But	beyond	this,	there	would	seem	to	be	no
reason	why	only	officers	or	only	leaders,	or	only	men,	should
distribute	the	elements.	Would	it	not	speak	much	more	clearly	of
our	unity	and	spiritual	equality	in	Christ	if	both	men	and	women,
for	example,	assisted	in	distributing	the	elements	of	the	Lord’s
Supper?
17
How	often	should	the	Lord’s	Supper	be	celebrated?	Scripture	does	
not	tell	us.	Jesus	simply	said,	“As	often	as	you	eat	this	bread	and
drink	the	cup	.	.	.”	(1	Cor.	11:26).	Paul’s	directive	here	regarding
worship	services	would	also	be	appropriate	to	consider:	“Let	all
things	be	done	for	edification”	(1Cor.	14:26).	In	actuality	it	has
been	the	practice	of	most	of	the	church	throughout	its	history	to
celebrate	the	Lord’s	Supper	every	week	when	believers	gather.
However,	in	many	Protestant	groups	since	the	Reformation,	there
has	been	a	less	frequent	celebration	of	the	Lord’s	Supper—
sometimes	once	a	month	or	twice	a	month,	or,	in	many	Reformed
churches,	only	four	times	a	year.	If	the	Lord’s	Supper	is	planned
and	explained	and	carried	out	in	such	a	way	that	it	is	a	time	of	self-
examination,	confession,	and	thanksgiving	and	praise,	then	it	does
not	seem	that	celebrating	it	once	a	week	would	be	too	often,
however,	and	it	certainly	could	be	observed	that	frequently	“for
edification.”
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
What	things	symbolized	by	the	Lord’s	Supper	have	received	new
emphasis	in	your	thinking	as	a	result	of	reading	this	chapter?	Do	you	feel
more	eager	to	participate	in	the	Lord’s	Supper	now	than	before	you	read
the	chapter?	Why?
2
.	
In	what	ways	(if	any)	will	you	approach	the	Lord’s	Supper	differently
now?	Which	of	the	things	symbolized	in	the	Lord’s	Supper	is	most
encouraging	to	your	Christian	life	right	now?
3
.	
What	view	of	the	nature	of	Christ’s	presence	in	the	Lord’s	Supper	have
you	been	taught	in	your	church	previously?	What	is	your	own	view
now?
4
.	
Are	there	any	broken	personal	relationships	that	you	need	to	make	right
before	you	come	to	the	Lord’s	Supper	again?
5
.	
Are	there	areas	in	which	your	church	needs	to	do	more	teaching	about
the	nature	of	the	Lord’s	Supper?	What	are	they?
SPECIAL	TERMS
Communion
	
	
	
	
spiritual	presence
consubstantiation
	
	
	
	
symbolic	presence
Eucharist
	
	
	
	
transubstantiation
not	discerning	the	body
	
	
	
	
ubiquity	of	Christ’s	human	nature
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the
bibliography	to	chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be
found	in	
Appendix	4
.)
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92			Litton,	472–542
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1875–76			Pope,	3:325–34
1892–94			Miley,	2:411–14
1940			Wiley,	3:189–208
1960			Purkiser,	411–15
1983			Carter,	2:616–19
3.			Baptist
1767			Gill,	2:647–60
1907			Strong,	959–80
1983–85			Erickson,	1107–28
4.			Dispensational
1947			Chafer,	7:229
1949			Thiessen,	322–25
1986			Ryrie,	425–26
5.			Lutheran
1917–24			Pieper,	3:290–96
1934			Mueller,	506–40
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1559			Calvin,	2:1359–1448	(4.27–28)
1724–58			Edwards,	1:431–532
1861			Heppe,	627–56
1871–73			Hodge,	3:611–92
1878			Dabney,	800–817
1887–1921			Warfield,	
SSW,	
1:332–38
1889			Shedd,	2b:564–74
1937–66			Murray,	
CW,	
2:376–84;	
CW,	
3:275–88
1938			Berkhof,	644–58
1962			Buswell,	2:266–79
7.			Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988–92			Williams
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955			Ott,	370–416
2.			Roman	Catholic:	Post-Vatican	II
1980			McBrien,	2:757–68;	1:552–56
Other	Works
Beckwith,	Roger	T.	“Eucharist.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	236–38.
Berkouwer,	G.	C.	
The	Sacraments.	
Trans.	by	Hugo	Bekker.	Grand
Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1969.
Bridge,	D.,	and	D.	Phypers.	
Communion:	The	Meal	That	Unites?
London:	Hodder	and	Stoughton,	1981.
Marshall,	I.	Howard.	
Last	Supper	and	Lord’s	Supper.	
Grand	Rapids:
Eerdmans,	1980.
Osterhaven,	M.	E.	“Lord’s	Supper,	Views	of.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	653–56.
Wallace,	R.	S.	“Lord’s	Supper.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	651–53.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
1
	Corinthians	11:23–26:	
For	I	received	from	the	Lord	what	I	also	delivered
to	you,	that	the	Lord	Jesus	on	the	night	when	he	was	betrayed	took	bread,	and
when	he	had	given	thanks,	he	broke	it,	and	said,	“This	is	my	body	which	is	for
you.	Do	this	in	remembrance	of	me.”	In	the	same	way	also	the	cup,	after
supper,	saying,	“This	cup	is	the	new	covenant	in	my	blood.	Do	this,	as	often
as	you	drink	it,	in	remembrance	of	me.”	For	as	often	as	you	eat	this	bread
and	drink	the	cup,	you	proclaim	the	Lord’s	death	until	he	comes.
HYMN
“Here,	O	My	Lord,	I	See	Thee	Face	to	Face”
This	beautiful	hymn	is	not	frequently	sung,	but	it	speaks	so	directly
to	Jesus	himself	and	speaks	so	clearly	of	the	spiritual	reality	that	we
need	to	remember	in	the	Lord’s	supper	that	it	is	one	of	the	greatest
hymns	ever	written	regarding	this	doctrine.	It	conveys	an	attitude	of
reverence	in	the	Lord’s	presence,	joy	in	salvation,	and	genuine
repentance	for	sin	as	well.	The	sweet	beauty	of	spirit	that	Horatius
Bonar	exemplified	in	this	hymn	is	matched	by	very	few	hymns	in
the	history	of	the	church.
Tune:	“Spirit	of	God,	Descend	Upon	My	Heart”
Here,	O	my	Lord,	I	see	thee	face	to	face;
Here	would	I	touch	and	handle	things	unseen,
Here	grasp	with	firmer	hand	th’	eternal	grace,
And	all	my	weariness	upon	thee	lean.
Here	would	I	feed	upon	the	bread	of	God,
Here	drink	with	thee	the	royal	wine	of	heaven;
Here	would	I	lay	aside	each	earthly	load,
Here	taste	afresh	the	calm	of	sin	forgiven.
This	is	the	hour	of	banquet	and	of	song;
This	is	the	heav’nly	table	spread	for	me:
Here	let	me	feast,	and,	feasting,	still	prolong
The	brief,	bright	hour	of	fellowship	with	thee.
I	have	no	help	but	thine,	nor	do	I	need
Another	arm	save	thine	to	lean	upon:
It	is	enough,	my	Lord,	enough	indeed;
My	strength	is	in	thy	might,	thy	might	alone.
Mine	is	the	sin,	but	thine	the	righteousness;
Mine	is	the	guilt,	but	thine	the	cleansing	blood;
Here	is	my	robe,	my	refuge,	and	my	peace,
Thy	blood,	thy	righteousness,	O	Lord	my	God.
AUTHOR:	HORATIUS	BONAR,	1855
NOTES
1
See	discussion	of	the	term	
ex	opere	operato	
in	relationship	to	baptism	in	
chapter	49
	above,	p.	
1189.
2
Ludwig	Ott,	
Fundamentals	of	Catholic	Dogma,	
says,	“Since	the	measure	of	the	grace	conferred	
ex	opere	operato	
is	in	proportion
to	the	subjective	disposition	of	the	recipient,	the	reception	of	Holy	Communion	should	be	preceded	by	a	good	preparation,	and	an
appropriate	thanksgiving	should	follow	it.	.	.	.	An	unworthy	Communion	is	a	sacrilege”	(p.	
399).
3
The	word	
eucharist	
simply	means	the	Lord’s	Supper.	(It	is	derived	from	the	Greek	word	
eucharistia,	
“giving	of	thanks.”	The
related	verb	
eucharisteō,	
“to	give	thanks,”	is	found	in	the	biblical	records	of	the	Last	Supper	in	Matt.	26:27;	Mark	14:23;	Luke
22:19;	and	1	Cor.	11:24:	“when	he	had	
given	thanks.”
)	The	term	
eucharist	
is	often	used	by	Roman	Catholics	and	frequently	by
Episcopalians	as	well.	Among	many	Protestant	churches	the	term	
Communion	
is	commonly	used	to	refer	to	the	Lord’s	Supper.
4
However,	since	the	Vatican	II	council	(1962–65),	administration	of	both	the	bread	and	the	wine	to	laypersons	has	been	allowed,
but	it	is	not	always	practiced.
5
It	is	for	this	reason	that	many	Protestants	have	felt	that	they	could	readily	partake	of	the	Lord’s	Supper	in	any	other	Protestant
church,	even	in	high	church	Anglican	services	that	in	form	appear	quite	similar	to	Roman	Catholic	services,	but	they	could	not	in
good	conscience	participate	in	a	Roman	Catholic	mass,	because	of	the	Roman	Catholic	teaching	on	the	nature	of	the	mass	itself.
6
4	vols.	(St.	Louis:	Concordia,	1950–57).
7
Pieper,	p.	
296.
8
Ibid.
9
Berkhof,	
Systematic	Theology,	
p.	653.
10
There	was	some	difference	between	Calvin	and	another	Swiss	Reformer,	Ulrich	Zwingli	(1484–1531)	on	the	nature	of	the
presence	of	Christ	in	the	Lord’s	supper,	both	agreeing	that	Christ	was	present	in	a	symbolic	way,	but	Zwingli	being	much	more
hesitant	about	affirming	a	real	spiritual	presence	of	Christ.	However,	the	actual	teaching	of	Zwingli	in	this	regard	is	a	matter	of
some	difference	among	historians.
11
It	is	true	that	this	sentence	is	spoken	in	a	context	that	applies	specifically	to	church	discipline	(vv.	15–19),	but	it	is	a	statement
of	a	general	truth	used	here	to	support	a	specific	application,	and	there	is	no	good	reason	to	restrict	its	application	to	occasions	of
church	discipline.	It	tells	us	that	Jesus	is	always	present	when	believers	gather	in	his	name.
12
Sometimes	Protestants	have	become	so	concerned	to	deny	the	Roman	Catholic	view	of	the	“real	presence”	of	Christ	in	the
elements	that	they	have	wrongly	denied	even	any	spiritual	presence.	Millard	Erickson	notes	the	humorous	situation	that	results:
“Out	of	a	zeal	to	avoid	the	conception	that	Jesus	is	present	in	some	sort	of	magical	way,	certain	Baptists	among	others	have
sometimes	gone	to	such	extremes	as	to	give	the	impression	that	the	one	place	where	Jesus	most	assuredly	is	not	to	be	found	is	the
Lord’s	supper.	This	is	what	one	Baptist	leader	termed	‘the	doctrine	of	the	real	absence’	of	Jesus	Christ”	(
Christian	Theology,	
p.
1123).
13
However,	some	in	the	Church	of	England	and	elsewhere	have	recently	begun	to	allow	young	children	to	participate	in	the
Lord’s	Supper,	reasoning	that	if	they	have	been	given	the	sign	of	baptism	it	is	wrong	to	deny	them	the	sign	of	the	Supper.
14
Moreover,	from	this	very	brief	mention	of	the	idea	of	one	body	we	may	rightly	suppose	that	it	was	not	a	new	idea,	but	that	Paul
had	taught	them	this	idea	while	staying	in	Corinth	for	two	years	when	he	founded	the	church	there.
15
Two	other	reasons	for	this	interpretation	are:	(1)	Paul	only	says	“not	discerning	the	body,”	and	he	does	not	say	“not	discerning
the	body	and	blood	of	the	Lord,”	which	he	more	likely	would	have	done	if	he	had	meant	“not	understanding	that	the	bread	and
cup	represent	the	body	and	blood	of	the	Lord.”	(2)	In	addition,	Paul	says,	“Let	a	man	examine	
himself”	
(and	this	would	no	doubt
include	examining	his	relationships	with	others	in	the	church),	but	Paul	does	not	say,	“Let	him	see	if	he	understands	what	the
bread	and	wine	stand	for.”
16
In	cases	of	church	discipline	or	in	cases	where	outward	behavior	gives	clear	evidence	that	a	person	is	straying	from	Christ,	the
leaders	of	the	church	may	wish	to	give	a	strong	and	clear	verbal	warning	against	participation	in	the	Lord’s	Supper,	so	that	the
erring	brother	or	sister	does	not	eat	and	drink	judgment	upon	himself	or	herself.	But	these	cases	should	be	rare,	and	we	must	also
avoid	the	mistake	of	some	churches	that	have	been	so	strict	in	administration	of	the	Lord’s	Supper	that	many	true	believers	have
been	kept	away	and	thus	the	unity	of	the	true	body	of	Christ	has	not	been	represented,	nor	have	believers	had	access	to	the
spiritual	blessings	that	should	rightly	be	theirs	in	Christ	in	participating	in	this	ordinance	and	thereby	obeying	their	Lord.
17
Of	course,	where	distribution	of	the	Lord’s	Supper	is	thought	to	be	a	priestly	function	(as	in	Anglican	churches),	churches	may
decide	that	another	approach	to	this	question	is	more	consistent	with	their	own	teachings.	Moreover,	in	a	church	where	only	the
leading	officers	of	the	church	have	assisted	in	serving	Communion	for	many	years,	the	church	may	decide	that	allowing	anyone
else	to	participate	in	distributing	the	elements	would	be	symbolizing	the	participation	of	those	people	in	the	leadership	and
governing	of	the	church,	and	they	may	wish	to	delay	making	a	change	at	least	until	some	clear	teaching	could	be	given.	Other
churches	may	feel	that	the	leadership	function	of	the	church	is	so	clearly	tied	up	with	the	distribution	of	the	elements	that	they
would	wish	to	continue	with	that	restriction	on	their	practice.
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	51
Worship
How	can	our	worship	fulfill	its	great	purpose	in	the	New
Testament	age?	What	does	it	mean	to	worship	“in	spirit	and	in
truth”?
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
The	term	
worship	
is	sometimes	applied	to	all	of	a	Christian’s	life,
and	it	is	rightly	said	that	everything	in	our	life	should	be	an	act	of
worship,	and	everything	the	church	does	should	be	considered
worship,	for	everything	we	do	should	glorify	God.	However,	in	this
chapter	I	am	not	using	the	word	in	that	broad	sense.	Rather,	I	am
using	
worship	
in	a	more	specific	sense	to	refer	to	the	music	and
words	that	Christians	direct	to	God	in	praise,	together	with	the	heart
attitudes	that	accompany	that	praise,	especially	when	Christians
assemble	together.	Since	the	chapters	in	this	part	of	the	book	deal
with	the	doctrine	of	the	church,	it	is	appropriate	in	this	chapter	to
focus	attention	on	the	worship	activities	of	the	assembled	church.
A.	Definition	and	Purpose	of	Worship
Worship	is	the	activity	of	glorifying	God	in	his	presence	with	our
voices	and	hearts.
In	this	definition	we	note	that	worship	is	an	act	of	glorifying	God.
Yet	all	aspects	of	our	lives	are	supposed	to	glorify	God,	so	this
definition	specifies	that	worship	is	something	we	do	especially
when	we	come	into	God’s	presence,	when	we	are	conscious	of
adoration	of	him	in	our	hearts,	and	when	we	praise	him	with	our
voices	and	speak	about	him	so	others	may	hear.	Paul	encourages	the
Christians	in	Colossae,	“Let	the	word	of	Christ	dwell	in	you	richly,
teach	and	admonish	one	another	
in	all	wisdom,	and	
sing	psalms
and	hymns	and	spiritual	songs	with	thankfulness	in	your	hearts	to
God”	
(Col.	3:16).
In	fact,	the	primary	reason	that	God	called	us	into	the	assembly	of
the	church	is	that	as	a	corporate	assembly	we	might	worship	him.
Edmund	Clowney	wisely	says:
God	had	demanded	of	Pharaoh,	“Let	my	people	go,	
so	that	they	may
worship	me	
in	the	desert”	(Ex.	7:16b).	.	.	.	God	brings	them	out	that	he
might	bring	them	in,	into	his	assembly,	to	the	great	company	of	those
who	stand	before	his	face.	.	.	.	
God’s	assembly	at	Sinai	is	therefore	the
immediate	goal	of	the	exodus.	God	brings	his	people	into	his	presence
that	they	might	hear	his	voice	and	worship	him.
But	Clowney	explains	that	the	worshiping	assembly	at	Mount	Sinai	could	not
remain	in	session	before	God	forever.	Therefore	God	established	other
festivals	in	which	the	whole	nation	would	assemble	before	him	three	times	a
year.	He	says	that	“Israelites	are	a	nation	formed	for	worship,	called	to
assemble	in	the	courts	of	the	Lord,	and	to	praise	together	the	name	of	the
Most	High.”
1
Yet	Clowney	points	out	that,	rather	than	worshiping	God	in	a
unified,	holy	assembly,	the	people	turned	aside	to	serving	idols	and,
rather	than	assembling	the	people	to	worship	before	him,	“in
judgment	God	scattered	the	people	in	exile.”
2
But	God	promised	that	his	purposes	for	his	people	would	yet	be
fulfilled,	that	there	would	someday	be	a	great	assembly	not	just	of
Israel	but	of	all	nations	before	his	throne	(Isa.	2:2–4;	25:6–8;	49:22;
66:18–21;	cf.	Jer.	48:47;	49:6,	39).	Clowney	notes	that	the
fulfillment	of	that	promise	began	only	when	Jesus	started	to	build
his	church:
Pentecost	was	the	time	of	the	firstfruits,	the	beginning	of	the	great
harvest	of	redemption.	Peter	preached	the	fulfillment	of	the	prophecy	of
Joel.	The	Spirit	had	been	poured	out,	
the	worship	of	the	new	age	had
been	ushered	in.	The	church,	the	assembly	for	worship,	was	praising
God.	.	.	.	
Now	the	ingathering	had	begun.
The	gospel	call	is	a	call	to	worship,	to	turn	from	sin	and	call	upon	the
name	of	the	Lord.	.	.	.	The	picture	of	the	church	as	a	worshiping
assembly	is	nowhere	more	powerfully	presented	than	by	the	author	of
the	Epistle	to	the	Hebrews	(12:18–29).	.	.	.	In	our	worship	in	Christ’s
church	we	approach	the	throne	of	God	the	judge	of	all.	
We	enter	the
festival	assembly	of	the	saints	and	the	angels.	
We	gather	in	spirit	with
the	spirits	of	just	men	made	perfect.	We	enter	the	assembly	of	glory
through	Christ	our	mediator,	and	the	blood	of	his	atoning	death.	.	.	.
Reverent	corporate	worship,	
then,	is	not	optional	for	the	church	of
God.	.	.	.	Rather,	it	
brings	to	expression	the	very	being	of	the	church.
It	manifests	on	earth	the	reality	of	the	heavenly	assembly.
3
Worship	is	therefore	a	
direct	
expression	of	our	ultimate	purpose	for	living,	“to
glorify	God	and	fully	to	enjoy	him	forever.”
4
	God	speaks	of	his	“sons”	and
“daughters”	as	“every	one	who	is	called	by	my	name,	whom	I	created	
for	my
glory,	
whom	I	formed	and	made”	(Isa.	43:6–7).	And	Paul	uses	similar
language	when	he	says	that	“we	who	first	hoped	in	Christ	have	been	destined
and	appointed	
to	live	for	the	praise	of	his	glory”	
(Eph.	1:12).	Scripture	is
clear	here	and	in	many	other	passages	that	God	created	us	to	glorify	him.
5
When	we	reflect	on	the	purpose	of	worship	it	also	reminds	us	that
God	is	worthy	of	worship	and	we	are	not.	
Even	the	apostle	John
had	to	be	told	that	he	should	not	worship	any	creature,	not	even	a
powerful	angel	in	heaven.	When	he	“fell	down	to	worship”	at	the
feet	of	the	angel	who	showed	him	marvelous	visions	in	heaven,	the
angel	said	to	him,	“You	must	not	do	that!	
.	.	.	Worship	God”	(Rev.
22:8–9).
This	is	because	God	is	jealous	for	his	own	honor	and	he	rightly
seeks	his	own	honor.	He	says,	“I	the	L
ORD
	your	God	am	a	jealous
God”	(Ex.	20:5)	and	“My	glory	I	will	not	give	to	another”	(Isa.
48:11).	Something	within	us	should	tremble	and	rejoice	at	this	fact.
We	should	tremble	with	fear	lest	we	rob	God’s	glory	from	him.	And
we	should	rejoice	that	it	is	
right	
that	God	seek	his	own	honor	and
be	jealous	for	his	own	honor,	for	he,	infinitely	more	than	anything
he	has	made,	is	
worthy	
of	honor.	The	twenty-four	elders	in	heaven
feel	this	reverence	and	joy,	for	they	fall	down	before	God’s	throne
and	cast	their	crowns	before	him	singing,	“You	are	worthy,	our
Lord	and	God,	to	receive	glory	and	honor	and	power,	for	you
created	all	things,	and	by	your	will	they	existed	and	were	created”
(Rev.	4:11).	When	we	feel	the	absolute	
rightness	
of	this	deep	within
ourselves	we	then	have	the	appropriate	heart	attitude	for	genuine
worship.
Because	God	is	worthy	of	worship	and	seeks	to	be	worshiped,
everything	in	our	worship	services	should	be	designed	and	carried
out	not	to	call	attention	to	ourselves	or	bring	glory	to	ourselves,	but
to	call	attention	to	God	and	to	cause	people	to	think	about	him.	It
would	be	appropriate	for	us	frequently	to	re-evaluate	the	various
elements	in	our	Sunday	services—the	preaching,	public	prayer,
leading	of	worship,	special	music,	celebration	of	the	Lord’s	Supper,
and	even	the	announcements	and	the	offering.	Are	they	really
bringing	glory	to	God	in	the	way	they	are	done?
6
	Peter	says	that
spiritual	gifts	are	to	be	used	in	such	a	way	that	“in	everything	God
may	be	glorified	through	Jesus	Christ”	(1	Peter	4:11).
B.	The	Results	of	Genuine	Worship
When	we	worship	God	in	the	sense	described	above,	truly	giving
him	glory	in	our	hearts	and	with	our	voices,	several	things	happen
as	a	result:
1.
	We	Delight	in	God.
	God	created	us	not	only	to	glorify	him	but	also	to
enjoy	him	and	delight	in	his	excellence.
7
	We	probably	experience	delight	in
God	more	fully	in	worship	than	in	any	other	activity	in	this	life.	David
confesses	that	the	“one	thing”	that	he	will	seek	for	above	all	else	is	“that	I
may	dwell	in	the	house	of	the	L
ORD
	all	the	days	of	my	life,	to	behold	the
beauty	of	the	L
ORD
,	and	to	inquire	in	his	temple”	(Ps.	27:4).	He	also	says,	“
In
your	presence	there	is	fulness	of	joy,	
in	your	right	hand	are	pleasures	for
evermore”	(Ps.	16:11).	Similarly,	Asaph	knows	that	God	alone	is	the
fulfillment	of	all	his	hopes	and	desires:	
“Whom	have	I	in	heaven	but	you?
And	there	is	nothing	upon	earth	that	I	desire	besides	you”	
(Ps.	73:25).	And
the	sons	of	Korah	say:
How	lovely	is	your	dwelling	place,
O	L
ORD
	of	hosts!
My	soul	longs,	yea,	faints
for	the	courts	of	the	L
ORD
;
My	heart	and	flesh	sing	for	joy
to	the	living	God	.	.	.
Blessed	are	those	who	dwell	in	your	house,
ever	singing	your	praise!	
.	.	.
For	a	day	in	your	courts	is	better
than	a	thousand	elsewhere.	(Ps.	84:1–2,	4,	10)
The	early	church	knew	such	joy	in	worship,	for	“day	by	day,	attending	the
temple	together	and	breaking	bread	in	their	homes,	they	partook	of	food	with
glad	and	generous	hearts,	
praising	God	
and	having	favor	with	all	the	people”
(Acts	2:46).	In	fact,	immediately	after	Jesus’	ascension	into	heaven,	the
disciples	“returned	to	Jerusalem	with	great	joy,	
and	were	continually	in	the
temple	blessing	God.”	
(Luke	24:52–53)
Of	course,	such	activity	of	continual	praise	cannot	last	forever	in
this	age,	for	living	in	a	fallen	world	requires	that	we	give	time	to
many	other	responsibilities	as	well.	But	extended	praise	does	give
us	a	foretaste	of	the	atmosphere	of	heaven,	where	the	four	living
creatures	“never	cease	to	sing,	‘Holy,	holy,	holy,	is	the	Lord	God
Almighty,	who	was	and	is	and	is	to	come!’	”	(Rev.	4:8),	and	the
other	heavenly	creatures	and	the	redeemed	who	have	died	join	in
that	heavenly	worship	and	extol	“the	Lamb	who	was	slain”	(Rev.
5:12).
2.	God	Delights	in	Us.
	What	does	God	do	when	we	worship	him?	The
amazing	truth	of	Scripture	is	that	as	the	creation	glorifies	God,	he	also	takes
delight	in	it.	When	God	first	made	the	universe,	he	looked	on	all	of	it	with
delight,	and	saw	that	“it	was	very	good”	(Gen.	1:31).	God	takes	special
delight	in	human	beings	whom	he	has	created	and	redeemed.	Isaiah	reminded
the	people	of	the	Lord,
You	shall	be	a	crown	of	beauty	in	the	hand	of	the	L
ORD
	.	.	.
you	shall	be	called	My	delight	is	in	her	.	.	.
for	the	L
ORD
	delights	in	you	.	.	.
as	the	bridegroom	rejoices	over	the	bride,
so	shall	your	God	rejoice	over	you.	(Isa.	62:3–5)
Zephaniah	echoes	the	same	theme	when	he	says,
The	L
ORD
,	your	God,	is	in	your	midst,
a	warrior	who	gives	victory;
he	will	rejoice	over	you	with	gladness,
he	will	renew	you	in	his	love;
he	will	exult	over	you	with	loud	singing.
(Zeph.	3:17)
This	truth	should	bring	great	encouragement	to	us,	for	as	we	love	God	and
praise	him	we	realize	that	we	are	bringing	joy	and	delight	to	his	heart.	And
the	deepest	joy	of	love	is	the	joy	of	bringing	delight	to	the	heart	of	the	one
you	love.
3.	We	Draw	Near	to	God	The	Amazing	Unseen	Reality	of	New	Covenant
Worship.
	In	the	old	covenant	believers	could	only	draw	near	to	God	in	a
limited	way	through	the	temple	ceremonies;	indeed,	most	of	the	people	of
Israel	could	not	enter	into	the	temple	itself,	but	had	to	remain	in	the	courtyard.
Even	the	priests	could	only	go	into	the	outer	court	of	the	temple,	the	“Holy
Place,”	when	it	was	their	appointed	duty.	But	into	the	inner	room	of	the
temple,	the	“Holy	of	Holies,”	no	one	could	go	except	the	high	priest,	and	he
only	once	a	year	(Heb.	9:1–7).
Now,	under	the	new	covenant,	believers	have	the	amazing	privilege
of	being	able	to	enter	directly	into	the	holy	of	holies	in	heaven
when	they	worship.	“We	have	confidence	to	enter	the	Most	Holy
Place	by	the	blood	of	Jesus”	(Heb.	10:19	NIV).
8
	Since	we	have	that
confidence	to	enter	into	the	very	presence	of	God,	the	author	of
Hebrews	encourages	us,	“
Let	us	draw	near	
with	a	true	heart	in	full
assurance	of	faith”	(Heb.	10:22).	Worship	in	the	New	Testament
church	is	not	simply	practice	for	some	later	heavenly	experience	of
genuine	worship,	nor	is	it	simply	pretending,	or	going	through	some
outward	activities.	It	is	
genuine	worship	
in	the	presence	of	God
himself,	and	when	we	worship	we	enter	before	his	throne.
This	reality	is	expressed	more	fully	by	the	author	of	Hebrews	in
chapter	12,	when	he	tells	Christians	that	they	have	not	come	to	a
place	like	the	earthly	Mount	Sinai	where	the	people	of	Israel
received	the	Ten	Commandments	from	God,	but	they	have	come	to
something	far	better,	the	heavenly	Jerusalem:
For	
you	have	not	come	
to	what	may	be	touched,	a	blazing	fire,	and
darkness,	and	gloom,	and	a	tempest,	and	the	sound	of	a	trumpet,	and	a
voice	whose	words	made	the	hearers	entreat	that	no	further	messages
be	spoken	to	them.	.	.	.	
But	you	have	come	to	Mount	Zion	and	to	the
city	of	the	living	God,	
the	heavenly	Jerusalem,	and	to	innumerable
angels	in	festal	gathering,	and	to	the	assembly	of	the	first-born	who
are	enrolled	in	heaven,	and	to	a	judge	who	is	God	of	all,	and	to	the
spirits	of	just	men	made	perfect,	and	to	Jesus,	the	mediator	of	a	new
covenant,	and	to	the	sprinkled	blood	that	speaks	more	graciously	than
the	blood	of	Abel.	(Heb.	12:18–24)
This	is	the	reality	of	new	covenant	worship:	it	actually	
is	
worship	in	the
presence	of	God,	though	we	do	not	now	see	him	with	our	physical	eyes,	nor
do	we	see	the	angels	gathered	around	his	throne	or	the	spirits	of	believers	who
have	gone	before	and	are	now	worshiping	in	God’s	presence.	But	it	is	all
there,	and	it	is	all	real,	more	real	and	more	permanent	than	the	physical
creation	that	we	see	around	us,	which	will	someday	be	destroyed	in	the	final
judgment.	And	if	we	believe	Scripture	to	be	true,	then	we	must	also	believe	it
to	be	actually	true	that	
we	ourselves	
come	to	that	place	and	join	
our	
voices
with	those	already	worshiping	in	heaven	whenever	we	come	to	God	in
worship.	Our	only	appropriate	response	is	this:	“Let	us	offer	to	God
acceptable	worship,	with	reverence	and	awe;	for	our	God	is	a	consuming	fire”
(Heb.	12:28–29).
4.	God	Draws	Near	to	Us.
	James	tells	us,	“Draw	near	to	God	and	he	will
draw	near	to	you”	(James	4:8).	This	has	been	the	pattern	of	God’s	dealings
with	his	people	throughout	the	Bible,	and	we	should	be	confident	that	it	will
be	true	also	today.
In	the	Old	Testament,	when	God’s	people	began	to	praise	him	at	the
dedication	of	the	temple,	he	descended	and	made	himself	known	in
their	midst:
when	the	song	was	raised,	
with	trumpets	and	cymbals	and	other
musical	instruments,	in	praise	to	the	L
ORD
,	“For	he	is	good,	for	his
steadfast	love	endures	for	ever,”	the	house,	
the	house	of	the	L
ORD
,	was
filled	with	a	cloud,	
so	that	the	priests	could	not	stand	to	minister
because	of	the	cloud;	
for	the	glory	of	the	L
ORD
	filled	the	house	of	God.
(2	Chron.	5:13–14)
Though	this	only	speaks	of	one	specific	incident,	it	does	not	seem	wrong	to
suppose	that	God	will	also	make	his	presence	known	at	other	times	among	his
people,	whenever	he	is	pleased	with	the	praise	they	offer	(even	if	he	does	not
come	in	the	form	of	a	visible	cloud).	David	says,	“Yet	you	are	holy,	enthroned
on	the	praises	of	Israel”	(Ps.	22:3).
5.	God	Ministers	to	Us.
	Although	the	primary	purpose	of	worship	is	to
glorify	God,	the	Scriptures	teach	that	in	worship	something	also	happens	to
us:	we	ourselves	are	built	up	or	edified.	To	some	extent	this	happens,	of
course,	when	we	learn	from	the	Bible	teachings	that	are	given	or	the	words	of
encouragement	that	others	speak	to	us—Paul	says,	“Let	all	things	be	done	for
edification”	(1	Cor.	14:26),	and	he	says	that	we	are	to	“teach	and	admonish
one	another	in	all	wisdom”	(Col.	3:16),	and	to	be	“addressing	one	another	in
psalms	and	hymns	and	spiritual	songs”	(Eph.	5:19;	cf.	Heb.	10:24–25).
But	in	addition	to	the	edification	that	comes	from	growth	in
understanding	the	Bible	and	hearing	words	of	encouragement	from
others,	there	is	another	kind	of	edification	that	occurs	in	worship:
when	we	worship	God	he	meets	with	us	and	directly	ministers	to
us,	strengthening	our	faith,	intensifying	our	awareness	of	his
presence,	and	granting	refreshment	to	our	spirits.	Peter	says	that	as
Christians	are	continually	coming	to	Christ	(in	worship	and	prayer
and	faith),	they	are	then	“
being	built	up	
as	a	spiritual	house	for	a
holy	priesthood,	to	offer	up	spiritual	sacrifices	acceptable	to	God
through	Jesus	Christ”	(1	Peter	2:5	NASB).	When	we	come	to
worship	we	come	into	God’s	presence	in	a	special	way,	and	we	may
expect	that	he	will	meet	us	there	and	minister	to	us:	as	we	“draw
near	to	the	throne	of	grace”	we	will	“receive	mercy	and	find	grace
to	help	in	time	of	need”	(Heb.	4:16).
9
	During	genuine	worship	we
will	often	experience	an	intensification	of	the	sanctifying	work	of
the	Holy	Spirit,	who	is	at	work	continually	changing	us	into	the
likeness	of	Christ	“from	one	degree	of	glory	to	another”	(2	Cor.
3:18).
10
6.	The	Lord’s	Enemies	Flee.
	When	the	people	of	Israel	began	to	worship,
God	at	times	would	fight	for	them	against	their	enemies.	For	example,	when
the	Moabites,	Edomites,	and	Syrians	came	against	Judah,	King	Jehoshaphat
sent	out	the	choir	praising	God	in	front	of	the	army:
He	appointed	those	who	were	to	sing	to	the	L
ORD
	and	praise	him	in
holy	array,	as	they	went	
before	the	army.	
.	.	.	And	
when	they	began	to
sing	and	praise,	
the	L
ORD
	set	an	ambush	against	the	men	of	Ammon,
Moab,	and	Mount	Seir,	who	had	come	against	Judah,	so	that	they
were	routed.	(2	Chron.	20:21–22)
Similarly,	when	God’s	people	offer	him	worship	today,	we	may	expect	that
the	Lord	will	battle	against	demonic	forces	that	oppose	the	gospel	and	cause
them	to	flee.
7.	Unbelievers	Know	They	Are	in	God’s	Presence.
	Though	Scripture	does
not	emphasize	evangelism	as	a	primary	purpose	when	the	church	meets	for
worship,	Paul	does	tell	the	Corinthians	to	take	thought	for	unbelievers	and
outsiders	who	come	to	their	services,	to	be	sure	that	the	Christians	speak	in
understandable	ways	(see	1	Cor.	14:23).	He	also	tells	them	that	if	the	gift	of
prophecy	is	functioning	properly,	unbelievers	will	from	time	to	time	have	the
secrets	of	their	heart	disclosed,	and	they	will	fall	on	their	face	and	
“worship
God	and	declare	that	God	is	really	among	you”	
(1	Cor.	14:25;	cf.	Acts	2:11).
But	evangelism	is	not	seen	as	a	primary	purpose	when	the	church	assembles
for	worship,	and	it	would	therefore	not	be	right	to	have	the	only	weekly
gathering	of	believers	designed	primarily	with	an	evangelistic	purpose.	Paul’s
concern	is	rather	that	visitors	understand	what	is	going	on	(and	not	think	that
Christians	are	“mad,”	1	Cor.	14:23),	and	that	they	recognize	that	“God	is
really	among	you”	(1	Cor.	14:25).
C.	The	Eternal	Value	of	Worship
Because	worship	glorifies	God	and	fulfills	the	purpose	for	which
God	created	us,	it	is	an	activity	of	eternal	significance	and	great
value.	When	Paul	cautions	the	Ephesians	not	to	waste	their	time	but
to	use	it	well,	he	puts	it	in	the	context	of	living	as	those	who	are
wise:	“Look	carefully	then	how	you	walk,	not	as	unwise	men	but	as
wise,	
making	the	most	of	the	time,	
because	the	days	are	evil”	(Eph.
5:15–16).
Paul	then	explains	what	it	is	to	be	wise	and	to	make	the	most	of	the
time:
Therefore	do	not	be	foolish,	but	understand	what	the	will	of	the	Lord
is.	And	do	not	get	drunk	with	wine,	for	that	is	debauchery;	but	be
filled	with	the	Spirit,	addressing	one	another	in	psalms	and	hymns	and
spiritual	songs,	
singing	and	making	melody	to	the	Lord	with	all	your
heart,	
always	and	for	everything	giving	thanks	in	the	name	of	our
Lord	Jesus	Christ	to	God	the	Father.	(Eph.	5:17–20)
Therefore	in	the	context	of	using	time	wisely	and	making	the	most	of	the
time,	Paul	includes	both	singing	of	spiritual	psalms	to	one	another	and	singing
to	the	Lord	with	our	hearts.
This	means	that	
worship	is	doing	the	will	of	God!	
Worship	is	the
result	of	understanding	“what	the	will	of	the	Lord	is.”	It	is	“making
the	most	of	the	time.”	Moreover,	because	God	is	eternal	and
omniscient,	the	praise	that	we	give	him	will	never	fade	from	his
consciousness	but	will	continue	to	bring	delight	to	his	heart	for	all
eternity	(cf.	Jude	25:	“To	the	only	God,	our	Savior	through	Jesus
Christ	our	Lord,	be	glory,	majesty,	dominion,	and	authority,	before
all	time	and	now	
and	for	ever”
).
The	fact	that	worship	is	an	activity	of	great	significance	and	eternal
value	is	also	evident	in	the	fact	that	it	is	the	primary	activity	carried
on	by	those	who	are	already	in	heaven	(cf.	Rev.	4:8–11;	5:11–14).
D.	How	Can	We	Enter	Into	Genuine	Worship?
Ultimately,	worship	is	a	spiritual	activity	and	it	must	be	empowered
by	the	Holy	Spirit	working	within	us.	This	means	that	we	must	pray
that	the	Holy	Spirit	will	enable	us	to	worship	rightly.
The	fact	that	genuine	worship	is	to	be	carried	on	in	the	unseen,
spiritual	realm	is	evident	in	Jesus’	words:
The	hour	is	coming,	and	now	is,	when	the	true	worshipers	will
worship	the	Father	
in	spirit	and	truth,	
for	such	the	Father	seeks	to
worship	him.	God	is	spirit,	and	those	who	worship	him	must	worship
in	spirit	and	truth.	(John	4:23–24)
To	worship	“in	spirit	and	truth”	is	best	understood	to	mean	not	“in
the	Holy	Spirit,”	but	rather	
“in	the	spiritual	realm,	in	the	realm	of
spiritual	activity.”
11
	This	means	that	true	worship	involves	not	only
our	physical	bodies	but	also	our	spirits,	the	immaterial	aspect	of	our
existence	that	primarily	acts	in	the	unseen	realm.	Mary	knew	she
was	worshiping	in	that	way,	for	she	exclaimed,	“
My	soul	
magnifies
the	Lord,	and	
my	spirit	
rejoices	in	God	my	Savior”	(Luke	1:46–47).
We	should	realize	also	that	God	continually	“seeks”	(John	4:23)
those	who	will	worship	him	in	the	spiritual	realm	and	therefore
those	whose	spirit	as	well	as	body	and	mind	is	worshiping	God.
Such	worship	is	not	optional	because	those	who	worship	God	“
must
worship	in	spirit	and	truth”	(v.	
24).	Unless	our	spirits	are
worshiping	God	we	are	not	truly	worshiping	him.
An	attitude	of	worship	comes	upon	us	when	we	begin	to	see	God	as
he	is	and	then	respond	to	his	presence.	Even	in	heaven	the	seraphim
who	behold	God’s	glory	cry	out,	“Holy,	holy,	holy	is	the	L
ORD
	of
hosts;	the	whole	earth	is	full	of	his	glory”	(Isa.	6:3).	When	the
disciples	saw	Jesus	walking	on	the	water,	and	then	saw	the	wind
cease	when	he	got	into	the	boat,	“those	in	the	boat	
worshiped	him,
saying,	‘Truly	you	are	the	Son	of	God’	”	(Matt.	14:33).	The	author
of	Hebrews	knows	that	when	we	come	into	the	presence	of	God
(Heb.	12:18–24),	the	proper	response	is	to	“offer	to	God	acceptable
worship,	with	reverence	and	awe;	for	our	God	is	a	consuming	fire”
(Heb.	12:28–29).	Therefore	genuine	worship	is	not	something	that
is	self-generated	or	that	can	be	worked	up	within	ourselves.	It	must
rather	be	the	outpouring	of	our	hearts	
in	response	
to	a	realization	of
who	God	is.
It	is	appropriate	to	ask	whether	there	is	much	genuine,	deep,
heartfelt	worship	in	our	churches.	In	many	evangelical	churches
people	do	not	truly	worship	God	in	their	hearts	until	the	last	hymn,
after	the	sermon	has	focused	their	attention	on	who	God	is	so	that
they	begin	to	rejoice	in	God	with	a	heart	full	of	praise.	But	then,
just	when	heartfelt	worship	has	begun,	the	service	abruptly	ends.	It
should	be	just	beginning!	If	genuine	worship	is	lacking	in	our
churches,	we	should	ask	how	we	can	bring	ourselves	to	experience
much	more	of	the	depth	and	richness	of	worship,	which	is	the
natural	response	of	the	believing	heart	to	a	clear	awareness	of
God’s	presence	and	character.
12
Is	there	anything	else	we	can	do	to	make	worship	more	effective?
We	must	remember	that	worship	is	a	spiritual	matter	(John	4:21–
24),	and	the	primary	solutions	will	therefore	be	spiritual	ones.
There	will	need	to	be	much	prayer	in	preparation	for	worship,
especially	on	the	part	of	those	in	leadership,	asking	that	God	will
bless	the	worship	times	and	make	himself	known	to	us.	Also,
congregations	will	need	teaching	about	the	spiritual	nature	of
worship	and	the	New	Testament	understanding	of	worship	in	God’s
presence	(see	Heb.	12:22–24).	In	addition,	Christians	need	to	be
encouraged	to	make	right	any	broken	interpersonal	relationships.
Paul	says	that	men	are	to	lift	holy	hands	“without	anger	or
quarreling”	(1	Tim.	2:8),	and	Jesus	reminds	us	that	we	are	first	to
“be	reconciled”	to	our	brother,	and	then	come	before	God’s	altar
and	offer	a	gift	(Matt.	5:24).	In	fact,	John	says	that	anyone	who
says,	“I	love	God”	but	hates	his	brother	“is	a	liar”	(1	John	4:20).
Husbands	particularly	need	to	make	sure	they	are	living
“considerately”	with	their	wives,	and	honoring	them,	in	order	that
their	prayers	“may	not	be	hindered”	(1	Peter	3:7).	And	the	entire
church	is	responsible	to	watch	“that	no	‘root	of	bitterness’	spring	up
and	cause	trouble,	and	by	it	the	many	become	defiled”	(Heb.	12:15)
—an	indication	that	sin	and	broken	relationships	among	a	few	can
spread	to	many	and	result	in	the	withholding	of	God’s	blessing
from	the	whole	congregation.
Moreover,	if	we	are	truly	to	draw	near	to	God	in	worship,	there
must	be	a	striving	for	personal	holiness	of	life.	The	author	of
Hebrews	reminds	believers	to	strive	for	“the	holiness	without	which
no	one	will	see	the	Lord”	(Heb.	12:14),	and	Jesus	says	that	it	is	the
“pure	in	heart”	who	shall	“see	God”	(Matt.	5:8)—a	promise	that	is
fulfilled	partially	in	this	life	and	completely	in	the	age	to	come.
Specifically	in	connection	with	prayer,	John	says,	“If	our	hearts	do
not	condemn	us,	we	have	confidence	before	God”	(1	John	3:21),
but	this	principle	certainly	applies	to	worship	as	well,	as	we	have
boldness	to	come	into	God’s	presence	to	offer	him	praise.	James
indicates	a	similar	concern	when,	immediately	after	saying,	“Draw
near	to	God	and	he	will	draw	near	to	you,”	he	adds,	“
Cleanse	
your
hands,	you	sinners,	and	
purify	
your	hearts,	you	men	of	double
mind”	(James	4:8).
13
Yet	the	physical	setting	and	the	structure	of	worship	services	do
matter,	for	there	are	indications	that	Jesus	thought	that	the
atmosphere	of	worship	was	very	important.	He	“entered	the	temple
of	God	and	drove	out	all	who	sold	and	bought	in	the	temple,	and	he
overturned	the	tables	of	the	money-changers	and	the	seats	of	those
who	sold	pigeons.”	In	explanation	of	this	action,	Jesus	insisted	that
the	temple	was	to	be	a	house	of	prayer,	for	he	said,	“It	is	written,
‘My	house	shall	be	called	a	house	of	prayer’;	but	you	make	it	a	den
of	robbers”	(Matt.	21:12–13).	He	also	told	believers,	“When	you
pray,	
go	into	your	room	and	shut	the	door	
and	pray	to	your	Father
who	is	in	secret”	(Matt.	6:6),	not	only	because	in	our	rooms	we	will
not	be	seen	by	men,	and	will	not	pray	so	as	to	receive	glory	from
men,	but	also	because	the	knowledge	that	others	are	watching	us	in
our	prayers	so	easily	distracts	our	attention,	so	that	then	we	pray	in
part	to	be	heard	by	others	or	at	least	so	as	not	to	offend	them.	This
does	not	mean	that	corporate	worship	and	prayer	are	forbidden	(for
both	are	very	evident	in	both	the	Old	Testament	and	New
Testament),	but	it	is	to	say	that	we	should	choose	a	
setting	
for
prayer	or	for	worship	that	avoids	distractions	as	much	as	possible.
This	is	consistent	with	the	fact	that	worship	is	to	be	done	in	an
orderly	way,	for	“God	is	not	a	God	of	confusion	but	of	peace”	(1
Cor.	14:33;	cf.	v.	
40).	The	atmosphere	and	mood	of	worship	are
important,	because	we	are	to	“offer	to	God	acceptable	worship,
with	reverence	and	awe”	(Heb.	12:28).	This	means	that	it	is
appropriate	to	come	together	as	a	church	in	a	setting	that	is
conducive	to	worship,	one	that	is	ordinarily	private	and	free	from
distractions,	giving	opportunity	to	focus	attention	on	the	Lord.
14
Singing	is	especially	important	to	worship	in	both	Old	and	New
Testaments.	In	our	day	there	has	been	quite	a	change	in	both	the
standard	English	that	is	spoken	by	people	and	the	musical	forms
that	people	are	familiar	with,	and	churches	need	to	talk	and	plan
openly	and	honestly	in	order	to	find	a	mix	of	songs	that	can	be	sung
well	by	the	whole	congregation,	and	that	people	can	genuinely
identify	with	as	a	vehicle	for	expressing	their	praise	to	God.	Songs
that	address	God	directly	in	the	second	person	(that	is,	speaking	to
God	as	“you”	rather	than	speaking	about	him	as	“he”)	will	often	be
especially	effective	as	worship	songs—though	the	Psalms	show	that
both	kinds	of	songs	are	pleasing	to	God.
In	addition,	it	is	important	to	allow	enough	time	for	the	various
aspects	of	corporate	worship.	Genuine	prayer	can	certainly	take
time	(see	Luke	6:12;	22:39–46;	Acts	12:12;	13:2).	Solid	Bible
teaching	can	often	take	a	long	time	as	well	(Matt.	15:32;	Acts	20:7–
11).	Moreover,	genuine,	heartfelt	worship	and	praise	will	also	take
quite	a	bit	of	time	if	it	is	to	be	effective.
This	is	true	in	part	because	different	aspects	of	a	worship	service
require	different	attitudes	and	states	of	mind.	Listening	to	Bible
teaching	requires	attentiveness	to	the	text	and	the	teacher.	Praise
requires	joy	and	a	focus	on	the	Lord	and	his	excellence.	Prayers	of
petition	require	a	focus	on	needs	and	a	deep	concern	for	others.
Times	when	offerings	are	given	require	a	focus	on	sacrificing
ourselves	to	the	Lord	as	well	as	giving	to	him	from	our	means	and
trusting	him	to	provide	for	our	needs.	The	Lord’s	Supper	requires	a
time	of	reflection,	self-examination,	and	perhaps	repentance,	along
with	thanksgiving.	But	we	cannot	have	all	of	these	attitudes	at	once,
for	we	are	finite.	Different	attitudes	of	mind	require	time	to	attain
and	dwell	in.	For	that	reason	it	is	impossible	to	fulfill	all	the	tasks
necessary	for	an	assembled	congregation	simply	in	one	hour	on
Sunday	morning,	and	it	is	harmful	even	to	try.	Those	who	do	try	to
do	everything	crowd	too	much	into	a	brief	time	and	fail	to	do
anything	well.
15
	If	congregations	are	to	fulfill	the	various	purposes
for	which	God	wants	them	to	assemble	together,	and	especially	to
have	extended	times	of	reverent	worship,	they	will	probably	need	to
find	creative	solutions	that	enable	them	to	meet	for	longer	periods
of	time,	and	omit	or	reschedule	some	activities	that	have	become
habitual	or	traditional	on	Sunday	mornings	but	are	really	not
necessary.
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
Do	you	experience	genuine,	fulfilling	worship	in	your	church	each
Sunday?	How	much	time	is	specifically	allotted	to	worship	(narrowly
defined)—that	is,	to	times	of	praise	and	thanksgiving	to	God?	Would	you
like	the	time	to	be	longer?	What	aspects	of	the	worship	time	do	you	find
most	meaningful?	Which	aspects	are	least	meaningful?	How	could	your
church	take	steps	to	strengthen	and	deepen	its	experience	of	worship	(if
that	is	needed)?
2
.	
Have	you	ever	felt	a	strong	sense	of	the	presence	of	God	in	corporate
worship?	When	was	this?	Can	you	describe	it?	Do	you	know	what
factors	contributed	to	this	sense?
3
.	
During	times	of	worship,	can	you	describe	the	emotions	that	are	most
prominent	in	your	consciousness?	Is	this	experience	similar	to	other
experiences	in	daily	life,	or	are	these	feelings	unique	to	times	of
worship?	Have	you	ever	sensed	that	God	is	ministering	to	you	while	you
are	worshiping	him?	What	made	you	aware	of	that?
4
.	
Do	you	think	there	is	enough	genuine	worship	in	a	typical	week	in	your
life?	If	not,	what	are	the	hindrances	to	such	worship?
5
.	
How	do	you	feel	about	the	fact	that	God	is	jealous	for	his	own	honor	and
seeks	his	honor?	Can	you	think	of	anything	in	the	universe	that	would	be
more	right	than	for	God	to	seek	his	own	honor?	Can	you	think	of
anything	other	than	worship	of	God	that	would	make	you	feel	more
deeply	that	you	are	doing	the	thing	for	which	you	were	created?
SPECIAL	TERMS
worship
	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the
bibliography	to	chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be
found	in	
Appendix	4
.)
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92			Litton	(no	explicit	treatment)
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1875–76			Pope,	3:287–94
1940			Wiley,	3:138–50
1960			Purkiser,	415–20
1983			Carter,	2:614–15
3.			Baptist
1767			Gill,	2:341–52,	558,	682–729
1987–94			Lewis/Demarest
4.			Dispensational
1986			Ryrie,	428–30
5.			Lutheran
	(no	explicit	treatment)
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1724–58			Edwards,	2:913–18
1937–66			Murray,	
CW,	
1:165–68
7.			Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988–92			Williams
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
(no	explicit	treatment)
Other	Works
Allen,	Ronald,	and	Borror,	Gordon.	
Worship:	Rediscovering	the	Missing
Jewel.	
Portland,	Ore.:	Multnomah,	1982.
Carson,	Herbert	M.	
Hallelujah!	Christian	Worship.	
Welwyn,
Hertfordshire,	England:	Evangelical	Press,	1980.
Engle,	Paul	E.	
Discovering	the	Fullness	of	Worship.	
Philadelphia:	Great
Commission,	1978.
Harrison,	E.	F.	“Worship.”	In	
EDT.	
pp.	1192–1193.
Kraueter,	Tom.	
Keys	to	Becoming	an	Effective	Worship	Leader.	
Available
from	Psalmist	Resources,	9820	E.	Watson	Rd.,	St.	Louis,	MO	63126.
1991.
Manson,	P.	D.	“Worship.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	730–32.
Martin,	Ralph	P.	
Worship	in	the	Early	Church.	
Westwood,	N.J.:	Revell,
1964.
_____.	
The	Worship	of	God.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1982.
Moule,	C.	F.	D.	
Worship	in	the	New	Testament.	
Richmond,	Va.:	John
Knox,	1961.
Peterson,	David.	
Engaging	With	God:	A	Biblical	Theology	of	Worship.
Leicester:	Inter-Varsity	Press,	and	Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1992.
Rayburn,	Robert	G.	
O	Come,	Let	Us	Worship.	
Grand	Rapids:	Baker,
1980.
Taylor,	Jack	R.	
The	Hallelujah	Factor.	
Nashville,	Tenn.:	Broadman,
1983.
Wainwright,	Geoffrey.	
Doxology:	The	Praise	of	God	in	Worship,
Doctrine,	and	Life.	
New	York:	Oxford	University	Press,	1980.
Webber,	Robert	E.	
Worship	Old	and	New.	
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,
1982.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
Revelation	4:
11:
You	are	worthy,	our	Lord	and	God,
to	receive	glory	and	honor	and	power,
for	you	created	all	things,
and	by	your	will	they	existed	and	were	created.
HYMN
“Thou	Art	Worthy”
Thou	art	worthy,	thou	art	worthy,	thou	art	worthy,	O	Lord.
To	receive	glory,	glory	and	honor,	glory	and	honor	and	power.
For	thou	hast	created,	hast	all	things	created,	thou	hast	created	all
things;
And	for	thy	pleasure,	they	are	created,	thou	art	worthy,	O	Lord.
AUTHOR:	PAULINE	MICHAEL	MILLS	(FROM	REV.	4:11)	
COPYRIGHT	©	FRED	BOCK	MUSIC,	1963,	1975.	
USED	BY	PERMISSION.
NOTES
1
Edmund	Clowney,	“The	Biblical	Theology	of	the	Church”	in	
The	Church	in	the	Bible	and	the	World,	
ed.	D.	A.	Carson,	pp.	17–
19.
2
Ibid.
3
Ibid.,	pp.	20–22.
4
This	familiar	phrase	has	been	widely	used	in	Christian	teachings.	It	is	found	in	the	
Westminster	Larger	Catechism,	
Question	One:
“
What	is	the	chief	and	highest	end	of	man?	Answer:	
Man’s	chief	and	highest	end	is	to	glorify	God,	and	fully	to	enjoy	him
forever.”
5
See	the	additional	discussion	in	
chapter	21
,	on	the	fact	that	God	created	us	for	his	own	glory.
6
Few	things	destroy	an	atmosphere	of	worship	more	quickly	than	a	soloist	or	choir	who	enjoy	drawing	attention	to	themselves,	or
a	preacher	who	parades	his	own	intelligence	or	skill	in	speaking.	“God	opposes	the	proud,	but	gives	grace	to	the	humble”	(1	Peter
5:5).
7
See	the	excellent	discussion	of	living	all	of	life	by	delighting	in	God	in	John	Piper,	
Desiring	God	
(Portland,	Ore.:	Multnomah,
1986);	also	his	analysis	of	God’s	delight	in	himself	and	what	reflects	his	excellence,	in	John	Piper,	
The	Pleasures	of	God
(Portland,	Ore.:	Multnomah,	1991).
8
The	Greek	text	literally	says	that	we	“have	confidence	into	the	entrance	of	
the	holy	places,”	
because	the	plural	
tōn	hagiōn	
is	used
elsewhere	in	Hebrews	to	refer	to	the	holy	place	and	the	holy	of	holies	together	as	“the	holy	places”	(Heb.	8:2;	9:8,	25;	13:11).	The
RSV	regularly	renders	this	expression	by	“the	sanctuary,”	but	that	translation	obscures	the	fact	that	it	is	referring	both	to	the	holy
place	and	to	the	holy	of	holies	(the	NASB	renders	these	plurals	as	singulars,	an	uncommon	departure	from	its	ordinary	tendency
to	translate	more	literally).
9
See	also	Ps.	34:4–5,	8;	37:4.
10
Somehow,	the	more	we	see	of	God	the	more	we	become	like	him.	That	is	evident	especially	when	we	enter	the	age	to	come,	for
John	says,	“When	he	appears	we	shall	be	like	him,	
for	we	shall	see	him	as	he	is”	
(1	John	3:2).	But	it	is	also	true	to	some	degree	in
this	life,	as	we	run	the	race	that	is	set	before	us,	“looking	to	Jesus	the	pioneer	and	perfecter	of	our	faith”	(Heb.	12:2).	At	times	the
presence	of	the	Lord	and	the	accompanying	working	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in	our	hearts	will	be	so	evident	that	we	will	recognize	that
God	is	doing	something	within	us—as	the	disciples	certainly	did	when	Jesus	walked	with	them	on	the	Emmaus	road,	for	later	they
said,	“Did	not	our	hearts	burn	within	us	while	he	talked	to	us	on	the	road,	while	he	opened	to	us	the	scriptures?”	(Luke	24:32).
11
This	is	because	(1)	the	discussion	that	Jesus	is	having	with	the	woman	at	the	well	in	this	context	is	a	discussion	about	the
location	
of	worship	(see	vv.	20–21)—should	it	be	in	Samaria	or	in	Jerusalem?	Jesus’	answer	would	fit	this	inquiry	much	better	if
he	were	speaking	about	the	spiritual	realm	in	which	we	worship,	as	opposed	to	the	physical	location	of	Jerusalem	or	Samaria.	(2)
In	the	Greek	text	the	word	
en	
(“in”)	of	the	phrase	“in	spirit	and	truth”	corresponds	to	the	same	word	(
en
)	used	in	v.	
21	to	speak	of
(literally)	“in	this	mountain”	and	“in	Jerusalem.”	Once	again	the	contrast	is	in	terms	of	location	“in”	which	one	is	to	worship.	(3)
The	word	
truth	
refers	to	a	quality	of	worship,	not	to	a	person.	The	parallel	would	be	more	understandable	if	“in	spirit”	likewise
referred	not	to	a	person	but	to	some	quality	of	the	worship,	such	as	the	realm	in	which	it	is	to	be	done.
12
Of	course,	God’s	character	can	be	revealed	not	only	through	the	preaching	of	the	Word,	but	also	through	the	words	of	the
hymns	that	are	sung,	through	prayer,	and	through	the	reading	of	Bible	passages	even	without	comment.
13
Other	Scripture	passages	indicate	a	connection	between	personal	holiness	and	worship	of	God:	see	Prov.	15:8:	“The	sacrifice	of
the	wicked	is	an	abomination	to	the	L
ORD
,	but	the	prayer	of	the	upright	is	his	delight.”	See	also	Prov.	15:29;	28:9;	also	Ps.
34:15–18;	66:18.
14
The	practical	considerations	discussed	in	this	section	can	be	applied	to	many	different	forms	of	worship,	but	I	have	not
discussed	the	actual	forms	that	worship	will	take.	Those	will	vary	widely,	from	the	extensive	structured	liturgies	of	Episcopalian
services	to	the	unstructured	spontaneity	of	charismatic	services.	Since	Scripture	does	not	prescribe	any	one	form,	the	major
principle	to	use	is	Paul’s	directive,	“Let	all	things	be	done	for	edification”	(1	Cor.	14:26).	Evangelicals	need	to	be	cautious,
however,	that	they	do	not	too	quickly	dismiss	unfamiliar	forms	of	worship:	people	in	liturgical	churches	should	realize	that
spontaneity	can	be	managed	in	an	orderly	way,	and	people	in	charismatic	groups	should	realize	that	edification	and	genuine
worship	can	occur	within	a	detailed	structure.	(Regarding	the	unison	reading	of	a	liturgy,	if	Christians	can	worship	and	pray	by
singing	
words	in	unison,	there	is	nothing	to	prevent	them	from	genuinely	worshiping	and	praying	by	
reading	
words	aloud	in
unison!)	Yet	any	one	form	that	is	used	excessively	can	become	a	meaningless	routine	for	most	participants.
15
Unfortunately,	pastors	who	try	to	officiate	at	a	service	into	which	too	many	activities	are	crowded	begin	to	resemble	the	master
of	ceremonies	at	a	three-ring	circus	who	shouts,	“Look	here!	Look	there!”	at	one	act	after	another.	In	a	similar	way	the	pastor
exhorts,	“Praise	God!	Be	generous!	Think	about	Scripture!	Pray!	Shake	hands	with	your	neighbor!	Say	hello	to	your	friends!
Examine	yourselves!	Repent	of	your	sins!	Sing	to	the	Lord!	Amen?	Amen!”	In	a	situation	like	this	people’s	emotions	are	jerked
back	and	forth	so	quickly	that	they	are	unable	to	respond	as	whole	persons,	and	the	result	is	that	they	withdraw	emotionally	and
do	not	respond	from	the	heart.	They	will	leave	the	service	feeling	frustrated	and	disappointed	because	the	need	of	their	hearts	to
experience	genuine	worship,	prayer,	and	learning	from	Scripture	has	not	been	satisfied.
For	most	human	beings,	focused	attention	is	slowly	attained	and	easily	lost.	Because	of	this,	I	personally	find	that	a	worship
leader	who	talks	to	the	congregation	between	songs	usually	distracts	my	attention	away	from	the	Lord	and	onto	himself,	and	my
attitude	of	worship	is	greatly	diminished.
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	52
Gifts	of	the	Holy	Spirit:	
(Part	1)	
General	Questions
What	are	spiritual	gifts?	How	many	are	there?	Have	some	gifts
ceased?	Seeking	and	using	spiritual	gifts.
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
A.	Questions	Regarding	Spiritual	Gifts	in	General
In	previous	generations,	systematic	theologies	did	not	have	chapters
on	spiritual	gifts,	for	there	were	few	questions	regarding	the	nature
and	use	of	spiritual	gifts	in	the	church.	But	the	twentieth	century
has	seen	a	remarkable	increase	in	interest	in	spiritual	gifts,
primarily	because	of	the	influence	of	the	Pentecostal	and
charismatic	movements	within	the	church.	In	this	chapter	we	will
first	look	at	some	general	questions	regarding	spiritual	gifts,	then
examine	the	specific	question	of	whether	some	(miraculous)	gifts
have	ceased.	In	the	next	chapter	we	shall	analyze	the	New
Testament	teaching	about	particular	gifts.
Before	beginning	the	discussion,	however,	we	may	define	spiritual
gifts	as	follows:	
A	spiritual	gift	is	any	ability	that	is	empowered	by
the	Holy	Spirit	and	used	in	any	ministry	of	the	church.	
This	broad
definition	includes	both	gifts	that	are	related	to	natural	abilities
(such	as	teaching,	showing	mercy,	or	administration)	and	gifts	that
seem	to	be	more	“miraculous”	and	less	related	to	natural	abilities
(such	as	prophecy,	healing,	or	distinguishing	between	spirits).	The
reason	for	this	is	that	when	Paul	lists	spiritual	gifts	(in	Rom.	12:6–
8;	1	Cor.	7:7;	12:8–10,	28;	and	Eph.	4:11)	he	includes	both	kinds	of
gifts.	Yet	not	every	natural	ability	that	people	have	is	included	here,
because	Paul	is	clear	that	all	spiritual	gifts	must	be	empowered	“by
one	and	the	same	Spirit”	(1	Cor.	12:11),	that	they	are	given	“for	the
common	good”	(1	Cor.	12:7),	and	that	they	are	all	to	be	used	for
“edification”	(1	Cor.	14:26),	or	for	building	up	the	church.
1
1.
	Spiritual	Gifts	in	the	History	of	Redemption.
	Certainly	the	Holy	Spirit
was	at	work	in	the	Old	Testament,	bringing	people	to	faith	and	working	in
remarkable	ways	in	a	few	individuals	such	as	Moses	or	Samuel,	David	or
Elijah.	But	in	general	there	was	
less	powerful	
activity	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in	the
lives	of	most	believers.	Effective	evangelism	of	the	nations	had	been
diminished,	casting	out	of	demons
2
	was	unknown,	miraculous	healing	was
uncommon	(though	it	did	happen,	especially	in	the	ministries	of	Elijah	and
Elisha),	prophecy	was	restricted	to	a	few	prophets	or	small	bands	of	prophets,
and	“resurrection	power”	over	sin	in	the	sense	of	Romans	6:1–14	and
Philippians	3:10	was	rarely	experienced.
But	at	several	points	the	Old	Testament	looks	forward	to	a	time
when	there	would	be	a	greater	empowering	of	the	Holy	Spirit	that
would	reach	to	all	of	God’s	people.	Moses	said,	“Would	that	all	the
L
ORD
’s	people	were	prophets,	that	the	L
ORD
	would	put	his	spirit
upon	them!”	(Num.	11:29).	And	the	L
ORD
	prophesied	through	Joel:
And	it	shall	come	to	pass	afterward,
that	I	will	pour	out	my	spirit	on	all	flesh;
your	sons	and	your	daughters	shall	prophesy,
your	old	men	shall	dream	dreams,
and	your	young	men	shall	see	visions.
Even	upon	the	menservants	and	maidservants
in	those	days,	I	will	pour	out	my	spirit.	(Joel	2:28–29)
John	the	Baptist	heightens	people’s	expectations	of	the	fulfillment	of	Joel’s
prophecy	when	he	announces	that	someone	is	coming	after	him	who	“will
baptize	you	with	the	Holy	Spirit	and	with	fire”	(Matt.	3:11;	cf.	Mark	1:8;
Luke	3:16;	John	1:33;	Acts	1:5).
When	Jesus	begins	his	ministry	he	comes	bringing	the	fullness	and
power	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in	his	person.	Luke	writes,	“And	Jesus
returned	
in	the	power	of	the	Spirit	
into	Galilee”	(Luke	4:14).	The
result	is	that	he	teaches	with	great	power	(Luke	4:15–22)	and	he
heals	and	casts	out	demons	from	all	who	are	oppressed	(Luke	4:31–
41).	Clearly,	Jesus	has	come	in	the	
greater	new	covenant	power	of
the	Holy	Spirit,	
and	he	has	come	to	
conquer	
Satan’s	kingdom.
In	fact,	he	says	that	the	power	of	the	Holy	Spirit	at	work	in	him
enabling	him	to	cast	out	demons	is	an	indication	that	the	kingdom
of	God	has	come	in	power:	“If	it	is	by	the	Spirit	of	God	that	I	cast
out	demons,	then	the	kingdom	of	God	has	come	upon	you”	(Matt.
12:28).	Looking	back	on	Jesus’	life	and	ministry,	John	tells	us,	“The
reason	the	Son	of	God	appeared	was	to	destroy	the	works	of	the
devil”	(1	John	3:8).
But	this	new	covenant	power	of	the	Holy	Spirit	is	not	limited	to	the
ministry	of	Jesus	alone.	He	sent	his	disciples	out,	saying,	“The
kingdom	of	heaven	is	at	hand”	and	told	them,	“Heal	the	sick,	raise
the	dead,	cleanse	lepers,	cast	out	demons”	(Matt.	10:7–8).
Nevertheless,	this	new	covenant	power	of	the	Holy	Spirit	is	not	yet
distributed	to	all	who	believed	in	Jesus	or	followed	him,	but	only	to
his	twelve	disciples	or	to	the	seventy	disciples	(Luke	10:1–12).
The	pouring	out	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in	new	covenant	fullness	and
power	in	the	church	occurred	at	Pentecost.	Before	Jesus	ascended
into	heaven	he	commanded	his	apostles	“not	to	depart	from
Jerusalem,	but	to	wait	for	the	promise	of	the	Father,”	and	the
content	of	that	promise	was,	“Before	many	days	you	shall	be
baptized	with	the	Holy	Spirit”	(Acts	1:4–5).	He	promised	them,
“You	shall	receive	power	when	the	Holy	Spirit	has	come	upon	you”
(Acts	1:8).	When	the	Spirit	was	poured	out	on	the	church	at
Pentecost	Peter	recognized	that	Joel’s	prophecy	was	being	fulfilled,
for	he	said,	“this	is	what	was	spoken	by	the	prophet	Joel”	(Acts
2:16),	and	he	then	quoted	Joel’s	prophecy	(vv.	17–21).	Peter
recognized	that	the	new	covenant	empowering	of	the	Holy	Spirit
had	come	to	God’s	people	and	the	new	covenant	age	had	begun	as	a
direct	result	of	the	activity	of	Jesus	in	heaven,	for	Peter	said,
This	Jesus	God	raised	up,	and	of	that	we	are	all	witnesses.	Being
therefore	exalted	at	the	right	hand	of	God,	and	
having	received	from
the	Father	the	promise	of	the	Holy	Spirit,	he	has	poured	out	this
which	you	see	and	hear.	
(Acts	2:32–33)
Against	the	background	of	Jesus’	ministry	and	the	earlier	ministry
of	the	disciples	with	Jesus,	the	disciples	present	at	Pentecost	would
rightly	have	expected	that	powerful	evangelistic	preaching,
deliverance	from	demonic	oppression,	physical	healing,	and
perhaps	also	prophecy,	dreams,	and	visions	would	all	begin	and
continue	among	those	who	believe	in	Christ,	and	that	these	things
would	be	
characteristic	
of	the	new	covenant	age	that	began	at
Pentecost.	A	further	characteristic	of	this	outpouring	of	the	Holy
Spirit	was	a	widespread	distribution	of	spiritual	gifts	to	all	people—
sons	and	daughters,	young	men	and	old	men,	menservants	and
maidservants,	in	the	words	of	Joel—
all	
received	a	new	covenant
empowering	of	the	Holy	Spirit,	and	it	would	also	be	expected	that
all	would	receive	gifts	of	the	Holy	Spirit	then	as	well.
3
	In	fact,	that
is	what	happened	in	the	early	church	(see	1	Cor.	12–14;	Gal.	3:5;
James	5:14–15).	As	B.	B.	Warfield	said:
We	are	justified	in	considering	it	characteristic	of	the	Apostolic
churches	that	such	miraculous	gifts	should	be	displayed	in	them.	The
exception	would	be,	not	a	church	with,	but	a	church	without,	such
gifts.	.	.	.	
The	Apostolic	Church	was	characteristically	a	miracle-
working	church.
4
(This	is	true	regardless	of	what	view	one	takes	about	the	continuation	of
miraculous	gifts	after	the	time	of	the	apostles.)
2.	The	Purpose	of	Spiritual	Gifts	in	the	New	Testament	Age.
	Spiritual	gifts
are	given	
to	equip	the	church	to	carry	out	its	ministry	until	Christ	returns.
Paul	tells	the	Corinthians,	
“You	are	not	lacking	in	any	spiritual	gift,	as	you
wait	for	the	revealing	of	our	Lord	Jesus	Christ”	
(1	Cor.	1:7).	Here	he
connects	the	possession	of	spiritual	gifts	and	their	situation	in	the	history	of
redemption	(waiting	for	Christ’s	return),	suggesting	that	gifts	are	given	to	the
church	for	the	period	between	Christ’s	ascension	and	his	return.	Similarly,
Paul	looks	forward	to	the	time	of	Christ’s	return	and	says,	“When	the	perfect
comes,	the	imperfect	will	pass	away”	(1	Cor.	13:10),	indicating	also	that	these
“imperfect”	gifts	(mentioned	in	vv.	8–9)	will	be	in	operation	until	Christ
returns,	when	they	will	be	superseded	by	something	far	greater.
5
	Indeed,	the
pouring	out	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in	“power”	at	Pentecost	(Acts	1:8)	was	to	equip
the	church	to	preach	the	gospel	(Acts	1:8)—something	that	will	continue	until
Christ	returns.	And	Paul	reminds	believers	that	in	their	use	of	spiritual	gifts
they	are	to	“strive	to	excel	in	
building	up	
the	church”	(1Cor.	14:12).	Finally,
in	writing	to	the	Ephesians,	Paul	specifies	that	when	Christ	ascended	into
heaven	he	gave	gifts	“to	
equip	
the	saints	for	the	work	of	ministry,	for	building
up	the	body	of	Christ”	(Eph.	4:12).
But	spiritual	gifts	not	only	equip	the	church	for	the	time	until	Christ
returns,	they	also	
give	a	foretaste	of	the	age	to	come.	
Paul	reminds
the	Corinthians	that	they	were	
“enriched”	
in	all	their	speech	and	all
their	knowledge,	and	that	the	result	of	this	enriching	was	that	they
were	“not	lacking	in	any	spiritual	gift”	(1	Cor.	1:5,	7).	Of	course,
this	
enrichment	
in	their	speech	and	knowledge	did	not	give	them
the	perfect	speech	or	the	perfect	knowledge	that	would	be	theirs	in
heaven,	but	only	a	foretaste	or	down	payment	of	that	heavenly
perfection.	Similarly,	Paul	reminds	the	Corinthians	that	spiritual
gifts	are	“imperfect”	but	when	the	“perfect”	way	of	knowing	comes
at	the	Lord’s	return,	then	these	gifts	will	pass	away	(1	Cor.	13:10).
Just	as	the	Holy	Spirit	himself	is	in	this	age	a	“down	payment”	(2
Cor.	1:22	NASB	mg.;	cf.	2	Cor.	5:5;	Eph.	1:14)	of	the	fuller	work
of	the	Holy	Spirit	within	us	in	the	age	to	come,	so	the	gifts	the	Holy
Spirit	gives	us	are	
partial	foretastes	
of	the	fuller	working	of	the
Holy	Spirit	that	will	be	ours	in	the	age	to	come.
In	this	way,	gifts	of	insight	and	discernment	prefigure	the	much
greater	discernment	we	will	have	when	Christ	returns.	Gifts	of
knowledge	and	wisdom	prefigure	the	much	greater	wisdom	that
will	be	ours	when	we	“know	as	we	are	known”	(cf.	1	Cor.	13:12).
Gifts	of	healing	give	a	foretaste	of	the	perfect	health	that	will	be
ours	when	Christ	grants	to	us	resurrection	bodies.	Similar	parallels
could	be	found	with	all	the	New	Testament	gifts.	Even	the	diversity
of	gifts	should	lead	to	greater	unity	and	interdependence	in	the
church	(see	1	Cor.	12:12–13,	24–25;	Eph.	4:13),	and	this	diversity
in	unity	will	itself	be	a	foretaste	of	the	unity	that	believers	will	have
in	heaven.
3.	How	Many	Gifts	Are	There?
	The	New	Testament	epistles	list	specific
spiritual	gifts	in	six	different	passages.	Consider	the	table	on	the	next	page.
What	is	obvious	is	that	these	lists	are	all	quite	different.	No	one	list
has	all	these	gifts,	and	no	gift	except	prophecy	is	mentioned	on	all
the	lists	(prophecy	is	not	mentioned	in	1	Cor.	7:7,	where	only	the
subject	of	marriage	and	celibacy	is	under	discussion,	but	it	is
certainly	included	in	the	“whoever	speaks”	of	1	Peter	4:11).	In	fact,
1	Corinthians	7:7	mentions	two	gifts	that	are	not	on	any	other	list:
in	the	context	of	speaking	of	marriage	and	celibacy,	Paul	says,
“Each	has	his	own	special	
gift
6
	from	God,	one	of	one	kind	and	one
of	another.”
These	facts	indicate	that	Paul	was	not	attempting	to	construct
exhaustive	lists	of	gifts	when	he	specified	the	ones	he	did.	Although
there	is	sometimes	an	indication	of	some	order	(he	puts	apostles
first,	prophets	second,	and	teachers	third,	but	tongues	last	in	1	Cor.
12:28),	it	seems	that	in	general	Paul	was	almost	randomly	listing	a
series	of	different	examples	of	gifts	as	they	came	to	mind.
1
	Corinthians	12:28
	
Ephesians	4:11
7
	
	
	
1
	Peter	4:11
	1.	apostle
8
	2.	prophet
	
(1)	apostle
(2)	prophet
	
whoever	speaks	(covering	several	gifts)
	3.	teacher
	
14.	evangelist
	
	
	
whoever	renders	service
	4.	miracles
	
15.	pastor-teacher
	
	
	
(covering	several	gifts)
	5.	kinds	of	healings
	
	
	
	
	
	
	6.	helps
	
Romans	12:6-8
	
	
	
	
	7.	administration
	
(2)	prophecy
	
	
	
	
	8.	tongues
	
16.	serving
	
	
	
	
	
	
(3)	teaching
	
	
	
	
1
	Corinthians	12:8-10
	
17.	encouraging
	
	
	
	
	9.	word	of	wisdom
	
18.	contributing
	
	
	
	
10.	word	of	knowledge
	
19.	leadership
	
	
	
	
11.	faith
	
20.	mercy
	
	
	
	
(5)	gifts	of	healing
	
	
	
	
	
	
(4)	miracles
	
1
	Corinthians	7:7
	
	
	
	
(2)	prophecy
	
21.	marriage
	
	
	
	
	12.	distinguishing	between	spirits
	
22.	celibacy
	
	
	
	
(8)	tongues
	
	
	
	
	
	
13.	interpretation	of	tongues
	
	
	
	
	
	
		
	
	
	
	
	
	
Moreover,	there	is	some	degree	of	overlap	among	the	gifts	listed	at
various	places.	No	doubt	the	gift	of	administration	(
kybernēsis,	
1
Cor.	12:28)	is	similar	to	the	gift	of	leadership	(
ho	proistamenos,
Rom.	12:8),	and	both	terms	could	probably	be	applied	to	many	who
have	the	office	of	pastor-teacher	(Eph.	4:11).	Moreover,	in	some
cases	Paul	lists	an	activity	and	in	other	cases	lists	the	related	noun
that	describes	the	person	(such	as	“prophecy”	in	Rom.	12:6	and	1
Cor.	12:10,	but	“prophet”	in	1	Cor.	12:28	and	Eph.	4:11).
9
Another	reason	for	thinking	that	Paul	could	have	made	much	longer
lists	if	he	had	wanted	to	is	the	fact	that	some	of	the	gifts	listed	will
have	many	different	expressions	as	they	are	found	in	different
people.	Certainly	the	gift	of	serving	(Rom.	12:6)	or	helps	(1	Cor.
12:28)	will	take	many	different	forms	in	different	situations	and
among	different	people.	Some	may	serve	or	help	by	giving	wise
counsel,	others	by	cooking	meals,	others	by	caring	for	children	or
befriending	an	older	person,	others	by	giving	specialized	legal	or
medical	or	financial	advice	when	needed	within	the	church.	These
gifts	differ	greatly.	Among	those	who	possess	the	gift	of
evangelism,	some	will	be	good	at	personal	evangelism	within	a
neighborhood,	others	at	evangelism	through	writing	of	tracts	and
Christian	literature,	and	others	at	evangelism	through	large
campaigns	and	public	meetings.	Still	others	will	be	good	at
evangelism	through	radio	and	television.	Not	all	of	these
evangelistic	gifts	are	the	same,	even	though	they	fall	under	the
broad	category	of	“evangelism.”	The	same	could	be	said	about	gifts
of	teaching	or	administration.
10
	All	of	this	simply	means	that	no
two	people’s	gifts	are	exactly	alike.
How	many	different	gifts	are	there	then?	It	simply	depends	on	how
specific	we	wish	to	be.	We	can	make	a	very	short	list	of	only	two
gifts	as	Peter	does	in	1	Peter	4:11:	“whoever	
speaks”	
and	“whoever
renders	service.”	
In	this	list	of	only	two	items	Peter	includes	all	the
gifts	mentioned	in	any	other	list	because	all	of	them	fit	in	one	of
these	two	categories.	On	the	other	hand,	we	could	take	the	Old
Testament	offices	of	prophet,	priest,	and	king,	and	have	a	list	of
three	kinds	of	gifts:	
prophetic	
gifts	(in	this	broad	sense)	would
include	anything	that	involves	teaching,	encouraging,	exhorting,	or
rebuking	others.	
Priestly	
gifts	would	include	anything	that	involves
showing	mercy	and	care	for	those	in	need	or	involve	interceding
before	God	(such	as	praying	in	tongues).	The	
kingly	
gifts	would
involve	anything	having	to	do	with	administration	or	government	or
order	in	the	church.
Other	classifications	of	gifts	are	gifts	of	
knowledge	
(such	as
distinguishing	between	spirits,	word	of	wisdom,	and	word	of
knowledge),	gifts	of	
power	
(such	as	healing,	miracles,	and	faith),
and	gifts	of	
speech	
(tongues,	interpretation,	and	prophecy).
11
	Then
again	we	could	make	a	much	longer	list,	such	as	the	list	of	twenty-
two	gifts	enumerated	above.	But	even	that	list	does	not	include	all
the	possible	gifts	(no	list	includes	a	gift	of	intercessory	prayer,	for
instance,	which	may	be	related	to	a	gift	of	faith	but	is	not	the	same
as	a	gift	of	faith;	no	musical	gifts	are	included	on	any	list	either,	and
neither	is	any	gift	of	casting	out	demons,	even	though	Paul	must
have	known	that	some	Christians	were	more	effective	in	that	area
than	others).	And	if	we	wished	to	divide	up	
different	kinds	
of
service	or	administration	or	evangelism	or	teaching,	then	we	could
quite	easily	have	a	list	that	included	fifty	or	even	a	hundred	items.
12
The	point	of	all	of	this	is	simply	to	say	that	God	gives	the	church	an
amazing	variety	of	spiritual	gifts,	and	they	are	all	tokens	of	his
varied	grace.	In	fact,	Peter	says	as	much:	“As	each	has	received	a
gift,	employ	it	for	one	another,	as	good	stewards	of	God’s	
varied
grace”	
(1	Peter	4:10;	the	word	“varied”	here	is	
poikilos,	
which
means	“having	many	facets	or	aspects;	having	rich	diversity”).
The	practical	outcome	of	this	discussion	is	that	we	should	be
willing	to	recognize	and	appreciate	people	who	have	gifts	that
differ	from	ours	and	whose	gifts	may	differ	from	our	expectations
of	what	certain	gifts	should	look	like.	Moreover,	a	healthy	church
will	have	a	great	diversity	of	gifts,	and	this	diversity	should	not	lead
to	fragmentation	but	to	greater	unity	among	believers	in	the	church.
Paul’s	whole	point	in	the	analogy	of	the	body	with	many	members
(1	Cor.	12:12–26)	is	to	say	that	God	has	put	us	in	the	body	with
these	differences	
so	that	we	might	depend	on	each	other.	
“The	eye
cannot	say	to	the	hand,	‘I	have	no	need	of	you,’	nor	again	the	head
to	the	feet,	‘I	have	no	need	of	you.’	On	the	contrary,	the	parts	of	the
body	which	seem	to	be	weaker	are	indispensable”	(1	Cor.	12:21–
22;	cf.	vv.	4–6).	It	runs	counter	to	the	world’s	way	of	thinking	to
say	that	we	will	enjoy	greater	unity	when	we	join	closely	together
with	those	who	are	different	from	us,	but	that	is	precisely	the	point
that	Paul	makes	in	1	Corinthians	12,	demonstrating	the	glory	of
God’s	wisdom	in	not	allowing	anyone	to	have	all	the	necessary
gifts	for	the	church,	but	in	requiring	us	to	depend	upon	each	other
for	the	proper	functioning	of	the	church.
4.	Gifts	May	Vary	in	Strength.
	Paul	says	that	if	we	have	the	gift	of
prophecy,	we	should	use	it	
“in	proportion	to	our	faith”	
(Rom.	12:6),
indicating	that	the	gift	can	be	more	or	less	strongly	developed	in	different
individuals,	or	in	the	same	individual	over	a	period	of	time.	This	is	why	Paul
can	remind	Timothy,	“Do	not	neglect	the	gift	you	have”	(1	Tim.	4:14),	and
can	say,	“I	remind	you	to	
rekindle	
the	gift	of	God	that	is	within	you”	(2	Tim.
1:6).	It	was	possible	for	Timothy	to	allow	his	gift	to	weaken,	apparently
through	infrequent	use,	and	Paul	reminds	him	to	stir	it	up	by	using	it	and
thereby	strengthening	it.	This	should	not	be	surprising,	for	we	realize	that
many	gifts	increase	in	strength	and	effectiveness	as	they	are	used,	whether
evangelism,	teaching,	encouraging,	administration,	or	faith.	Apollos	had	a
strong	gift	of	preaching	and	teaching,	for	we	read	that	he	was	“mighty	(or
“powerful,”	Gk.	
dynatos
)	in	the	Scriptures”	(Acts	18:24	NASB).	And	Paul
apparently	had	a	frequently	used	and	very	effective	gift	of	speaking	in
tongues	because	he	says,	“I	thank	God	that	I	speak	in	tongues	more	than	you
all”	(1	Cor.	14:18).
13
All	of	these	texts	indicate	that	
spiritual	gifts	may	vary	in	strength.	
If
we	think	of	any	gift,	whether	teaching	or	evangelism	on	the	one
hand,	or	prophecy	or	healing	on	the	other,	we	should	realize	that
within	any	congregation	there	will	likely	be	people	who	are	very
effective	in	the	use	of	that	gift	(perhaps	through	long	use	and
experience),	others	who	are	moderately	strong	in	that	gift,	and
others	who	probably	have	the	gift	but	are	just	beginning	to	use	it.
This	variation	in	strength	in	spiritual	gifts	depends	on	a
combination	of	divine	and	human	influence.	The	divine	influence	is
the	sovereign	working	of	the	Holy	Spirit	as	he	“apportions	to	each
one	individually	as	he	wills”	(1	Cor.	12:11).	The	human	influence
comes	from	experience,	training,	wisdom,	and	natural	ability	in	the
use	of	that	gift.	It	is	usually	not	possible	to	know	in	what	proportion
the	divine	and	human	influences	combine	at	any	one	time,	nor	is	it
really	necessary	to	know,	for	even	the	abilities	we	think	to	be
“natural”	are	from	God	(1	Cor.	4:7)	and	under	his	sovereign	control
(see	chapter	16	on	God’s	providence	and	human	responsibility).
But	this	leads	to	an	interesting	question:	how	strong	does	an	ability
have	to	be	before	it	can	be	called	a	spiritual	gift?	How	much
teaching	ability	does	someone	need	before	he	or	she	could	be	said
to	have	a	gift	of	teaching,	for	example?	Or	how	effective	in
evangelism	would	someone	need	to	be	before	we	would	recognize	a
gift	of	evangelism?	Or	how	frequently	would	someone	have	to	see
prayers	for	healing	answered	before	he	or	she	could	be	said	to	have
a	gift	of	healing?
Scripture	does	not	directly	answer	this	question,	but	the	fact	that
Paul	speaks	of	these	gifts	as	useful	for	the	building	up	of	the	church
(1	Cor.	14:12),	and	the	fact	that	Peter	likewise	says	that	each	person
who	has	received	a	gift	should	remember	to	employ	it	“for	one
another”	(1	Peter	4:10),	suggest	that	both	Paul	and	Peter	thought	of
gifts	as	abilities	that	were	
strong	enough	to	function	for	the	benefit
of	the	church,	
whether	for	the	assembled	congregation	(as	in
prophecy	or	teaching),	or	for	individuals	at	various	times	in	the
congregation	(as	helps	or	encouragement).
Probably	no	definite	line	can	be	drawn	in	this	matter,	but	Paul	does
remind	us	that	
not	all	have	every	gift	or	any	one	gift.	
He	is	quite
clear	in	this	in	a	set	of	questions	that	expect	the	answer	no	at	each
point:	“Are	all	apostles?	Are	all	prophets?	Are	all	teachers?	Do	all
work	miracles?	Do	all	possess	gifts	of	healing?	Do	all	speak	with
tongues?	Do	all	interpret?”	(1	Cor.	12:29–30).	The	Greek	text	(with
the	particle	
mē	
before	each	question)	clearly	expects	the	answer	no
to	every	question.	Therefore,	not	all	are	teachers,	for	example,	nor
do	all	possess	gifts	of	healing,	nor	do	all	speak	in	tongues.
But	even	though	not	all	have	the	gift	of	teaching,	it	is	true	that	all
people	“teach”	
in	some	sense	
of	the	word	
teach.	
Even	people	who
would	never	dream	of	teaching	a	Sunday	school	class	will	read
Bible	stories	to	their	own	children	and	explain	the	meaning	to	them
—indeed,	Moses	commanded	the	Israelites	to	do	this	very	thing
with	their	children	(Deut.	6:7),	explaining	God’s	words	to	them	as
they	sat	in	their	house	or	walked	on	the	road.	So	we	must	say	on	the
one	hand	that	not	everyone	has	the	
gift	
of	teaching.	But	on	the	other
hand	we	must	say	that	there	is	
some	general	ability	
related	to	the
gift	of	teaching	that	all	Christians	have.	Another	way	of	saying	this
would	be	to	say	that	there	is	no	spiritual	gift	that	all	believers	have,
yet	there	is	some	general	ability	similar	to	every	gift	that	all
Christians	have.
We	can	see	this	with	a	number	of	gifts.	Not	all	Christians	have	a
gift	of	evangelism,	but	all	Christians	have	the	ability	to	share	the
gospel	with	their	neighbors.	Not	all	Christians	have	gifts	of	healing
(in	fact,	as	we	shall	see	below,	some	people	say	that	no	one	today
has	genuine	gifts	of	healing),	but	nevertheless	every	Christian	can
and	does	pray	for	God	to	heal	friends	or	relatives	who	are	ill.	Not
every	Christian	has	the	gift	of	faith,	but	every	believer	has	some
degree	of	faith,	and	we	would	expect	it	to	be	growing	in	the	life	of
an	ordinary	Christian.
We	can	even	say	that	other	gifts,	such	as	prophecy	and	speaking	in
tongues,	not	only	vary	in	strength	among	those	who	have	the	gift,
but	also	find	a	counterpart	in	some	general	abilities	that	are	found
in	the	life	of	every	Christian.	For	example,	if	we	understand
prophecy	(according	to	the	definition	given	in	chapter	53)
14
	to	be
“reporting	something	that	God	spontaneously	brings	to	mind,”	then
it	is	true	that	not	everyone	experiences	this	as	a	gift,	for	not
everyone	experiences	God	spontaneously	bringing	things	to	mind
with	such	clarity	and	force	that	he	or	she	feels	free	to	speak	about
them	among	an	assembled	group	of	Christians.	But	probably	every
believer	has	at	one	time	or	another	had	a	sense	that	God	was
bringing	to	mind	the	need	to	pray	for	a	distant	friend	or	to	write	or
phone	a	word	of	encouragement	to	someone	distant,	and	later	has
found	that	that	was	exactly	the	thing	that	was	needed	at	the
moment.	Few	would	deny	that	God	sovereignly	brought	that	need
to	mind	in	a	spontaneous	way,	and,	though	this	would	not	be	called
a	gift	of	prophecy,	it	is	a	general	ability	to	receive	special	direction
or	guidance	from	God	that	is	similar	to	what	happens	in	the	gift	of
prophecy,	although	it	is	functioning	at	a	weaker	level.
We	can	even	consider	the	gift	of	speaking	in	tongues	from	this
perspective.	If	we	think	of	speaking	in	tongues	as	prayer	in
syllables	not	understood	by	the	speaker	(see	1	Cor.	14:2,	14),
15
	then
it	is	true	that	not	every	Christian	has	the	gift	of	speaking	in	tongues
(and	once	again	it	must	be	said	that	some	Christians	would	argue
that	no	one	has	that	gift	today,	since	the	age	of	the	apostles	has
ended).	But	on	the	other	hand	we	must	recognize	that	every
Christian	has	times	of	prayer	in	which	his	or	her	prayer	is	expressed
not	only	in	intelligible	words	and	syllables,	but	also	in	terms	of
sighs,	groans,	or	weeping	that	we	know	is	understood	and	heard	by
the	Lord,	and	that	expresses	needs	and	concerns	of	our	hearts	that
we	cannot	fully	put	into	words	(cf.	Rom.	8:26–27).	Once	again	we
should	not	call	this	a	gift	of	speaking	in	tongues,	but	it	does	seem	to
be	a	general	ability	in	our	Christian	lives	that	is	somewhat	related	to
the	gift	of	speaking	in	tongues,	in	that	it	gives	expression	to	prayer
in	syllables	that	we	do	not	fully	understand,	but	that	the	Holy	Spirit
nonetheless	makes	into	effective	prayer	that	is	heard	by	God.
The	point	of	this	whole	discussion	is	simply	to	say	that	spiritual
gifts	are	not	as	mysterious	and	“other	worldly”	as	people	sometimes
make	them	out	to	be.	Many	of	them	are	only	intensifications	or
highly	developed	instances	of	phenomena	that	most	Christians
experience	in	their	own	lives.	The	other	important	point	to	be
drawn	from	this	discussion	is	that	even	though	we	have	been	given
gifts	by	God,	we	are	still	responsible	to	use	them	effectively,	and	to
seek	to	grow	in	their	use	that	the	church	may	receive	more	benefit
from	the	gifts	of	which	God	has	allowed	us	to	be	stewards.
Finally,	the	fact	that	gifts	may	vary	in	strength	allows	us	to
recognize	that	a	certain	person’s	gift	(such	as	teaching	or
administration,	for	example)	may	not	be	strong	enough	to	function
for	the	benefit	of	the	entire	church	in	a	large	church	where	many
people	already	have	that	gift	developed	to	a	very	high	degree.	But
that	same	person,	moving	to	a	younger,	smaller	church	where	few
have	gifts	of	teaching	or	administration,	may	find	that	his	or	her
gifts	are	very	much	in	demand	and	able	to	function	for	the	benefit
of	the	entire	congregation.	(In	this	sense,	something	that	is	only
considered	a	general	ability	in	one	setting	might	rightly	be
considered	a	spiritual	gift	in	another	setting.)
5.	Do	Christians	Possess	Gifts	Temporarily	or	Permanently?
	In	most
cases,	it	seems	that	the	New	Testament	pictures	a	
permanent	
possession	of
spiritual	gifts.	The	analogy	of	the	parts	of	the	body	in	1	Corinthians	12:12–26
fits	this,	in	that	the	eye	does	not	become	a	hand,	nor	does	the	ear	become	a
foot,	but	various	parts	exist	in	the	body	permanently.
16
	Moreover,	Paul	says
that	some	people	have	titles	that	describe	a	continuing	function.	Some	people
can	be	called	“prophets”	or	“teachers”	(1	Cor.	12:29)	or	“evangelists”	(Eph.
4:11).	We	would	expect	that	those	people	have	a	permanent	possession	of	the
gifts	of	prophecy,	teaching,	and	evangelism,	unless	some	unusual
circumstance	would	come	along	which	would	take	that	gift	away.	Similarly,
Paul	talks	in	terms	of	possessing	spiritual	gifts	when	he	says,	“If	I	
have	
the
gift	of	prophecy”	(1	Cor.	13:2	NIV).	And	when	Paul	requires	that	there	be	an
interpreter	present	for	anyone	to	speak	in	tongues	(1	Cor.	14:28),	he	assumes
that	the	church	will	know	whether	someone	who	has	the	gift	of	interpretation
is	present,	which	implies	that	that	gift	would	be	possessed	by	someone	over
time.	When	he	says,	“If	any	one	thinks	that	he	is	a	prophet”	(1	Cor.	14:37),	he
realizes	that	some	at	Corinth	will	have	functioned	with	the	gift	of	prophecy
frequently	enough	to	think	of	themselves	as	“prophets.”	All	of	these	verses
point	in	the	direction	of	a	permanent,	or	at	least	abiding	and	continuing,
possession	of	spiritual	gifts.
Indeed,	in	Romans	12,	Paul	begins	his	sentence,	“
Having	gifts	
that
differ	according	to	the	grace	given	to	us”	(Rom.	12:6).	And	he	tells
Timothy,	“Do	not	neglect	the	gift	
that	is	in	you”	
(1	Tim.	4:14,
literal	translation),	again	indicating	that	Timothy	had	had	that	gift
over	a	period	of	time.	Therefore	it	seems	that	in	general	the	New
Testament	indicates	that	people	have	spiritual	gifts	given	to	them
and,	once	they	have	them,	they	are	usually	able	to	continue	to	use
them	over	the	course	of	their	Christian	life.
However,	some	important	qualifications	must	be	made,	because
there	are	some	senses	in	which	gifts	are	
not	permanent.	
There	are
some	gifts	that	are	nonpermanent	by	their	very	nature,	such	as	the
gifts	of	marriage	and	celibacy	(1	Cor.	7:7).	Though	Paul	calls	them
gifts,	in	the	lives	of	most	believers	there	will	be	times	at	which	they
are	unmarried,	and	times	at	which	they	are	married.	Moreover,
some	gifts,	though	perhaps	exercised	fairly	frequently,	still	cannot
be	exercised	at	will.	Effectiveness	in	the	gift	of	healing,	for
example,	depends	on	God’s	sovereign	will	in	answering	prayer	for
healing.	Similarly,	prophecy	depends	on	the	giving	of	a
spontaneous	“revelation”	(1	Cor.	14:30)	from	God,	and	simply
cannot	be	exercised	at	will.	The	same	could	even	be	said	about	the
gift	of	evangelism:	It	is	ultimately	the	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	to
bring	regeneration	and	enable	someone	to	believe,	so	the	evangelist
may	pray	and	preach,	but	only	God	can	give	the	harvest	of	souls.
In	other	cases,	some	particular	gift	may	be	given	for	a	unique	need
or	event.	Though	it	is	not,	strictly	speaking,	a	spiritual	gift	in	the
New	Testament	sense,	the	return	of	Samson’s	strength	one	last	time
at	the	end	of	his	life	(Judg.	16:28)	was	given	temporarily	for	one
final	moment	in	his	life.	And,	in	the	New	Testament,	the
remarkable	revelation	of	heaven	Stephen	had	when	he,	“full	of	the
Holy	Spirit,	gazed	into	heaven	and	saw	the	glory	of	God,	and	Jesus
standing	at	the	right	hand	of	God”	(Acts	7:55)	was	a	manifestation
of	the	Spirit	given	to	him	only	for	that	specific	moment.
Another	sense	in	which	a	gift	may	be	non-permanent	is	if	a	person	
neglects	his	or	her	gift,	and	perhaps	grieves	the	Holy	Spirit	or	falls
into	serious	doctrinal	or	moral	error	(as	Samson	did	in	the	Old
Testament,	for	example).	In	such	a	case	the	gift	may	be	withdrawn.
Certainly	Paul	warned	Timothy,	“Do	not	neglect	the	gift	you	have”
(1	Tim.	4:14),	and	we	may	perhaps	also	learn	from	the	parable	of
the	talents,	in	which	Jesus	says	that	“to	every	one	who	has	will
more	be	given,	and	he	will	have	abundance;	but	from	him	who	has
not,	even	what	he	has	will	be	taken	away”	(Matt.	25:29).
17
Moreover,	we	must	remember	that	
the	Holy	Spirit	is	still	sovereign
in	distributing	gifts:	
he	“apportions	to	each	one	individually	
as	he
wills”	
(1	Cor.	12:11).	The	word	here	translated	“apportions”	is	a
present	participle,	which	indicates	continuing	activity	over	time,
and	we	could	paraphrase,	“The	Holy	Spirit	
is	always	continuing	to
distribute	or	apportion	gifts	
to	each	person	individually	just	as	he
wills	to	do.”	This	means	that,	although	it	is	
ordinarily	
the	custom	of
the	Holy	Spirit	to	continue	to	empower	the	same	gift	or	gifts	in
people	over	time,	nonetheless,	there	is	a	continual	willing	and
deciding	of	the	Holy	Spirit	to	do	this	or	not,	and	he	may	for	his	own
reasons	withdraw	a	gift	for	a	time,	or	cause	it	to	be	much	stronger
or	much	weaker	than	it	was.
Finally,	1	Corinthians	13:8–13	(to	be	discussed	below)	indicates
that	the	present	spiritual	gifts	which	we	have	are	only	for	this	age,
and	will	be	superseded	by	something	far	greater.	Therefore	in	that
sense	no	gift	is	“permanent”	since	every	gift	will	be	rendered
useless	at	the	time	of	the	Lord’s	return.
Within	this	discussion	of	the	question	of	whether	spiritual	gifts	are
temporary	or	permanent,	sometimes	Romans	11:29	is	mentioned:
“For	the	gifts	and	the	call	of	God	are	irrevocable.”	It	does	not	seem
to	be	appropriate	to	use	the	verse	in	the	context	of	this	discussion,
however,	for	in	this	case	Paul	is	talking	about	the	status	of	the
Jewish	people,	including	their	calling	as	God’s	people	and	the	gifts
or	blessings	bestowed	on	them	as	a	result	of	that	status.	Here	Paul	is
arguing	that	God	still	has	a	purpose	for	his	people	Israel,	but	the
question	of	gifts	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in	the	sense	of	1	Corinthians	12–
14	is	not	in	view	at	all	in	Romans	11:29.	And	certainly	in	any	case
this	sentence	would	not	be	true	as	a	totally	unrestricted	statement
concerning	spiritual	gifts,	for	it	is	evident	that	through	misuse,
neglect,	or	grieving	of	the	Holy	Spirit,	people	can	have	their	gifts
diminished	or	removed	by	God’s	sovereign	choice.
6.	Are	Gifts	Miraculous	or	Nonmiraculous?
	The	answer	to	this	question
really	depends	on	the	definition	of	the	word	
miracle.	
If	we	define	
miracle	
as
“a	direct	activity	of	God	in	the	world,”	then	all	the	spiritual	gifts	are
miraculous	because	they	are	all	empowered	by	the	Holy	Spirit	(1	Cor.	12:11;
cf.	vv.	4–6).	But	in	that	sense	
everything	
that	happens	in	the	world	might	be
said	to	be	miraculous,	because	all	of	it	is	brought	about	by	God’s	providential
work	in	creation	(see	Eph.	1:11;	Dan.	4:35;	Matt.	5:45).
18
	Therefore	the	word
miracle	
loses	its	usefulness,	because	it	is	difficult	for	us	to	find	something
that	happens	in	the	world	that	is	
not	
miraculous	in	this	sense.
It	is	better	to	define	
miracle	
in	a	narrower	sense,	as	we	did	in
chapter	17,	above:	A	miracle	is	a	“less	common	activity	of	God	in
which	he	arouses	people’s	awe	and	wonder	and	bears	witness	to
himself.”
19
	In	terms	of	this	definition,	only	some	gifts	are
“miraculous”:	namely,	those	gifts	that	people	think	to	be	miraculous
because	they	are	amazed	at	the	activity	of	God	operating	in	them.
Certainly	we	would	include	in	this	category	prophecy	(note	the
amazement	of	the	unbeliever	in	1	Cor.	14:24–25),	healing
(similarly,	note	the	response	of	people	in	Acts	3:10	et	al.),	casting
out	of	demons	(see	Acts	19:11–13,	17),	or	speaking	in	tongues
when	it	is	an	actual	foreign	language	and	understood	by	others	(see
the	description	of	Pentecost	in	Acts	2:7).	Probably	other	remarkable
phenomena	would	be	included	in	the	gift	of	miracles	(1	Cor.	12:10)
as	well.
On	the	other	hand,	in	this	definition,	some	gifts	would	be	thought	of
as	nonmiraculous.	Gifts	of	serving,	teaching,	encouraging,
contributing,	and	doing	acts	of	mercy	(in	Rom.	12:7–8)	would	fall
in	this	category,	as	would	the	gifts	of	those	who	act	as	helpers	and
administrators	(1	Cor.	12:28).	But	it	is	still	the	same	Holy	Spirit
who	gives	them	and	works	through	them.
The	point	of	this	analysis	is	to	caution	us	against	making	a
supernatural/natural	distinction	in	our	minds	whereby	we	think	that
some	gifts	are	“supernatural”	and	some	gifts	are	simply	“natural.”
The	Bible	makes	no	such	distinction,	and	the	danger	of	doing	this	is
that	we	may	tend	to	think	that	some	gifts	(which	we	think	to	be
“supernatural”)	are	more	important	or	more	clearly	from	the	Lord,
and	we	may	tend	to	devalue	or	deemphasize	the	gifts	which	we
think	to	be	“natural.”	If	we	do	this	we	will	fail	to	see	God’s	hand	in
the	working	of	all	the	gifts	and	fail	to	thank	him	for	all	of	them.
On	the	other	hand,	the	misleading	supernatural/natural	distinction
could	also	cause	us	to	be	very	suspicious	about	those	which	we
think	to	be	“supernatural,”	or	could	lead	us	to	think	that	they	are
very	unlikely	to	happen	in	our	own	experience.	In	that	case,	we
would	tend	to	emphasize	the	gifts	we	thought	to	be	“natural”	and
have	a	very	low	degree	of	expectation	or	faith	regarding	anything
which	we	thought	to	be	“supernatural.”
In	contrast	to	this	perspective,	Scripture	says	that	“all”	the	gifts	are
worked	in	us	by	the	same	Holy	Spirit,	the	same	Lord,	and	the	same
God	(1	Cor.	12:4–6).	The	worldview	of	Scripture	is	one	of
continuity	and	continual	interaction	between	the	
visible	world	
that
we	can	see	and	touch	and	the	
invisible	world	
that	Scripture	tells	us
is	there	and	is	real.	God	works	in	both,	and	we	do	ourselves	and	the
church	a	great	disservice	by	separating	these	aspects	of	creation
into	“supernatural”	and	“natural.”
Finally,	should	we	seek	the	more	unusual	or	miraculous	gifts,	or
should	we	seek	the	more	ordinary	gifts?	Once	again,	Scripture	does
not	make	this	kind	of	distinction	when	it	tells	us	what	kind	of	gifts
to	seek.	Paul	says	to	the	Corinthians,	“Since	you	are	eager	for
manifestations	of	the	Spirit,	
strive	to	excel	in	building	up	the
church”	
(1	Cor.	14:12).	This	means	that	we	should	learn	which
gifts	are	most	needed	in	the	church	we	attend,	and	then	pray	that
God	would	give	those	gifts	to	ourselves	or	to	others.	Whether	those
gifts	are	thought	to	be	miraculous	or	non-miraculous	really	is	not
the	important	point	at	all.
20
7.	Discovering	and	Seeking	Spiritual	Gifts.
	Paul	seems	to	assume	that
believers	will	know	what	their	spiritual	gifts	are.	He	simply	tells	those	in	the
church	at	Rome	to	use	their	gifts	in	various	ways:	“if	prophecy,	in	proportion
to	our	faith	.	.	.	he	who	contributes,	in	liberality;	he	who	gives	aid,	with	zeal;
he	who	does	acts	of	mercy,	with	cheerfulness”	(Rom.	12:6–8).	Similarly,
Peter	simply	tells	his	readers	how	to	use	their	gifts,	but	does	not	say	anything
about	discovering	what	they	are:	“
As	each	has	received	a	gift,	
employ	it	for
one	another,	as	good	stewards	of	God’s	varied	grace”	(1	Peter	4:10).
But	what	if	many	members	in	a	church	do	not	know	what	spiritual
gift	or	gifts	God	has	given	to	them?	In	such	a	case,	the	leaders	of
the	church	need	to	ask	whether	they	are	providing	sufficient
opportunities	for	varieties	of	gifts	to	be	used.	Though	the	lists	of
gifts	given	in	the	New	Testament	are	not	exhaustive,	they	certainly
provide	a	good	starting	point	for	churches	to	ask	whether	at	least
there	is	opportunity	for	
these	gifts	
to	be	used.	If	God	has	placed
people	with	certain	gifts	in	a	church	when	these	gifts	are	not
encouraged	or	perhaps	not	allowed	to	be	used,	they	will	feel
frustrated	and	unfulfilled	in	their	Christian	ministries,	and	will
perhaps	move	to	another	church	where	their	gifts	can	function	for
the	benefit	of	the	church.
In	the	case	of	individuals	who	do	not	know	what	their	gifts	are,	they
can	begin	by	asking	what	the	needs	and	opportunities	for	ministry
are	in	their	church.	Specifically,	they	can	ask	what	gifts	are	most
needed	for	the	building	up	of	the	church	at	that	point.	In	addition,
each	individual	believer	who	does	not	know	what	his	or	her	gifts
are	should	do	some	self-examination.	What	interests	and	desires
and	abilities	does	he	or	she	have?	Can	others	give	advice	or
encouragement	pointing	in	the	direction	of	specific	gifts?
Moreover,	has	there	been	blessing	in	the	past	in	ministering	in	a
particular	kind	of	service?	In	all	of	this,	the	person	seeking	to
discover	his	or	her	gifts	should	pray	and	ask	God	for	wisdom,
confident	that	it	will	be	given	according	to	his	promise,	“If	any	of
you	lacks	wisdom,	let	him	ask	God,	who	gives	to	all	men
generously	and	without	reproaching,	and	it	will	be	given	him.	But
let	him	ask	in	faith,	with	no	doubting”	(James	1:5–6).	Sometimes
God	will	grant	this	wisdom	in	terms	of	more	accurate	insight	into
one’s	own	abilities.	At	other	times	it	may	come	through	advice
from	others	or	through	seeing	increased	blessing	in	one	area	of
ministry.	And	Paul	indicates	that	in	some	cases	there	may	be
prophecy	that	gives	indication	of	a	specific	gift,	for	he	says	to
Timothy,	“
Do	not	neglect	the	gift	you	have,	which	was	given	you
through	prophecy	
with	the	laying	on	of	hands	of	the	council	of
elders”	(1	Tim.	4:14,	author’s	translation).
Finally,	the	person	wondering	what	his	or	her	spiritual	gifts	are
should	simply	begin	to	try	ministering	in	various	areas	and	see
where	God	brings	blessing.	Teaching	a	Sunday	school	class	or
home	Bible	study	is	an	excellent	way	to	begin	using	the	gift	of
teaching.	Every	community	has	opportunities	for	greater	use	of	the
gift	of	evangelism.	People	who	think	they	may	have	a	gift	of
healing	could	ask	their	elders	for	opportunities	to	accompany	them
when	they	go	to	pray	for	the	sick.	People	who	think	they	may	have
a	gift	of	faith	or	a	gift	of	intercessory	prayer	could	begin	to	ask
some	Christian	friends	for	specific	needs	about	which	to	pray.	In	all
of	this,	churches	can	give	encouragement	and	opportunities	for
people	to	try	out	using	various	gifts,	and	can	also	give	teaching	and
practical	training	in	the	proper	methods	of	using	various	gifts.	In
addition,	churches	should	continually	be	praying	that	God	would
allow	people	to	find	what	their	gifts	are	and	then	to	be	able	to	use
them.	In	all	of	this	the	goal	is	that	the	body	of	Christ	in	each
location	grow	up	to	maturity,	until	“the	whole	body,	joined	and	knit
together	by	every	joint	with	which	it	is	supplied,	
when	each	part	is
working	properly,	
makes	bodily	growth	and	upbuilds	itself	in	love”
(Eph.	4:16).
Beyond	the	question	of	discovering	what	gifts	one	has	is	the
question	of	seeking	additional	spiritual	gifts.	Paul	commands
Christians,	
“Earnestly	desire	the	higher	gifts”	
(1	Cor.	12:31),	and
says	later,	“Make	love	your	aim,	and	
earnestly	desire	the	spiritual
gifts,	
especially	that	you	may	prophesy”	(1	Cor.	14:1).	In	this
context,	Paul	defines	what	he	means	by	“higher	gifts”	or	“greater
gifts”	because	in	1	Corinthians	14:5	he	repeats	the	word	he	used	in
12:31	for	“higher”	(Gk.	
meizōn
)	when	he	says,	“He	who	prophesies
is	
greater	
than	he	who	speaks	in	tongues,	unless	someone
interprets,	
so	that	the	church	may	be	edified”	
(1	Cor.	14:5).	Here
the	“greater”	gifts	are	those	that	most	edify	the	church.	This	is
consistent	with	Paul’s	statement	a	few	verses	later,	when	he	says,
“since	you	are	eager	for	manifestations	of	the	Spirit,	strive	to	excel
in	building	up	the	church”	(1	Cor.	14:12).	The	
higher	gifts	
are	
those
that	build	up	the	church	more	and	bring	more	benefit	to	others.
But	how	do	we	seek	more	spiritual	gifts?	First,	we	should	
ask	God
for	them.	
Paul	says	directly	that	“he	who	speaks	in	a	tongue	
should
pray	for	the	power	to	interpret”	
(1	Cor.	14:13;	cf.	James	1:5,	where
James	tells	people	that	they	should	ask	God	for	wisdom).	Next,
people	who	seek	additional	spiritual	gifts	should	
have	right	motives.
If	spiritual	gifts	are	sought	only	so	that	the	person	may	be	more
prominent	or	have	more	influence	or	power,	this	certainly	is	wrong
in	God’s	eyes.	This	was	the	motivation	of	Simon	the	Sorcerer	in
Acts	8:19,	when	he	said,	“Give	me	also	this	power,	that	any	one	on
whom	I	lay	my	hands	may	receive	the	Holy	Spirit”	(see	Peter’s
rebuke	in	vv.	21–22).	Similarly,	Ananias	and	Sapphira	sought	glory
for	themselves	when	they	purported	to	be	giving	the	entire	proceeds
of	the	sale	of	their	land	to	the	church,	but	it	was	not	true,	and	both
lost	their	lives	(Acts	5:1–11).	It	is	a	fearful	thing	to	want	spiritual
gifts	or	prominence	in	the	church	only	for	our	own	glory,	not	for	the
glory	of	God	and	for	the	help	of	others.	Therefore	those	who	seek
spiritual	gifts	must	first	ask	if	they	are	seeking	them	out	of	love	for
others	and	a	concern	to	be	able	to	minister	to	their	needs,	because
those	who	have	great	spiritual	gifts	but	“have	not	love”	are
“nothing”	in	God’s	sight	(cf.	1	Cor.	13:1–3).	This	is	why	Paul	says,
“Make	love	your	aim,”	
and	only	after	that	adds,	“and	earnestly
desire	the	spiritual	gifts”	(1	Cor.	14:1).	He	repeats	the	same	theme
again	when	he	says,	“since	you	are	eager	for	manifestations	of	the
Spirit,	
strive	to	excel	in	building	up	the	church”	
(1	Cor.	14:12).
Every	person	asking	God	for	an	additional	spiritual	gift	should
search	his	or	her	own	heart	frequently,	asking	why	this	particular
gift	is	desired.	Is	it	really	out	of	a	love	for	others	and	a	desire	to
build	up	the	church	and	to	see	God	glorified?
After	that,	it	is	appropriate	to	
seek	opportunities	to	try	the	gift,	
just
as	in	the	case	of	a	person	trying	to	discover	his	or	her	gift,	as
explained	above.	Small	group	Bible	studies	or	prayer	meetings	in
homes	often	provide	a	good	setting	in	which	people	can	try	gifts	of
teaching	or	intercessory	prayer	or	encouragement	or	prophecy	or
healing,	for	example.
Finally,	those	who	are	seeking	additional	spiritual	gifts	should
continue	to	use	the	gifts	they	now	have,	
and	should	
be	content	
if
God	chooses	not	to	give	them	more.	The	master	approved	of	the
servant	whose	pound	had	“made	ten	pounds	more,”	but	condemned
the	one	who	hid	his	pound	in	a	napkin	and	did	nothing	with	it	(Luke
19:16–17,	20–23)—certainly	showing	us	that	we	have
responsibility	to	
use	
and	
attempt	to	increase	
whatever	talents	or
abilities	God	has	given	to	us	as	his	stewards.
To	balance	this	emphasis	on	seeking	and	growing	in	spiritual	gifts
we	must	also	remember	that	Paul	clearly	says	that	spiritual	gifts	are
apportioned	to	each	person	individually	by	the	Holy	Spirit	
“as	he
wills”	
(1	Cor.	12:11),	and	that	“God	arranged	the	organs	in	the
body,	each	one	of	them,	
as	he	chose”	
(1	Cor.	12:18).	He	says	that
God	has	put	various	gifts	in	the	church	and	not	all	are	apostles	or
prophets	or	teachers	(1	Cor.	12:28–30).	In	this	way	he	reminds	the
Corinthians	that	ultimately	the	distribution	of	gifts	is	a	matter	of
God’s	sovereign	will,	and	it	is	for	the	good	of	the	church	and	for
our	good	that	none	of	us	have	all	of	the	gifts,	and	that	we	will	need
continually	to	depend	on	others	who	have	gifts	differing	from	ours.
These	considerations	should	make	us	content	if	God	chooses	not	to
give	us	the	other	gifts	that	we	seek.
8.	Gifts	Are	Tools	for	Ministry,	and	Not	Necessarily	Related	to	Christian
Maturity.
	We	must	recognize	that	spiritual	gifts	are	given	to	
every	
believer	(1
Cor.	12:7,	11;	1	Peter	4:10).	Even	immature	Christians	receive	spiritual	gifts
from	the	Lord—this	was	certainly	evident	in	the	Corinthian	church,	which
had	an	abundance	of	spiritual	gifts	(1	Cor.	1:7),	but	was	still	very	immature	in
many	areas	of	doctrine	and	conduct.	Paul	says,	“But	I,	brethren,	could	not
address	you	as	spiritual	men,	but	as	men	of	the	flesh,	as	babes	in	Christ”	(1
Cor.	3:1).	So	spiritual	gifts	are	not	necessarily	a	sign	of	spiritual	maturity.	It	is
possible	to	have	remarkable	spiritual	gifts	in	one	area	or	another	but	still	be
quite	immature	in	doctrinal	understanding	or	in	Christian	conduct,	as	was	the
case	at	Corinth.	Indeed,	on	occasion	even	
unbelievers	
are	able	to	prophesy
and	cast	out	demons	and	do	miracles,	for	Jesus	says	that	at	the	last	day	many
will	say	to	him,	“Lord,	Lord,	did	we	not	prophesy	in	your	name,	and	cast	out
demons	in	your	name,	and	do	many	mighty	works	in	your	name?”	But	Jesus
will	declare	to	them,	“I	
never	
knew	you;	depart	from	me,	you	evildoers”
(Matt.	7:22–23).	It	is	not	that	Jesus	knew	them	once	and	later	did	not	know
them;	he	says,	“I	never	knew	you.”	They	were	never	Christians,	yet	they
performed	many	remarkable	works.	So	
we	must	not	evaluate	spiritual
maturity	on	the	basis	of	spiritual	gifting.	
Maturity	comes	through	a	close	walk
with	Jesus,	and	results	in	obedience	to	his	commands	in	everyday	life:	“He
who	says	he	abides	in	him	ought	to	walk	in	the	same	way	in	which	he
walked”	(1	John	2:6).
Why	then	does	the	Holy	Spirit	give	us	spiritual	gifts?	They	are
given	for	the	work	of	ministry	and	are	
simply	tools	
to	be	used	for
that	end.	They	should	never	be	a	source	of	personal	pride	on	the
part	of	those	who	possess	them,	nor	should	they	be	thought	of	as	a
mark	of	maturity.	We	should	strive	simply	to	excel	in	loving	others,
caring	for	their	needs,	building	up	the	church,	and	living	a	life	of
conformity	to	the	pattern	of	Christ’s	life.	If	we	do	that,	and	if	God
chooses	to	give	us	spiritual	gifts	that	equip	us	for	those	tasks,	then
we	should	thank	him	for	that,	and	pray	that	he	would	keep	us	from
pride	over	gifts	that	have	been	freely	and	graciously	given,	and
which	we	did	not	earn.
B.	Have	Some	Gifts	Ceased?	The	Cessationist	Debate
Within	the	evangelical	world	today	there	are	differing	positions
over	the	question,	“Are	all	the	gifts	mentioned	in	the	New
Testament	valid	for	use	in	the	church	today?”	Some	would	say
yes.
21
	Others	would	say	no,	and	would	argue	that	some	of	the	more
miraculous	gifts	(such	as	prophecy,	tongues	plus	interpretation,	and
perhaps	healing	and	casting	out	of	demons)	were	given	only	during
the	time	of	the	apostles,	as	“signs”	to	authenticate	the	apostles
during	the	early	preaching	of	the	gospel.	They	state	that	these	gifts
are	no	longer	needed	as	signs	today,	and	that	they	ceased	at	the	end
of	the	apostolic	age,	probably	at	the	end	of	the	first	century	or
beginning	of	the	second	century	A.D.
We	should	also	realize	that	there	is	a	large	“middle”	group	with
respect	to	this	question,	a	group	of	“mainstream	evangelicals”	who
are	neither	charismatics	or	Pentecostals	on	the	one	hand,	nor
“cessationists”
22
	on	the	other	hand,	but	are	simply	undecided,	and
unsure	if	this	question	can	be	decided	from	Scripture.
23
Although	some	aspects	of	this	question	were	discussed	in	chapter
17	on	miracles,	there	are	some	additional	considerations	that	can	be
addressed	here,	specifically	related	to	the	topic	of	spiritual	gifts.
1.
	Does	
1
	Corinthians	
1
3:8–
1
3	Tell	Us	When	Miraculous	Gifts	Will
Cease?
	Paul	says:
Love	never	ends;	as	for	prophecies,	they	will	pass	away;	as	for
tongues,	they	will	cease;	as	for	knowledge,	it	will	pass	away.	For	our
knowledge	is	imperfect	and	our	prophecy	is	imperfect;	but	
when	the
perfect	comes,	the	imperfect	will	pass	away.	
When	I	was	a	child,	I
spoke	like	a	child,	I	thought	like	a	child,	I	reasoned	like	a	child;	when
I	became	a	man,	I	gave	up	childish	ways.	For	now	we	see	in	a	mirror
dimly,	but	then	face	to	face.	Now	I	know	in	part;	then	I	shall
understand	fully,	even	as	I	have	been	fully	understood.	So	faith,	hope,
love	abide,	these	three;	but	the	greatest	of	these	is	love.	(1	Cor.	13:8–
13)
This	passage	is	important	to	the	discussion	because	in	it	Paul
mentions	the	gift	of	prophecy	as	something	that	is	“imperfect,”	and
then	says	that	what	is	“imperfect”	will	“pass	away”	(1	Cor.	13:10).
He	even	says	when	this	will	happen:	“when	the	perfect	comes.”	But
when	is	that?	And	even	if	we	can	determine	when	it	is,	does	that
mean	that	Paul	had	in	mind	something	that	would	answer	this
“cessation”	question	for	the	church	today?	Can	the	gift	of	prophecy
in	this	passage	be	representative	of	miraculous	gifts	in	general	in
the	church	age?
a.	The	Purpose	of	
1
	Corinthians	
1
3:8–
1
3:
	Paul	interrupts	his	discussion	of
spiritual	gifts	with	chapter	13	of	1	Corinthians,	in	which	he	intends	to	put	the
entire	discussion	of	gifts	in	proper	perspective.	It	is	not	enough	simply	to
“seek	the	greater	gifts”	(12:31a,	author’s	translation).	One	must	also	“seek
after	love”	(14:1,	author’s	translation),	thus	coupling	proper	goals	with	proper
motives.	Without	love,	the	gifts	are	without	value	(13:1–3).	In	fact,	Paul
argues,	love	is	superior	to	all	the	gifts	and	therefore	it	is	more	important	to	act
in	love	than	to	have	any	of	the	gifts.
In	order	to	show	the	superiority	of	love,	Paul	argues	that	it	lasts
forever,	whereas	the	gifts	are	all	temporary	(13:8).	Verses	9–12
further	explain	why	the	gifts	are	temporary.	Our	present	knowledge
and	prophesying	are	partial	and	imperfect	(v.	
9),	but	someday
something	perfect	will	come	to	replace	them	(v.	
10).	This	is
explained	by	the	analogy	of	a	child	who	gives	up	childish	thought
and	speech	for	the	thought	and	speech	of	an	adult	(v.	
11).	Paul	then
elaborates	further	on	verses	9–10	by	explaining	that	our	present
perception	and	knowledge	are	indirect	and	imperfect,	but	that
someday	they	will	be	direct	and	perfect	(v.	
12).
In	this	argument	Paul	connects	the	function	of	prophecy	with	the
time	of	its	cessation.	It	fills	a	certain	need	now,	but	does	so	only
imperfectly.	When	“the	perfect”	comes,	that	function	will	be	better
fulfilled	by	something	else,	and	prophecy	will	cease	because	it	will
be	made	obsolete	or	useless	(this	is	the	probable	nuance	of	the
Greek	term	used	here,	
katargeō,	
“pass	away”	in	vv.	8,	10).	So	the
overall	function	of	1	Corinthians	13:8–13	is	to	show	that	love	is
superior	to	gifts	like	prophecy	because	those	gifts	will	pass	away
but	love	will	not	pass	away.
b.	
1
	Corinthians	
1
3:
1
0:	The	Cessation	of	Prophecy	When	Christ	Returns:
Paul	writes	in	verse	10,	“But	
when	the	perfect	comes,	
the	imperfect	will	pass
away.”	The	phrase	“the	imperfect”	(Gk.	
ek	merous,	
“partial,	imperfect”)	refers
most	clearly	to	knowing	and	prophesying,	the	two	activities	that	are	said	to	be
done	“partially,	imperfectly”	in	verse	9	(also	using	in	both	cases	the	same
Greek	phrase,	
ek	merous
).	To	bring	out	this	connection,	we	could	translate,
Love	never	fails.	Whether	there	be	prophecies,	they	will	
pass	away;
whether	there	be	tongues,	they	will	cease;	whether	there	be
knowledge,	it	will	
pass	away.	
This	is	because	we	know	
imperfectly
and	we	prophesy	
imperfectly—
but	when	the	perfect	comes,	the
imperfect	will	
pass	away.
Thus,	the	strong	links	between	the	statements	are	made	clear	by	the	repetition
of	two	key	terms,	“pass	away”	and	“imperfect.”
No	doubt	Paul	also	intended	tongues	to	be	included	in	the	sense	of	verse	9	as
among	those	activities	that	are	“imperfect,”	but	omitted	overly	pedantic
repetition	for	stylistic	reasons.	Yet	tongues	must	be	understood	as	part	of	the
sense	of	verse	9,	for	verse	9	is	the	reason	for	verse	8,	as	the	word	“for”	(Gk.
gar
)	shows.	Thus	verse	9	must	give	the	reason	why	tongues,	as	well	as
knowledge	and	prophecy,	will	cease.	In	fact,	the	repeated	“if	.	.	.	if	.	.	.	if”	in
verse	8	suggests	that	Paul	could	have	listed	more	gifts	here	(wisdom,	healing,
interpretation?)	if	he	had	wished.
So	1	Corinthians	13:10	could	be	paraphrased,	“When	the	perfect	is
come,	
prophecy	and	tongues	and	other	imperfect	gifts	
will	pass
away.”	The	only	remaining	problem	is	to	determine	what	time	is
meant	by	the	word	“when.”	Several	factors	in	the	context	argue	that
the	time	of	the	Lord’s	return	what	Paul	has	in	mind.
(1)	First,	the	meaning	of	verse	12	seems	to	require	that	verse	10	is
talking	about	the	time	of	the	Lord’s	return.	The	word	“then”	(Gk.
tote
)	in	verse	12	refers	to	the	time	“when	the	perfect	comes”	in
verse	10.	This	is	evident	from	looking	at	verse	12:	“For	now	we	see
in	a	mirror	dimly,	but	then	face	to	face.	Now	I	know	in	part;	
then	
I
shall	know	even	as	I	have	been	known”	(author’s	translation).
When	shall	we	see	“face	to	face”?	When	shall	we	know	“even	as
we	have	been	known”?	These	events	can	only	happen	when	the
Lord	returns.
The	phrase	“see	face	to	face”	is	several	times	used	in	the	Old
Testament	to	refer	to	seeing	God	personally
24	
—	not	fully	or
exhaustively,	for	no	finite	creature	can	ever	do	that,	but	personally
and	truly	nonetheless.	So	when	Paul	says,	“but	then	face	to	face”	he
clearly	means,	“but	then	
we	shall	see	God	
face	to	face.”	Indeed,
that	will	be	the	greatest	blessing	of	heaven	and	our	greatest	joy	for
all	eternity	(Rev.	22:4:	“They	shall	see	his	face”).
The	second	half	of	verse	12	says,	“Now	I	know	in	part;	then	I	shall
know	even	as	I	have	been	known.”	The	second	and	third	word	for
“know”—the	one	used	for	“Then	I	shall	
know	
even	as	I	have	been
known”—
is	a	somewhat	stronger	word	for	knowing	(Gk.
epiginōskō
),	but	certainly	does	not	imply	infinite	knowledge	or
omniscience.	Paul	does	not	expect	to	know	all	things,	and	he	does
not	say,	“Then	I	shall	know	all	things,”	which	would	have	been
easy	to	say	in	Greek.
25
	Rather,	he	means	that	when	the	Lord	returns
Paul	expects	to	be	freed	from	the	misconceptions	and	inabilities	to
understand	(especially	to	understand	God	and	his	work)	which	are
part	of	this	present	life.	His	knowledge	will	resemble	God’s	present
knowledge	of	him	because	it	will	contain	no	false	impressions	and
will	not	be	limited	to	what	is	able	to	be	perceived	in	this	age.	But
such	knowledge	will	only	occur	when	the	Lord	returns.
Now	what	is	the	word	“then”	in	verse	12	referring	to?	Paul	says,
“For	now	we	see	in	a	mirror	dimly,	but	
then	
we	shall	see	face	to
face.	Now	I	know	in	part;	but	
then	
I	shall	know	even	as	I	have	been
known”	(author’s	translation).	His	word	“then”	has	to	refer	back	to
something	in	the	previous	verses	that	he	has	been	explaining.	We
look	first	to	verse	11,	but	see	that	nothing	in	verse	11	can	be	a
future	time	Paul	refers	to	as	“then”:	“When	I	was	a	child,	I	spoke
like	a	child,	I	thought	like	a	child,	I	reasoned	like	a	child;	when	I
became	a	man,	I	gave	up	childish	ways.”	All	of	this	refers	to	the
past,	not	the	future.	It	speaks	of	past	events	in	Paul’s	life	by	way	of
providing	a	natural	human	illustration	of	what	he	has	said	in	verse
10.	But	nothing	in	the	verse	speaks	of	a	future	time	when
something	
will	
happen.
So	we	look	back	to	verse	10:	“but	when	the	perfect	comes,	the
imperfect	will	pass	away.”	Here	is	a	statement	about	the	future.	At
some	point	in	the	future,	Paul	says	that	“the	perfect”	
will	
come,	and
“the	imperfect”	
will	
pass	away,	
will	
be	“made	useless.”	When	will
this	happen?	This	is	what	is	explained	by	verse	12.	
Then,	
at	the
time	the	perfect	comes,	we	shall	see	“face	to	face”	and	know	“even
as	we	are	known.”
This	means	that	the	time	when	“the	perfect”	comes	must	be	the
time	of	Christ’s	return.
26
	Therefore,	we	can	paraphrase	verse	10:
“But	
when	Christ	returns,	
the	imperfect	will	pass	away.”
27
	Or,	to
use	our	conclusion	above	that	“the	imperfect”	included	prophecy
and	tongues,	we	can	paraphrase,	“But	
when	Christ	returns,
prophecy	and	tongues	(and	other	imperfect	gifts)	will	pass	away.”
Thus	we	have	in	1	Corinthians	13:10	a	definite	statement	about	the
time	of	the	cessation	of	imperfect	gifts	like	prophecy:	they	will	“be
made	useless”	or	“pass	away”	
when	Christ	returns.	
And	this	would
imply	that	they	will	continue	to	exist	and	be	useful	for	the	church,
throughout	the	church	age,	including	today,	and	right	up	to	the	day
when	Christ	returns.
(2)	Another	reason	why	the	time	when	“the	perfect”	comes	is	the
time	when	Christ	returns	is	also	evident	from	the	purpose	of	the
passage:	Paul	is	attempting	to	emphasize	the	greatness	of	love,	and
in	so	doing	he	wants	to	establish	that	“Love	never	ends”	(1	Cor.
13:8).	To	prove	his	point	he	argues	that	it	will	last	beyond	the	time
when	the	Lord	returns,	unlike	present	spiritual	gifts.	This	makes	a
convincing	argument:	love	is	so	fundamental	to	God’s	plans	for	the
universe	that	it	will	last	beyond	the	transition	from	this	age	to	the
age	to	come	at	Christ’s	return—it	will	continue	for	eternity.
(3)	A	third	reason	why	this	passage	refers	to	the	time	of	the	Lord’s
return	can	be	found	in	a	more	general	statement	from	Paul	about	the
purpose	of	spiritual	gifts	in	the	New	Testament	age.	In	1
Corinthians	1:7	Paul	ties	the	possession	of	spiritual	gifts	(Gk.
charismata
)	to	the	activity	of	waiting	for	the	Lord’s	return:	“you	are
not	lacking	in	any	spiritual	gift,	as	you	wait	for	the	revealing	of	our
Lord	Jesus	Christ.”
This	suggests	that	Paul	saw	the	gifts	as	a	temporary	provision	made
to	equip	believers	for	ministry	
until	the	Lord	returned.	
So	this	verse
provides	a	close	parallel	to	the	thought	of	1	Corinthians	13:8–13,
where	prophecy	and	knowledge	(and	no	doubt	tongues)	are	seen,
similarly,	as	useful	until	Christ’s	return	but	unnecessary	beyond	that
time.
1	Corinthians	13:10,	therefore,	refers	to	the	time	of	Christ’s	return
and	says	that	these	spiritual	gifts	will	last	among	believers	until	that
time.	This	means	that	we	have	a	clear	biblical	statement	that	Paul
expected	these	gifts	to	continue	through	the	entire	church	age	and
to	function	for	the	benefit	of	the	church	until	the	Lord	returns.
c.	Objections:
	Various	objections	to	this	conclusion	have	been	raised,	usually
by	those	who	hold	that	these	gifts	have	ceased	in	the	church	and	should	no
longer	be	used.
(1)	This	Passage	Does	Not	Specify	When	the	Gifts	Will	Cease:
	The	first
objection	to	our	conclusion	above	comes	from	Richard	Gaffin’s	thoughtful
study,	
Perspectives	on	Pentecost.	
While	Dr.	Gaffin	agrees	that	“when	the
perfect	comes”	refers	to	the	time	of	Christ’s	return,	he	does	not	think	that	this
verse	specifies	the	time	of	the	cessation	of	certain	gifts.	He	thinks,	rather,	that
Paul	is	just	viewing	“the	entire	period	until	Christ’s	return,	without	regard	to
whether	or	not	discontinuities	may	intervene	during	the	course	of	this
period.”
28
In	fact,	Gaffin	argues,	Paul’s	overall	purpose	is	to	emphasize	the
enduring	qualities	of	faith,	hope,	and	love,	especially	love,	and	not
to	specify	the	time	in	which	certain	gifts	will	cease.	He	says:
Paul	is	not	intending	to	specify	the	time	when	any	particular	mode
will	cease.	What	he	does	affirm	is	the	termination	of	the	believer’s
present,	fragmentary	knowledge	.	.	.	when	“the	perfect”	comes.	The
time	of	the	cessation	of	prophecy	and	tongues	is	an	open	question	so
far	as	this	passage	is	concerned	and	will	have	to	be	decided	on	the
basis	of	other	passages	and	considerations.
29
He	also	says	that,	in	addition	to	prophecy,	tongues,	and	knowledge,	Paul
might	just	as	well	have	added	“inscripturation,”	too—and	if	he	had	done	this,
the	list	would	then	have	included	an	element	that	ceased	long	before	Christ’s
return.	(Inscripturation	is	the	process	of	writing	Scripture.)	So,	Gaffin
concludes,	it	might	be	true	of	some	of	the	others	in	the	list	as	well.
In	response	to	this	objection	it	must	be	said	that	it	does	not	do
justice	to	the	actual	words	of	the	text.	Evangelicals	have	rightly
insisted	(and	I	know	that	Dr.	Gaffin	agrees	with	this)	that	passages
of	Scripture	are	true	not	only	in	the	main	point	of	each	passage,	but
also	in	the	minor	details	that	are	affirmed	as	well.	The	main	point	of
the	passage	may	well	be	that	love	lasts	forever,	but	another	point,
and	certainly	an	important	one	as	well,	is	that	verse	10	affirms	not
just	that	these	imperfect	gifts	will	cease	sometime,	but	that	they	will
cease	“
when	
the	perfect	comes.”	Paul	specifies	a	certain	time:
“
When	the	perfect	comes,	
the	imperfect	will	pass	away.”	But	Dr.
Gaffin	seems	to	claim	that	Paul	is	not	actually	saying	this.	Yet	the
force	of	the	words	cannot	be	avoided	by	affirming	that	the	overall
theme	of	the	larger	context	is	something	else.
In	addition,	Dr.	Gaffin’s	suggestion	does	not	seem	to	fit	with	the
logic	of	the	passage.	Paul’s	argument	is	that	it	is	specifically	the
coming	of	“the	perfect,”	which	does	away	with	prophecy,	tongues,
and	knowledge,	because	then	there	is	a	new,	far-superior	way	of
learning	and	knowing	things	“even	as	I	have	been	known.”	But
until	
that	time,	the	new	and	superior	way	of	knowing	has	not	come,
and	therefore	these	imperfect	gifts	are	still	valid	and	useful.	Finally,
it	is	precarious	to	put	much	weight	on	something	we	think	Paul
might	have	said	but	in	fact	did	not	say.	To	say	that	Paul	might	have
included	“inscripturation”	in	this	list	means	that	Paul	might	have
written,	“When	Christ	returns,	inscripturation	will	cease.”	But	I
cannot	believe	at	all	that	Paul	could	have	written	such	a	statement,
for	it	would	have	been	false—indeed,	a	“false	prophecy”	in	the
words	of	Scripture.	For	“inscripturation”	ceased	long	ago,	when	the
book	of	Revelation	was	written	by	the	apostle	John.
So	Dr.	Gaffin’s	objections	do	not	seem	to	overturn	our	conclusions
on	1	Corinthians	13:10.	If	“the	perfect”	refers	to	the	time	of	Christ’s
return,	then	Paul	says	that	gifts	such	as	prophecy	and	tongues	will
cease	at	that	time,	and	implies	therefore	that	they	continue	through
the	church	age.
(2)	“When	the	Perfect	Comes”	in	
1
	Corinthians	
1
3:
1
0	Refers	to	a	Time
Earlier	Than	the	Time	of	the	Lord’s	Return:
	Those	who	make	this	second
objection	argue	that	“when	the	perfect	comes”	means	one	of	several	different
things,	such	as	“when	the	church	is	mature”	or	“when	Scripture	is	complete”
or	“when	the	Gentiles	are	included	in	the	church.”	Probably	the	most	careful
statement	of	this	view	is	found	in	the	book	by	Robert	L.	Reymond,	
What
About	Continuing	Revelations	and	Miracles	in	the	Presbyterian	Church
Today?
30
	but	another	clear	statement	of	a	similar	position	is	found	in	Walter
Chantry’s	book,	
Signs	of	the	Apostles.
31
Chantry’s	argument	depends	on	the	fact	that	elsewhere	in	1
Corinthians	the	word	here	translated	“perfect”	(Gk.	
teleios
)	is	used
to	refer	to	human	maturity	(1	Cor.	14:20,	“in	thinking	be	mature”)
or	to	maturity	in	the	Christian	life	(as	in	1	Cor.	2:6).	Yet	here	again
we	must	note	that	a	word	does	not	have	to	be	used	to	refer	to	the
same	thing	every	time	it	is	used	in	Scripture—in	some	cases	
teleios
may	refer	to	“mature”	or	“perfect”	manhood,	in	other	cases	some
other	kind	of	“completeness”	or	“perfection.”	The	word	
teleios	
is
used	in	Hebrews	9:11,	for	example,	to	refer	to	the	“more	perfect
tent”—yet	we	would	not	therefore	conclude	that	“perfect”	in	1
Corinthians	13:10	must	refer	to	a	perfect	tent.	The	precise	referent
of	the	word	must	be	determined	by	the	individual	context,	and
there,	as	we	have	seen,	the	context	indicates	that	“when	the	perfect
comes”	refers	to	the	time	of	Christ’s	return.
Dr.	Reymond’s	argument	is	somewhat	different.	He	reasons	as
follows	(p.	
34):
(a)	“The	imperfect”	things	mentioned	in	verses	9–10—prophecy,
tongues,	and	knowledge—are	incomplete	means	of	revelation,	“all
relating	to	God’s	making	his	will	known	to	his	church.”
(b)	“The	perfect”	in	this	context	must	refer	to	something	in	the
same	category	as	the	“imperfect”	things.
(c)	Therefore	“the	perfect”	in	this	context	must	refer	to	a	means	of
revelation,	but	a	completed	one.	And	this	completed	means	of
God’s	making	his	will	known	to	his	church	is	Scripture.
(d)	Conclusion:	“When	the	perfect	comes”	refers	to	the	time	when
the	canon	of	Scripture	will	be	complete.
Reymond	notes	that	he	is	not	saying	that	“the	perfect”	refers
exactly	to	the	canon	of	Scripture,	but	rather	to	“the	completed
revelatory	process”	that	resulted	in	Scripture	(p.	
32).	And	in
response	to	the	objection	that	“then	we	shall	see	face	to	face”	in
verse	12	refers	to	seeing	God	face	to	face,	he	answers	that	it	may
not	mean	this,	but	may	simply	mean	seeing	“plainly”	as	opposed	to
“obscurely”	(p.	
32).
In	response,	it	may	be	said	that	this	argument,	while	careful	and
consistent	in	itself,	still	depends	on	one	prior	assumption	which	is
really	the	point	at	issue	in	this	whole	discussion:	the	authority	of
New	Testament	prophecy	and	related	gifts.	Once	Reymond	assumes
that	prophecy	(and	tongues	and	the	kind	of	“knowledge”	mentioned
here)	are	Scripture-quality	revelation,	the	whole	argument	falls	into
place.	The	argument	could	be	recast	as	follows:
(a)	Prophecy	and	tongues	are	Scripture-quality	revelation.
(b)	Therefore	this	whole	passage	is	about	Scripture-quality
revelation.
(c)	Therefore	“the	perfect”	refers	to	the	perfection	or	completion	of
Scripture-quality	revelation,	or	the	completion	of	Scripture.
In	such	an	argument	the	initial	assumption	determines	the
conclusion.	However,	before	this	assumption	can	be	made,	it	needs
to	be	demonstrated	from	an	inductive	analysis	of	the	New
Testament	texts	on	prophecy.
32
	Yet,	to	my	knowledge,	no	such
inductive	demonstration	of	the	Scripture-quality	authority	of	New
Testament	congregational	prophecy	has	been	made.
Moreover,	there	are	some	other	factors	in	the	text	of	1	Corinthians
13:8–13	that	are	hard	to	reconcile	with	Reymond’s	position.	The
regular	Old	Testament	usage	of	seeing	“face	to	face”	as	an
expression	not	just	for	seeing	clearly	but	for	
personally	
seeing	God
(see	above)	remains	unexplained.	And	the	fact	that	Paul	includes
himself	in	the	expressions	“Then	
we	
shall	see	face	to	face”	and
“Then	I	shall	know	even	as	I	have	been	known”	make	it	difficult	to
view	these	as	references	to	the	time	of	the	completion	of	Scripture.
Does	Paul	really	think	that	when	the	other	apostles	finally	finish
their	contributions	to	the	New	Testament	he	will	suddenly	gain	such
a	remarkable	change	in	his	knowledge	that	he	will	know	as	he	has
been	known,	and	will	go	from	seeing	in	a	mirror	dimly	to	seeing
face	to	face?
In	addition	to	the	views	of	Reymond	and	Chantry,	there	have	been
other	attempts	to	see	“when	the	perfect	comes”	as	some	time	before
Christ’s	return,	but	we	will	not	treat	them	in	detail	here.	Such	views
all	break	down	at	verse	12,	where	Paul	implies	that	believers	will
see	God	“face	to	face”	“when	the	perfect	comes.”	This	cannot	be
said	about	the	time	suggested	in	any	of	these	other	proposals.
The	proposal	about	the	completion	of	the	canon	of	New	Testament
Scripture	(the	group	of	writings	that	came	to	be	included	in	the
New	Testament)	also	fails	to	fit	Paul’s	purpose	in	the	context.	If	we
take	A.D.	90	as	the	approximate	date	of	the	writing	of	Revelation,
the	last	New	Testament	book	written,	then	the	end	of	the	writing	of
Scripture	came	about	thirty-five	years	after	Paul	wrote	1
Corinthians	(about	A.D.	55).	But	would	it	be	persuasive	to	argue	as
follows:	“We	can	be	sure	that	love	will	never	end,	for	we	know	that
it	will	last	more	than	thirty-five	years”?	This	would	hardly	be	a
convincing	argument.	The	context	requires	rather	that	Paul	be
contrasting	this	age	with	the	age	to	come,	and	saying	that	love	will
endure	into	eternity.
33
	In	fact,	we	see	a	similar	procedure	elsewhere
in	1	Corinthians.	When	Paul	wants	to	demonstrate	the	eternal	value
of	something,	he	does	this	by	arguing	that	it	will	last	beyond	the
day	of	the	Lord’s	return	(cf,	1	Cor.	3:13–15;	15:51–58).	By
contrast,	prophecy	and	other	gifts	will	not	last	beyond	that	day.
Finally,	these	proposals	fail	to	find	any	support	in	the	immediate
context.	Whereas	Christ’s	return	is	mentioned	clearly	in	verse	12,
no	verse	in	this	section	mentions	anything	about	the	completion	of
Scripture	or	a	collection	of	the	books	of	the	New	Testament	or	the
inclusion	of	the	Gentiles	in	the	church	or	the	“maturity”	of	the
church	(whatever	that	means—is	the	church	really	mature	even
today?).	All	of	these	suggestions	bring	in	new	elements	not	found
in	the	context	to	replace	the	one	element—Christ’s	return—which
clearly	is	right	there	in	the	context	already.	In	fact,	Richard	Gaffin,
who	himself	holds	that	the	gift	of	prophecy	is	not	valid	for	today,
nevertheless	says	that	the	“perfect”	in	verse	10	and	the	“then”	in
verse	12	“no	doubt	refer	to	the	time	of	Christ’s	return.	The	view
that	they	describe	the	point	at	which	the	New	Testament	canon	is
completed	cannot	be	made	credible	exegetically.”
34
Dr.	D.	Martyn	Lloyd-Jones	observes	that	the	view	that	makes
“when	the	perfect	comes”	equal	the	time	of	the	completion	of	the
New	Testament	encounters	another	difficulty:
It	means	that	you	and	I,	who	have	the	Scriptures	open	before	us,	know
much	more	than	the	apostle	Paul	of	God’s	truth.	.	.	.	It	means	that	we
are	altogether	superior	.	.	.	even	to	the	apostles	themselves,	including
the	apostle	Paul!	It	means	that	we	are	now	in	a	position	in	which	.	.	.
“we	know,	even	as	also	we	are	known”	by	God	.	.	.	indeed,	there	is
only	one	word	to	describe	such	a	view,	it	is	nonsense.
35
John	Calvin,	referring	to	1	Corinthians	13:8–13,	says,	“It	is	stupid
of	people	to	make	the	whole	of	this	discussion	apply	to	the
intervening	time.”
36
2.	Would	the	Continuation	of	Prophecy	Today	Challenge	the	Sufficiency
of	Scripture?
a.	The	Authority	of	the	Gift	of	Prophecy:
	Those	who	take	a	“cessationist”
view	argue	that	once	the	last	New	Testament	book	was	written	(probably	the
book	of	Revelation	around	A.D.	90),	there	were	to	be	no	more	“words	of
God”	spoken	or	written	in	the	church.	This	is	especially	relevant	for	the	gift
of	prophecy,	according	to	the	cessationist	position,	because	from	that	point	on
Scripture	
was	the	complete	and	sufficient	source	of	God’s	words	for	his
people.	To	add	any	more	words	from	continuing	prophetic	utterances	would
be,	in	effect,	either	to	add	to	Scripture	or	to	compete	with	Scripture.	In	both
cases,	the	sufficiency	of	Scripture	itself	would	be	challenged,	and,	in	practice,
its	unique	authority	in	our	lives	compromised.
Now	
if	
New	Testament	congregational	prophecy	was	like	Old
Testament	prophecy	and	New	Testament	apostolic	words	in	its
authority,	then	this	cessationist	objection	would	indeed	be	true.	
If
prophets	today,	for	example,	spoke	words	that	we	knew	were	the
very	words	of	God,	then	these	words	
would	be	
equal	to	Scripture	in
authority,	and	we	
would	be	
obligated	to	write	them	down	and	add
them	to	our	Bibles	whenever	we	heard	them.	But	if	we	are
convinced	that	God	stopped	causing	Scripture	to	be	written	when
the	book	of	Revelation	was	completed,	then	we	have	to	say	that	
this
kind	of	speech,	uttering	the	very	words	of	God,	cannot	happen
today.	And	any	claims	to	have	“new”	Scripture,	“new”	words	of
God,	must	be	rejected	as	false.
This	question	is	very	important,	because	the	claim	that	New
Testament	congregational	prophecy	had	authority	equal	to	Scripture
is	the	basis	of	many	cessationist	arguments.	Yet	it	must	be	noted
that	noncessationists	themselves	do	not	seem	to	view	prophecy	that
way.	George	Mallone	writes,	“To	my	knowledge	no	noncessationist
in	the	mainstream	of	Christianity	claims	that	revelation	today	is
equal	with	Scripture.”
37
	Perhaps	it	would	be	good	for	those	arguing
against	continuing	prophecy	today	to	give	a	more	sympathetic
hearing	to	the	most	responsible	charismatic	writers,	simply	for	the
purpose	of	being	able	to	respond	to	something	that	charismatics
actually	believe	
(even	if	not	always	expressed	in	theologically
precise	form),	instead	of	responding	to	something	that	cessationists
say	that	charismatics	believe	or	say	that	charismatics	should
believe.
Furthermore,	aside	from	the	question	of	current	practice	or	belief,	I
have	argued	extensively	elsewhere	that	ordinary	congregational
prophecy	in	New	Testament	churches	did	
not	
have	the	authority	of
Scripture.
38
	It	was	not	spoken	in	words	that	were	the	very	words	of
God,	but	rather	in	merely	human	words.	And	because	it	has	this
lesser	authority,	there	is	no	reason	to	think	that	it	will	not	continue
in	the	church	until	Christ	returns.	It	does	not	threaten	or	compete
with	Scripture	in	authority	but	is	subject	to	Scripture,	as	well	as	to
the	mature	judgment	of	the	congregation.
b.	The	Question	of	Guidance:
	Another	objection	is	sometimes	raised	at	this
point.	Some	will	argue	that	even	if	those	who	use	the	gift	of	prophecy	today
say	
that	it	does	not	equal	Scripture	in	authority,	
in	fact	
it	functions	in	their
lives	to	compete	with	or	even	replace	Scripture	in	giving	guidance	concerning
God’s	will.	Thus,	prophecy	today,	it	is	said,	challenges	the	doctrine	of	the
sufficiency	of	Scripture	for	guidance	in	our	lives.
Here	it	must	be	admitted	that	many	mistakes	have	been	made	in	the
history	of	the	church.	John	MacArthur	points	to	the	way	in	which
the	idea	of	further	revelations	has	given	rise	to	many	heretical
movements	in	the	church.
39
But	here	the	question	must	be,	Are	abuses	
necessary	
to	the
functioning	of	the	gift	of	prophecy?	If	we	are	to	argue	that	mistakes
and	abuses	of	a	gift	make	the	gift	itself	invalid,	then	we	would	have
to	reject	Bible	teaching	too	(for	many	Bible	teachers	have	taught
error	and	started	cults),	and	church	administration	as	well	(for	many
church	leaders	have	led	people	astray),	and	so	forth.	The	
abuse	
of	a
gift	does	not	mean	that	we	must	prohibit	the	
proper	use	
of	the	gift,
unless	it	can	be	shown	that	there	cannot	be	proper	use—that	
all	
use
has	to	be	abuse.
40
Moreover,	specifically	with	respect	to	guidance,	it	is	good	to	note
how	cautious	many	in	the	charismatic	movement	are	about	the	use
of	prophecy	to	give	specific	guidance.	Several	quotations	will
illustrate	this	point.
Michael	Harper	(Church	of	England):
Prophecies	which	tell	other	people	what	they	are	to	do—are	to	be
regarded	with	great	suspicion.
41
Dennis	and	Rita	Bennett	(American	Episcopalians):
We	should	also	be	careful	of	personal,	directive	prophecy,	especially
outside	the	ministry	of	a	mature	and	submitted	man	of	God.
Unrestrained	“personal	prophecy”	did	much	to	undermine	the
movement	of	the	Holy	Spirit	which	began	at	the	turn	of	the
century.	.	.	.	Christians	are	certainly	given	words	for	one	another	“in
the	Lord”	.	.	.	and	such	words	can	be	most	refreshing	and	helpful,	but
there	must	be	a	witness	of	the	Spirit	on	the	part	of	the	person
receiving	the	words,	and	extreme	caution	should	be	used	in	receiving
any	alleged	directive	or	predictive	prophecy.	Never	undertake	any
project	simply	because	you	were	told	to	by	presumed	prophetic
utterance	or	interpretation	of	tongues,	or	by	a	presumed	word	of
wisdom,	or	knowledge.	Never	do	something	just	because	a	friend
comes	to	you	and	says:	“The	Lord	told	me	to	tell	you	to	do	thus	and
thus.”	If	the	Lord	has	instructions	for	you,	He	will	give	you	a	witness
in	your	own	heart,	in	which	case	the	words	coming	from	a	friend	.	.	.
will	be	a	confirmation	to	what	God	
has	already	been	
showing	you.
Your	guidance	must	also	agree	with	Scripture.	.	.	.
42
Donald	Gee	(Assemblies	of	God):
[There	are]	grave	problems	raised	by	the	habit	of	giving	and	receiving
personal	“messages”	of	guidance	through	the	gifts	of	the	Spirit.	.	.	.
The	Bible	gives	a	place	for	such	direction	from	the	Holy	Spirit.	.	.	.
But	it	must	be	kept	in	proportion.	An	examination	of	the	Scriptures
will	show	us	that	as	a	matter	of	fact	the	early	Christians	did	
not
continually	receive	such	voices	from	heaven.	In	most	cases	they	made
their	decisions	by	the	use	of	what	we	often	call	“sanctified	common-
sense”	and	lived	quite	normal	lives.	Many	of	our	errors	where
spiritual	gifts	are	concerned	arise	when	we	want	the	extraordinary	and
exceptional	to	be	made	the	frequent	and	habitual.	Let	all	who	develop
excessive	desire	for	“messages”	through	the	gifts	take	warning	from
the	wreckage	of	past	generations	as	well	as	of	contemporaries.	.	.	.
The	Holy	Scriptures	are	a	lamp	unto	our	feet	and	a	light	unto	our
path.
43
On	the	other	hand,	even	among	very	Reformed	cessationists,	there
is	a	willingness	to	admit	some	kind	of	continuing	“illumination”	by
the	Holy	Spirit	in	believers’	lives.	For	example,	Westminster
Seminary	professor	Richard	Gaffin	says,
Often,	too,	what	is	seen	as	prophecy	is	actually	a	spontaneous,	Spirit-
worked	application	of	Scripture,	a	more	or	less	sudden	grasp	of	the
bearing	that	biblical	teaching	has	on	a	particular	situation	or	problem.
All	Christians	need	to	be	open	to	these	more	spontaneous	workings	of
the	Spirit.
44
And	Robert	Reymond	defines	
illumination	
as	“the	Holy	Spirit’s	enabling	of
Christians	generally	to	understand,	to	recall	to	mind,	and	to	apply	the
Scriptures	they	have	studied.”
45
But	if	these	writers	will	allow	for	the	present	activity	of	the	Holy
Spirit	enabling	Christians	to	“understand”	or	“recall	to	mind”	or
“apply”	or	“grasp”	the	teachings	of	Scripture,	then	there	does	not
seem	to	be	such	a	great	difference	in	principle	between	what	they
are	
saying	
and	what	many	in	the	charismatic	movement	are	
doing
(even	though	there	will	probably	be	some	remaining	differences
over	the	precise	way	guidance	functions—yet	this	is	not	so	much	a
difference	about	prophecy	as	about	guidance	generally,	and
particularly	the	way	guidance	from	Scripture	relates	to	guidance
from	advice,	counsel,	conscience,	circumstances,	sermons,	etc.).
The	larger	point	is	that	what	Gaffin	and	Reymond	here	call
“illumination,”	the	New	Testament	seems	to	call	a	“revelation,”	and
what	they	would	call	a	spoken	report	of	such	illumination,	the	New
Testament	seems	to	call	a	“prophecy.”
So	I	wonder	if	there	may	be	room	for	more	joint	theological
reflection	in	this	area.	Charismatics	need	to	realize	that	cessationists
are	skeptical	about	the	scope	and	frequency	of	such	“illumination,”
whether	it	is	right	to	call	it	New	Testament	prophecy,	whether	it
really	does	have	value	for	the	church,	and	whether	it	should	be
sought	after.	And	cessationists	need	to	realize	that	their	own	highly
developed	and	carefully	formulated	doctrine	of	the	sufficiency	of
Scripture	in	guidance	is	not	usually	shared	or	even	understood	by
much	of	evangelicalism,	including	those	in	the	charismatic
movement.	Nevertheless,	perhaps	the	Reformed	idea	of
“illumination”	allows	for	what	is	happening	in	prophecy	today,	and
may	provide	a	way	of	understanding	it	that	is	not	seen	as
challenging	the	sufficiency	of	Scripture.
What	shall	we	conclude	then	about	the	relationship	between	the	gift
of	prophecy	and	the	sufficiency	of	Scripture?	We	must	say	that	we
appreciate	the	desire	of	the	cessationists	to	protect	the	uniqueness
of	Scripture	and	not	to	allow	anything	to	compete	with	the	authority
of	Scripture	in	our	lives.	We	also	must	be	thankful	for	the	desire	of
cessationists	that	Christians	understand	and	follow	sound	principles
of	guidance	in	their	daily	lives,	and	not	get	off	into	an	area	of
excessive	subjectivism	that	does	not	have	the	controls	of	Scripture
attached	to	it.	On	the	other	hand,	there	is	certainly	a	danger	that
comes	with	the	cessationist	viewpoint	if	it	is	wrong	here.	It	is	the
very	real	danger	of	opposing	something	that	God	is	doing	in	the
church	today	and	failing	to	give	him	glory	for	that	work.	God	is
jealous	for	his	works	and	seeks	glory	from	them	for	himself,	and
we	must	continually	pray	not	only	that	he	would	keep	us	from
endorsing	error,	but	also	that	he	would	keep	us	from	opposing
something	that	is	genuinely	from	him.
3.	Were	Miraculous	Gifts	Limited	to	the	Apostles	and	Their
Companions?
	Another	cessationist	argument	is	that	miraculous	gifts	were
limited	to	the	apostles	and	their	close	companions.	Since	I	have	discussed	this
argument	at	length	in	chapter	17,	I	will	not	repeat	the	discussion	here.
46
4.	Did	Miraculous	Gifts	Only	Accompany	the	Giving	of	New	Scripture?
Another	objection	is	to	say	that	miraculous	gifts	accompanied	the	giving	of
Scripture,	and	since	there	is	no	new	Scripture	given	today,	we	should	expect
no	new	miracles	today.
But	in	response	to	that	it	must	be	said	that	this	is	not	the	only
purpose	for	miraculous	gifts.	As	we	noted	in	chapter	17,	miracles
have	several	other	purposes	in	Scripture:	(1)	they	authenticate	the
gospel	message	throughout	the	church	age;	(2)	they	give	help	to
those	in	need,	and	thereby	demonstrate	God’s	mercy	and	love;	(3)
they	equip	people	for	ministry;	and	(4)	they	glorify	God.
47
We	should	also	note	that	not	all	miracles	accompany	the	giving	of
additional	Scripture.	For	example,	the	ministries	of	Elijah	and
Elisha	were	marked	by	several	miracles	in	the	Old	Testament,	but
they	wrote	no	books	or	sections	of	the	Bible.	In	the	New	Testament,
there	were	many	occurrences	of	miracles	that	were	not
accompanied	by	the	giving	of	Scripture.	Both	Stephen	and	Philip	in
the	book	of	Acts	worked	miracles	but	wrote	no	Scripture.	There
were	prophets	who	wrote	no	Scripture	in	Caesarea	(Acts	21:4)	and
Tyre	(Acts	21:9–11)	and	Rome	(Rom.	12:6)	and	Thessalonica	(1
Thess.	5:20–21)	and	Ephesus	(Eph.	4:11)	and	the	communities	to
which	1	John	was	written	(1	John	4:1–6).	There	were	apparently
many	miracles	in	the	churches	of	Galatia	(Gal.	3:5).	There	were
many	miraculous	things	occurring	at	Corinth	(1	Cor.	12:8–10),	but
in	1	Corinthians	14:36	Paul	denies	that	any	Scripture	has	come
forth	from	the	Corinthian	church.
48
	And	James	expects	that	healing
will	occur	at	the	hands	of	the	elders	in	all	the	churches	to	which	he
writes	(see	James	5:14–16).
5.	Is	It	a	Historical	Fact	That	Miraculous	Gifts	Ceased	Early	in	the
History	of	the	Church?
	Some	cessationists	have	argued	that	miraculous	gifts
in	fact	ceased	when	the	apostles	died,	because	the	purpose	of	miracles	was	to
give	authentication	to	the	apostles.	For	this	reason,	it	is	argued,	there	should
be	no	miraculous	gifts	today.	B.	B.	Warfield	argued	this	extensively	in	his
book,	
Counterfeit	Miracles.
49
In	response,	it	must	be	said	first	that	the	premise	just	stated	is	very
doubtful	on	historical	grounds.	There	is	increasing	historical
evidence
50
	that	miraculous	gifts	were	occurring	throughout	the
history	of	the	church	in	greater	or	lesser	degree,	even	when
exaggerated	or	evidently	spurious	claims	are	discounted.	Healings
and	other	kinds	of	miraculous	answers	to	prayer	are	often	recorded.
There	were	also	people	claiming	to	be	prophets	throughout	the
history	of	the	early	church—the	problem	was	that	too	often	they
misunderstood	their	gift,	or	others	misunderstood	it,	so	that	their
utterances	were	(mistakenly)	treated	like	actual	words	of	God.
Sometimes	they	would	be	tolerated,	and	sometimes	they	were	too
much	of	a	threat	to	the	established	leadership	of	the	churches	and
they	would	begin	splinter	groups—tragically,	no	longer	under	the
restraining	and	evaluating	authority	of	the	established	churches.
Then	too,	others	may	have	had	“revelations”	given	to	them	which
they	then	did	not	express,	or	simply	included	without	comment	in	a
prayer,	or	in	a	sermon	or	word	of	exhortation,	or	in	the	writing	of	a
hymn	or	some	devotional	literature.
51
It	should	also	be	clear	that	when	Paul	said,	“When	the	perfect
comes,	the	imperfect	will	pass	away”	(1	Cor.	13:10),	he	was	not
saying	anything	about	the	relative	
frequency	
of	miraculous	gifts	in
the	history	of	the	church.	That	would	be	subject	to	much	variation
depending	on	the	spiritual	maturity	and	vitality	of	the	church	in
various	periods,	the	degree	to	which	these	gifts	were	sought	as	a
blessing	or	rejected	as	a	heresy,	the	frequency	with	which	the
meetings	of	the	church	normally	made	provision	for	the	exercise	of
these	gifts,	the	degree	to	which	the	nature	of	these	gifts	was
correctly	understood,	and,	over	all	of	this,	the	Holy	Spirit’s
sovereign	work	in	distributing	gifts	to	the	church.
What	Paul	is	speaking	about,	however,	is	the	total	and	final
abolition	of	these	gifts	that	is	to	be	brought	about	by	divine
initiative	at	the	return	of	Christ.	And	he	is	saying	that	he	thinks	that
until	the	time	of	the	return	of	Christ	these	gifts	will	at	least	to	some
extent	remain	available	for	use,	and	the	Holy	Spirit	will	continue	to
distribute	these	gifts	to	people.	Calvin	notes	the	abundance	of
spiritual	gifts	in	Paul’s	day	and	then	comments	(on	1	Cor.	14:32):
Today	we	see	our	own	slender	resources,	our	poverty	in	fact;	but	this
is	undoubtedly	the	punishment	we	deserve,	as	the	reward	for	our
ingratitude.	For	God’s	riches	are	not	exhausted,	nor	has	His	liberality
grown	less;	but	we	are	not	worthy	of	His	largess,	or	capable	of
receiving	all	that	He	generously	gives.
52
6.	Are	Miraculous	Gifts	Today	the	Same	As	the	Miraculous	Gifts	in
Scripture?
	Yet	another	objection	to	the	continuation	of	miracles	today	is	to
say	that	the	alleged	miracles	today	are	not	like	the	miracles	in	Scripture
because	they	are	far	weaker	and	often	are	only	partially	effective.	In	response
to	this	objection	we	must	ask	whether	it	really	matters	whether	the	miracles
today	are	exactly	as	powerful	as	those	that	occurred	at	the	time	of	the	New
Testament.	For	one	thing,	we	have	very	little	information	about	the	kind	of
miracles	done	by	ordinary	Christians	in	various	congregations,	such	as	the
Christians	at	Corinth	or	in	the	churches	in	Galatia.	Moreover,	although
remarkable	miracles	done	by	Jesus	are	recorded	in	the	gospels,	when	Jesus
healed	“every	disease	and	every	infirmity”	(Matt.	9:35)	this	must	have
included	many	with	less	serious	diseases.	We	must	also	ask	what	the	expected
benefit	is	for	the	objection	that	miracles	today	are	not	as	powerful	as	those	in
Scripture.	If	today	only	three	hundred	are	converted	at	an	evangelistic
meeting	instead	of	the	three	thousand	converted	on	the	day	of	Pentecost	(Acts
2:41),	shall	we	say	that	the	speaker	does	not	really	have	the	gift	of
evangelism,	since	the	gift	did	not	operate	as	powerfully	as	it	did	with	the
apostles?	Or	if	only	30	percent	of	the	people	we	pray	for	regarding	physical
illness	are	fully	healed	instead	of	100	percent	in	the	life	of	Jesus	or	of	the
apostles,	shall	we	say	this	is	not	the	New	Testament	gift	of	healing?
53
	We
must	remember	that	gifts	can	vary	in	strength	and	no	gift	is	perfect	in	this	age.
But	does	that	mean	that	we	should	stop	using	these	gifts	altogether,	or	oppose
them	where	we	see	them	functioning	with	some	degree	of	effectiveness?	Shall
we	not	praise	God	if	300	are	converted	rather	than	three	thousand,	or	if	30
percent	are	healed	rather	than	100	percent	of	those	for	whom	we	pray?	Is	not
the	work	of	the	Lord	being	done?	If	the	quantity	is	not	as	great	as	in	New
Testament	times,	then	we	may	ask	the	Lord	for	more	grace	or	mercy,	but	it
does	not	seem	appropriate	to	give	up	on	the	use	of	these	gifts	or	to	oppose
those	who	do	use	them.
7.	Is	It	Dangerous	for	a	Church	to	Allow	for	the	Possibility	of	Miraculous
Gifts	Today?
	A	final	objection	from	the	cessationist	position	is	to	say	that	a
church	that	emphasizes	the	use	of	miraculous	gifts	is	in	danger	of	becoming
imbalanced,	and	will	likely	neglect	other	important	things	such	as
evangelism,	sound	doctrine,	and	moral	purity	of	life.
To	say	that	the	use	of	miraculous	gifts	is	“dangerous”	is	not	by
itself	an	adequate	criticism,	because	some	things	that	are	
right	
are
dangerous,	at	least	in	some	sense.	Missionary	work	is	dangerous.
Driving	a	car	is	dangerous.	If	we	define	
dangerous	
to	mean
“something	might	go	wrong,”	then	we	can	criticize	
anything	
that
anybody	might	do	as	“dangerous,”	and	this	just	becomes	an	all-
purpose	criticism	when	there	is	no	specific	abuse	to	point	to.	A
better	approach	with	respect	to	spiritual	gifts	is	to	ask,	“Are	they
being	used	in	accordance	with	Scripture?”	and	“Are	adequate	steps
being	taken	to	guard	against	the	dangers	of	abuse?”
Of	course	it	is	true	that	churches	can	become	imbalanced,	and	some
in	fact	have	done	so.	But	not	all	will,	nor	do	they	have	to	do	so.
Furthermore,	since	this	argument	is	one	based	on	actual	results	in
the	life	of	a	church,	it	is	also	appropriate	to	ask,	“Which	churches	in
the	world	today	have	the	most	effective	evangelism?	Which	have
the	most	sacrificial	giving	among	their	members?	Which	in	fact
have	the	most	emphasis	on	purity	of	life?	Which	have	the	deepest
love	for	the	Lord	and	for	his	Word?”	It	seems	to	me	that	it	is
difficult	to	answer	these	questions	clearly,	but	I	do	not	think	that	we
can	fairly	say	that	those	churches	in	the	charismatic	and	Pentecostal
movements	
by	and	large	
are	
weaker	
in	these	areas	than	other
evangelical	churches.	In	fact,	in	some	cases	they	may	be	stronger	in
these	areas.	The	point	is	simply	that	any	argument	that	says	that
churches	emphasizing	miraculous	gifts	
will	
become	imbalanced	is
simply	not	proven	in	actual	practice.
8.	A	Final	Note:	Cessationists	and	Charismatics	Need	Each	Other.
	Finally,
it	can	be	argued	that	those	in	the	charismatic	and	Pentecostal	camps,	and
those	in	the	cessationist	camp	(primarily	Reformed	and	dispensational
Christians)	really	need	each	other,	and	they	would	do	well	to	appreciate	each
other	more.	The	former	tend	to	have	more	practical	experience	in	the	use	of
spiritual	gifts	and	in	vitality	in	worship	that	cessationists	could	benefit	from,
if	they	were	willing	to	learn.	On	the	other	hand,	Reformed	and	dispensational
groups	have	traditionally	been	very	strong	in	understanding	of	Christian
doctrine	and	in	deep	and	accurate	understanding	of	the	teachings	of	Scripture.
Charismatic	and	Pentecostal	groups	could	learn	much	from	them	if	they
would	be	willing	to	do	so.	But	it	certainly	is	not	helpful	to	the	church	as	a
whole	for	both	sides	to	think	they	can	learn	nothing	from	the	other,	or	that
they	can	gain	no	benefit	from	fellowship	with	each	other.
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
pter,	what	spiritual	gift	or	gifts	did	you	think	you	had?	Has	your
understanding	of	your	own	spiritual	gift(s)	changed	after	studying	this
chapter?	In	what	way?
2
.	
Explain	how	each	of	the	spiritual	gifts	that	you	understand	yourself	to
have	is	greater	than	what	would	have	been	known	to	most	old	covenant
believers.	Explain	how	each	gift	is	a	foretaste	of	some	knowledge	or
ability	you	will	have	after	Christ	returns.
3
.	
What	can	you	do	to	stir	up	or	strengthen	those	spiritual	gifts	in	you	that
need	strengthening?	Are	there	some	gifts	that	you	have	been	given	but
have	neglected?	Why	do	you	think	you	have	neglected	them?	What
could	be	done	to	stir	up	or	rekindle	them	in	you?
4
.	
As	you	think	about	your	own	church,	which	spiritual	gifts	do	you	think
are	most	effectively	functioning	at	the	present	time?	Which	are	most
needed	in	your	church?	Is	there	anything	you	can	do	to	help	meet	those
needs?
5
.	
What	do	you	think	could	be	done	to	help	churches	avoid	having
controversies,	and	even	divisions,	over	the	question	of	spiritual	gifts?
Are	there	tensions	in	your	own	church	with	regard	to	these	questions
today?	If	so,	what	can	you	do	to	help	alleviate	these	tensions?
6
.	
Do	you	think	that	some	spiritual	gifts	mentioned	in	the	New	Testament
ceased	early	in	the	history	of	the	church,	and	are	no	longer	valid	for
today?	Has	your	opinion	on	this	question	changed	as	a	result	of	reading
this	chapter?
7
.	
In	your	viewpoint,	would	a	church	be	healthier	and	more	unified	if	it
concentrated	on	a	few	gifts	and	used	them	carefully	and	well,	or	if	it
encouraged	a	multiplicity	of	different	gifts,	and	allowed	them	to	be	used
at	many	different	times	by	many	different	people?	If	you	answered	with
the	latter	option,	what	things	might	your	church	do	to	include	a	greater
diversity	and	distribution	in	the	use	of	spiritual	gifts?	What	are	some	of
the	dangers	that	might	accompany	such	widespread	use,	and	how	can
they	be	guarded	against?
SPECIAL	TERMS
See	the	list	at	the	end	of	the	next	chapter.
	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
See	the	list	at	the	end	of	the	next	chapter.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
1
	Peter	4:10–11:	
As	each	has	received	a	gift,	employ	it	for	one	another,	as
good	stewards	of	God’s	varied	grace:	whoever	speaks,	as	one	who	utters
oracles	of	God;	whoever	renders	service,	as	one	who	renders	it	by	the
strength	which	God	supplies;	in	order	that	in	everything	God	may	be	glorified
through	Jesus	Christ.	To	him	belong	glory	and	dominion	for	ever	and	ever.
Amen.
HYMN
“Come,	Thou	Almighty	King”
This	is	a	trinitarian	hymn	in	which	the	first	verse	is	addressed	to
God	the	Father,	the	second	to	God	the	Son,	and	the	third	to	God	the
Holy	Spirit.	The	third	verse	is	a	request	that	the	Holy	Spirit	would
come	and	rule	in	our	hearts,	be	ever-present	among	us,	and	dwell
among	us	as	the	“Spirit	of	power.”	The	final	verse	is	a	hymn	of
praise	to	God	“the	great	One	in	Three.”	In	the	midst	of	a	long
discussion	on	spiritual	gifts,	it	is	good	to	refocus	our	attention	on
God	himself,	who	is	the	giver	of	all	good	gifts,	and	whose	glory	is
the	goal	of	the	use	of	every	gift.
Come,	thou	almighty	King,	Help	us	thy	name	to	sing,
Help	us	to	praise:
Father,	all	glorious,	O’er	all	victorious,
Come,	and	reign	over	us,	Ancient	of	Days.
Come,	thou	incarnate	Word,	Gird	on	thy	mighty	sword,
Our	prayer	attend:
Come,	and	thy	people	bless,	And	give	thy	Word	success;
Spirit	of	holiness,	on	us	descend.
Come,	holy	Comforter,	Thy	sacred	witness	bear
In	this	glad	hour:
Thou	who	almighty	art,	Now	rule	in	every	heart,
And	ne’er	from	us	depart,	Spirit	of	pow’r.
To	the	great	One	in	Three,	Eternal	praises	be,
Hence	evermore.
His	sovereign	majesty	May	we	in	glory	see,
And	to	eternity	love	and	adore.
AUTHOR:	ANON.,	1757
NOTES
1
When	seemingly	natural	gifts	(such	as	teaching,	helps,	administration,	or	musical	gifts)	are	empowered	by	the	Holy	Spirit,	they
will	generally	show	increased	effectiveness	and	power	in	their	use.	Paul	says	the	Corinthians	were	“enriched”	in	all	their	speech
and	knowledge	as	spiritual	gifts	came	to	them	(1	Cor.	1:5–7).	Any	pastor	who	has	preached	for	a	time	knows	the	difference
between	preaching	in	his	own	“natural”	ability	and	preaching	the	same	sermon	under	the	anointing	or	empowering	of	the	Holy
Spirit.
2
The	only	thing	that	comes	close	to	casting	out	of	demons	in	the	Old	Testament	is	the	fact	that	when	David	played	the	lyre	for
King	Saul,	“Saul	was	refreshed,	and	was	well,	and	the	evil	spirit	departed	from	him”	(1	Sam.	16:23),	but	David	had	to	do	this
“whenever	the	evil	spirit	from	God	was	upon	Saul”	(ibid.),	indicating	that	there	was	no	permanent	relief	from	the	demonic
oppression	that	Saul	experienced.
3
See	
chapter	39
,	on	the	question	of	baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit.
4
Warfield,	
Counterfeit	Miracles,	
p.	5.
5
This	interpretation	of	1	Cor.	13:10	is	defended	at	greater	length	in	section	B	below.
6
Strictly	speaking,	to	be	an	apostle	is	an	office,	not	a	gift	(see	
chapter	47
,	on	the	office	of	apostle).
7
This	list	gives	four	kinds	of	persons	in	terms	of	offices	or	functions,	not,	strictly	speaking,	four	gifts.	For	three	of	the	functions
on	the	list,	the	corresponding	gifts	would	be	prophecy,	evangelism,	and	teaching.
8
The	Greek	term	for	“gift”	here	is	
charisma,	
the	same	term	Paul	uses	in	1	Cor.	12–14	to	talk	about	spiritual	gifts.
9
Something	can	be	said	at	this	point	about	the	relationship	between	gifts	and	offices	in	the	church.	As	we	look	at	these	lists,	it	is
evident	that	in	some	cases	Paul	names	the	specific	gift	(such	as	gifts	of	healing	or	administration	or	tongues),	and	in	other	cases	he
names	the	
persons	
who	have	those	gifts	(such	as	apostles,	prophets,	or	evangelists).	Some	lists	name	only	the	gifts	themselves
(such	as	1	Cor.	12:8–10),	while	other	lists	name	only	the	people	who	possess	those	gifts	(such	as	Eph.	4:11	or	1	Peter	4:11).	And
some	lists	are	mixed,	naming	some	gifts	and	some	persons	who	have	the	gifts	(such	as	Rom.	12:6–8	and	1	Cor.	12:28).
In	addition	to	that,	another	distinction	should	be	made:	In	cases	where	Paul	names	
persons,	
he	sometimes	gives	a	name	that	refers
to	an	officially	recognized	
office	
in	the	church	(such	as	“apostles”	or	“pastor-teachers”).	We	would	expect	that	such	people	would
begin	to	function	in	those	offices	after	they	had	received	formal	recognition	by	the	church	as	a	whole	(this	would	be	called
“ordination”	or	“installation	in	office”	for	the	office	of	pastor	[or	elder]	for	example).	But	in	other	cases,	though	the	person	is
named,	it	is	not	necessary	to	think	there	was	any	official	recognition	or	establishment	in	office	in	front	of	the	entire	church.	This
would	be	the	case,	for	example,	for	“he	who	encourages”	and	“he	who	contributes”	and	“he	who	does	acts	of	mercy”	in	Rom.
12:6–8.	Similarly,	the	New	Testament	does	not	clearly	indicate	that	prophets	or	evangelists	were	established	in	any	formally
recognized	offices	in	the	early	church,	and	the	word	“prophet”	probably	just	refers	to	one	who	prophesied	regularly	and	with
evident	blessing	in	the	church.	“Evangelist”	could	similarly	refer	to	those	who	regularly	functioned	effectively	in	the	work	of
evangelism,	and	“teachers”	could	include	both	those	who	had	formally	recognized	teaching	functions	in	the	church,	perhaps	in
connection	with	the	office	of	elder,	and	those	who	had	teaching	functions	in	less-formal	capacities	in	the	church	but	regularly
taught	with	effectiveness	in	informal	or	smaller	group	settings.
For	convenience,	we	will	continue	to	refer	to	these	lists	as	lists	of	“spiritual	gifts,”	although,	to	be	more	precise,	we	should	realize
that	they	include	both	spiritual	gifts	and	persons	who	exercise	those	gifts.	Since	both	the	gifts	and	the	persons	are	given	to	the
church	by	Jesus	Christ,	it	is	appropriate	that	both	are	named	in	various	parts	of	these	lists.
10
See	the	excellent	discussion	in	John	R.	W.	Stott,	
Baptism	and	Fullness:	The	Work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	Today	
(Downers	Grove,	Ill.
InterVarsity	Press,	1964),	pp.	88–89.
11
This	classification	is	from	Dennis	and	Rita	Bennett,	
The	Holy	Spirit	and	You	
(Plainfield,	N.J.:	Logos	International,	1971),	p.	
83.
The	Bennetts’	actual	categorization	is	gifts	of	revelation,	gifts	of	power,	and	inspirational	or	fellowship	gifts,	and	they	list	them	in
reverse	order	to	what	I	have	given	here.
12
This	variety	of	ways	of	classifying	gifts	allows	us	to	say	that	many	types	of	classification	are	possible	for	teaching	purposes,
but	we	should	beware	of	any	claim	that	a	certain	way	of	classifying	or	listing	gifts	is	the	only	valid	one,	for	Scripture	does	not
limit	us	to	any	one	scheme	of	classification.
13
See	also	1	Cor.	13:1–3	where	Paul	gives	examples	of	some	gifts	developed	to	the	highest	imaginable	degree,	examples	which
he	uses	to	show	that	even	such	gifts	without	love	would	bring	no	benefit.
14
See	
chapter	53
,	for	a	definition	of	the	gift	of	prophecy	in	the	church.
15
See	also	the	discussion	of	the	gift	of	speaking	in	tongues	in	
chapter	53
.
16
We	should	not	press	the	metaphor	of	the	body	too	far,	of	course,	for	people	
do	
receive	other	gifts,	and	Paul	even	encourages
people	to	seek	additional	spiritual	gifts	(1	Cor.	14:1).	But	the	metaphor	does	suggest	
some	
degree	of	stability	or	permanence	in	the
possession	of	gifts.
17
Although	the	primary	point	of	this	parable	has	to	do	with	rewards	at	the	final	judgment,	it	nonetheless	encourages	faithfulness
in	stewardship	with	what	one	has	been	given,	and	it	is	not	unreasonable	to	expect	that	God	would	act	toward	us	in	that	way,	at
least	in	principle,	in	this	life	as	well.
18
See	the	discussion	of	various	definitions	for	the	word	
miracle	
in	
chapter	17
19
See	
chapter	17
.
20
See	
chapter	17
,	for	a	discussion	of	the	objection	that	it	is	wrong	to	seek	miraculous	gifts	or	miracles	today.
21
Many	who	say	yes,	such	as	the	present	author,	would	add	the	qualification	that	“apostle”	is	an	office,	not	a	gift,	and	that	the
office	of	apostle	does	not	continue	today	(see	
chapter	47
,	for	this	argument).
22
Cessationist	
refers	to	someone	who	thinks	that	certain	miraculous	spiritual	gifts	
ceased	
long	ago,	when	the	apostles	died	and
Scripture	was	complete.
23
The	discussion	in	the	remainder	of	this	section	on	the	cessationist	debate	is	adapted	from	Wayne	Grudem,	
The	Gift	of	Prophecy
in	the	New	Testament	Today	
(Eastbourne:	Kingsway,	and	Westchester,	Ill.:	Crossway,	1988),	pp.	227–52,	and	is	used	by
permission.
24
See,	for	example,	Gen.	32:30	and	Judg.	6:22	(exactly	the	same	Greek	wording	as	1	Cor.	13:12);	Deut.	5:4;	34:10;	Ezek.	20:35
(very	similar	wording);	Ex.	33:11	(the	same	concept,	and	the	same	wording	as	some	of	the	preceding	passages	in	Hebrew,	but
different	wording	this	time	in	the	Greek	translation	of	the	Septuagint).
25
Greek	
epignōsomai	ta	panta	
would	say,	“I	shall	know	all	things.”
26
I	have	stated	it	this	way	because,	more	precisely,	“the	perfect”	in	1	Cor.	13:10	is	not	Christ	himself,	but	is	a	method	of	acquiring
knowledge	which	is	so	superior	to	present	knowledge	and	prophecy	that	it	makes	these	two	obsolete.	For	when	this	“perfect”
comes	it	renders	the	imperfect	useless.	But	only	the	kind	of	knowledge	Paul	expected	in	the	final	consummation	of	all	things
could	be	so	qualitatively	different	from	present	knowledge	that	it	could	provide	this	kind	of	contrast	and	be	called	“the	perfect”	as
opposed	to	“the	imperfect.”
27
D.	A.	Carson,	
Showing	the	Spirit:	A	Theological	Exposition	of	1	Corinthians	12–14	
(Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1987),	pp.	70–72,
gives	several	similar	reasons	why	the	time	“when	the	perfect	comes”	must	be	the	time	of	Christ’s	return	(with	references	to	other
views,	and	to	the	relevant	literature).
Among	“cessationists”	(those	who	hold	that	gifts	such	as	prophecy	have	“ceased”	and	are	not	valid	for	today),	some,	but	not	all,
agree	that	the	time	“when	the	perfect	comes”	must	be	the	time	of	Christ’s	return:	see	John	F.	MacArthur,	Jr.,	
The	Charismatics:	A
Doctrinal	Perspective	
(Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1978),	pp.	165–66,	and	Richard	B.	Gaffin,	
Perspectives	on	Pentecost
(Phillipsburg,	N.J.:	Presbyterian	and	Reformed,	1979),	p.	
109.
28
Richard	B.	Gaffin,	
Perspectives	on	Pentecost,	
pp.	109–10.
29
Ibid.,	p.	
111.
30
Robert	L.	Reymond,	
What	About	Continuing	Revelations	and	Miracles	in	the	Presbyterian	Church	Today?	
(Phillipsburg,	N.J.:
Presbyterian	and	Reformed,	1977),	pp.	32–34.	Kenneth	L.	Gentry,	Jr.,	
The	Charismatic	Gift	of	Prophecy:	A	Reformed	Analysis
(Memphis,	Tenn.:	Whitefield	Seminary	Press,	1986),	pp.	31–33,	lists	both	this	view	and	the	view	of	Dr.	Gaffin	(see	objection	1,
above)	as	acceptable	options.	See	also	the	entries	under	Robert	Thomas,	Victor	Budgen,	and	Thomas	Edgar	in	the	bibliography	to
chapter	53
.
31
Walter	J.	Chantry,	
Signs	of	the	Apostles,	
pp.	50–52.
32
See	
chapter	53
,	for	a	fuller	discussion	of	the	gift	of	prophecy;	also	Wayne	Grudem,	
The	Gift	of	Prophecy	in	the	New	Testament
and	Today.
33
Some	argue	that	faith	and	hope	will	not	endure	in	heaven,	so	1	Cor.	13:13	only	means	that	faith	and	hope	last	until,	not	beyond,
Christ’s	return.	However,	if	faith	is	dependence	on	God	and	trust	in	him,	and	if	hope	is	a	confident	expectation	of	future	blessings
to	be	received	from	God,	then	there	is	no	reason	to	think	that	we	will	cease	to	have	faith	and	hope	in	heaven.	(See	Carson’s	good
discussion	of	faith,	hope,	and	love	as	“eternally	permanent	virtues”	in	
Showing	the	Spirit,	
pp.	74–75.)
34
Gaffin,	
Perspectives,	
p.	109;	cf.	Max	Turner,	“Spiritual	Gifts	Then	and	Now,”	
Vox	Evangelica	
15	(1985),	p.	
38.
35
D.	Martyn	Lloyd-Jones,	
Prove	All	Things,	
ed.	by	Christopher	Catherwood	(Eastbourne,	England:	Kingsway,	1985),	pp.	32–33.
36
John	Calvin,	
The	First	Epistle	of	Paul	the	Apostle	to	the	Corinthians,	
trans.	by	J.	W.	Fraser,	ed.	by	D.	W.	Torrance	and	T.	F.
Torrance	(Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1960),	p.	
281	(on	1	Cor.	13:10).
37
George	Mallone,	ed.,	
Those	Controversial	Gifts	
(Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,	1983),	p.	
21.
38
For	further	discussion	of	the	authority	of	the	gift	of	prophecy,	see	
chapter	53
.	See	also	Wayne	Grudem,	
The	Gift	of	Prophecy	in
1	Corinthians;	
Wayne	Grudem,	
The	Gift	of	Prophecy	in	the	New	Testament	and	Today;	
D.	A.	Carson,	
Showing	the	Spirit:	A
Theological	Exposition	of	1	Corinthians	12–14,	
pp.	91–100;	Graham	Houston,	
Prophecy:	A	Gift	For	Today?	
(Downers	Grove,
Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,	1989).	(Alternative	views	are	noted	in	the	discussion	in	chapter	53;	see	esp.	the	book	by	Richard	Gaffin,
Perspectives	on	Pentecost.
)
39
John	F.	MacArthur,	Jr.,	
The	Charismatics:	A	Doctrinal	Perspective,	
chapters	2–6;	see	esp.	pp.	27ff.	MacArthur	has	expanded
his	criticisms	in	an	updated	edition,	
Charismatic	Chaos	
(Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1992),	pp.	47–84.	A	thoughtful	and	extensive
critique	of	MacArthur	is	found	in	Rich	Nathan,	
A	Response	to	Charismatic	Chaos	
(Anaheim,	Calif.:	Association	of	Vineyard
Churches,	1993).
40
Some	may	object	that	prophecy	has	more	potential	for	abuse	than	other	gifts	because	the	idea	that	God	can	reveal	things	to
people	today	(in	prophecies)	inevitably	leads	to	competition	with	the	authority	of	Scripture.	In	response,	three	points	can	be	made:
(1)	Teaching	on	the	fallible	nature	of	all	contemporary	prophecies	has	not	been	as	extensive	as	needed	to	prevent	abuse,	especially
at	the	popular	level,	among	groups	that	allow	prophecy	today.	Therefore	there	has	been	more	misuse	of	prophecy	than	there
should	have	been.	Even	where	strong	cautions	have	been	proclaimed,	there	has	seldom	been	an	explanation	of	how	prophecy	can
be	from	God	but	still	not	equal	to	God’s	words	in	authority—that	is,	very	few	Pentecostal	or	charismatic	writers	have	explained
prophecy	as	a	
human	
report	of	something	that	God	has	spontaneously	brought	to	mind	(the	view	which	I	defend	in	
chapter	53
).
(However,	see	the	helpful	cautions	from	several	charismatic	writers	in	the	following	paragraphs	in	the	text	above.)	(2)	It	is	simply
not	true	that	teaching	a	congregation	that	prophecy	must	always	be	
subject	
to	Scripture	inevitably	leads	people	to	exalt	prophecies
above	
Scripture.	This	will	happen	where	such	teaching	is	neglected,	not	where	it	is	propagated.	(3)	If	the	Bible	indeed	teaches	that
prophecy	can	be	expected	to	continue	today	in	a	form	that	does	not	challenge	scriptural	authority,	then	we	are	not	free	to	reject	it
because	we	recognize	a	potential	for	abuse.	(Other	gifts	have	potential	for	abuse	in	other	areas.)	Rather,	we	should	encourage	the
gift	and	do	our	best	to	guard	against	abuse.
41
Michael	Harper,	
Prophecy:	A	Gift	for	the	Body	of	Christ	
(Plainhill,	N.J.:	Logos,	1964),	p.	
26.
42
Dennis	and	Rita	Bennett,	
The	Holy	Spirit	and	You,	
p.	107.
43
Donald	Gee,	
Spiritual	Gifts	in	the	Work	of	Ministry	Today	
(Springfield,	Mo.:	Gospel	Publishing	House,	1963),	pp.	51–52.
44
Gaffin,	
Perspectives,	
p.	120.
45
Reymond,	
What	About	.	.	.	?	
pp.	28–29.
46
See	
chapter	17
,	for	a	discussion	of	the	question	of	whether	miraculous	gifts	were	limited	to	the	apostles	and	their	close
companions.
47
See	
chapter	17
,	for	a	discussion	of	these	purposes	for	miracles.
48
See	
chapter	53
,	for	a	discussion	of	1	Cor.	14:36.
49
London:	Banner	of	Truth,	1972	(reprint	of	1918	edition).	It	should	be	noted	that	Warfield’s	argument,	though	frequently	quoted,
is	really	a	historical	survey,	not	an	analysis	of	biblical	texts.	Moreover,	Warfield’s	purpose	was	not	to	refute	any	use	of	spiritual
gifts	among	Christians	like	those	in	much	of	the	charismatic	movement	today,	whose	doctrine	(on	all	matters	other	than	spiritual
gifts)	and	whose	church	affiliation	put	them	in	the	mainstream	of	evangelical	Protestantism.	Warfield	rather	was	refuting	the
spurious	claims	to	miracles	which	had	come	from	some	branches	of	Roman	Catholicism	at	various	periods	in	the	history	of	the
church,	and	from	various	heretical	sects	(Warfield	includes	discussion	of	the	followers	of	Edward	Irving	[1792–1834],	who
strayed	into	eccentric	teachings	and	was	excommunicated	from	the	Church	of	Scotland	in	1833).	It	is	open	to	question	whether
modern-day	cessationists	are	right	to	claim	Warfield’s	support	when	opposing	something	which	is	far	different	in	doctrine	and	life
from	that	which	Warfield	himself	opposed.
50
Warfield’s	position	has	come	in	for	criticism	from	recent	evangelical	studies:	see	Max	Turner,	“Spiritual	Gifts	Then	and	Now,”
Vox	Evangelica	
15	(1985),	pp.	41–43,	with	notes	to	other	literature;	Donald	Bridge,	
Signs	and	Wonders	Today	
(Leicester:	Inter-
Varsity	Press,	1985),	pp.	166–77;	and	Ronald	A.	Kydd,	
Charismatic	Gifts	in	the	Early	Church	
(Peabody,	Mass.:	Hendriksen,
1984).	Significant	evidence	of	miraculous	gifts	in	early	church	history	is	found	in	Eusebius	A.	Stephanou,	“The	Charismata	in	the
Early	Church	Fathers,”	
The	Greek	Orthodox	Theological	Review	
21:2	(Summer,	1976),	pp.	125–46.
A	broad-ranging	but	popularly	written	study	of	the	history	of	miraculous	gifts	in	the	church	is	found	in	Paul	Thigpen,	“Did	the
Power	of	the	Spirit	Ever	Leave	the	Church?”	
Charisma	
18:2	(Sept.	1992),	pp.	20–28.	Most	recently,	see	Jon	Ruthven,	
On	the
Cessation	of	the	Charismata:	The	Protestant	Polemic	on	Post-Biblical	Miracles	
(Sheffield:	Sheffield	University	Academic	Press,
1993);	this	is	a	revision	and	expansion	of	the	author’s	Ph.D.	dissertation	responding	to	the	arguments	of	cessationists	from
Warfield	to	the	present.
The	argument	from	church	history	can	be	turned	the	other	way	by	an	analysis	of	events	from	about	1970	to	the	present.	Church
growth	analysts	tell	us	that	Pentecostal	and	charismatic	churches,	which	encourage	miraculous	gifts,	are	experiencing	growth
unprecedented	in	the	history	of	the	church.	Fuller	Seminary	professor	C.	Peter	Wagner	says,	“While	back	in	1945
Pentecostals/charismatics	could	count	only	sixteen	million	members	worldwide,	by	1975	they	had	grown	to	ninety-six	million	and
then	ten	years	later	in	1985	they	numbered	an	astounding	247	million.	I	am	not	aware	of	any	non-political,	non-militaristic
voluntary	association	which	has	grown	at	that	rate	in	all	of	human	history”	(“Exploring	the	Supernatural	Dimensions	of	Church
Growth,”	
Global	Church	Growth	
[Oct.-Dec.,	1988],	p.	
3).	(By	way	of	comparison,	if	the	world	population	was	5	billion,	the	1985
figure	of	247	million	constituted	5	percent	of	the	population	of	the	world.)
51
We	must	realize	that	unless	people	understand	prophecy	as	the	fallible	report	of	something	that	God	spontaneously	brings	to
mind,	it	will	be	very	difficult	for	the	church	to	encourage	or	even	tolerate	it.	If	prophecy	is	indeed	based	on	something	God
suddenly	brings	to	mind,	it	would	eventually	be	very	easy	for	Christian	prophets,	whether	for	good	or	ill	motives,	to	begin	to
claim	not	only	that	they	had	received	a	“revelation”	from	God	or	Christ,	but	also	that	they	spoke	with	a	divine	authority	like	that
of	Scripture.	This	apparently	happened,	at	least	in	Montanism	(second	century	A.D.)	and	probably	in	many	other	cases	as	well.	Of
course,	if	these	prophets	began	to	promote	heretical	ideas,	the	reaction	of	the	rest	of	the	church	would	eventually	be	to	drive	them
out	altogether:	someone	who	claims	absolute	divine	authority	would	eventually	be	accepted	or	rejected;	he	could	not	be	merely
tolerated.
But	along	with	this	rejection	of	prophets	who	misunderstood	their	status	there	was	perhaps	also	a	rejection	of	the	gift	of	prophecy
altogether,	so	that	a	failure	on	the	part	of	the	church	itself	to	understand	the	nature	of	the	gift	of	prophecy	might	have	been	the
cause	of	a	fairly	complete	suppression	of	at	least	the	public	expression	of	the	gift	of	prophecy	in	the	church.
52
John	Calvin,	
The	First	Epistle	of	Paul	the	Apostle	to	the	Corinthians,	
p.	305.
53
The	figure	of	30	percent	is	simply	an	example	for	illustrative	purposes,	but	it	is	close	to	two	recent	tabulations	concerning
people	who	received	prayer	for	healing.	One	tabulation	is	found	in	David	C.	Lewis,	
Healing:	Fiction,	Fantasy,	or	Fact?	
(London:
Hodder	and	Stoughton,	1989),	an	academic	investigation	of	1,890	people	who	attended	one	of	John	Wimber’s	conferences	in
Harrogate,	England,	in	1986.	The	author	is	a	social	anthropologist	who	prepared	a	detailed	questionnaire	that	people	filled	out
during	the	conference,	and	then	followed	up	some	randomly	selected	cases	several	months	later.	Of	862	cases	of	prayer	for
physical	healing,	32	percent	(or	279)	reported	a	“great	deal”	of	healing	or	“total	healing.”	Another	26	percent	(or	222)	reported	a
“fair	amount”	of	healing.	The	remaining	42	percent	(or	366)	reported	“little”	or	“no	healing”	(pp.	21–22).	Many	case	studies	are
reported	in	detail,	in	several	instances	with	medical	reports	quoted	at	length.	All	the	physical	problems	prayed	for	are	listed	in	a
detailed	appendix	(pp.	276–83).	(These	physical	problems	are	distinguished	from	prayer	for	spiritual	problems	such	as	inner
healing	and	deliverance,	which	are	tabulated	separately	by	Lewis.)	The	other	tabulation	is	found	in	John	Wimber,	
Power	Healing,
p.	188,	who	says	that,	of	people	who	received	extended	prayer	for	healing	at	his	church,	“During	1986	thirty-two	percent	of	all
people	prayed	for	were	completely	healed,	while	overall	eighty-six	percent	showed	evidence	of	some	significant	healing.”	(D.	A.
Carson,	
How	Long,	O	Lord?	
[Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1990],	p.	
124,	says,	“Wimber	is	quite	candid:	he	estimates	that	his	‘success
rate’	is	about	2	percent,”	but	Carson	gives	no	documentation	for	this	statement,	and	it	is	apparently	incorrect	in	light	of	what
Wimber	has	actually	written.)
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	53
Gifts	of	the	Holy	Spirit:	
(Part	2)	
Specific	Gifts
How	should	we	understand	and	
use	specific	spiritual	gifts?
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
In	this	chapter	we	will	build	on	the	general	discussion	about
spiritual	gifts	in	the	previous	chapter	and	examine	several	specific
gifts	in	more	detail.	We	will	not	consider	every	gift	mentioned	in
the	New	Testament,	but	will	focus	on	several	gifts	that	are	not	well
understood	or	whose	use	has	aroused	some	controversy	today.
Therefore	we	will	not	examine	gifts	whose	meaning	and	use	are
self-evident	from	the	term	involved	(such	as	serving,	encouraging,
contributing,	showing	leadership,	or	showing	mercy),	but	will
rather	concentrate	on	those	in	the	following	list,	primarily	taken
from	1	Corinthians	12:28	and	12:8–10:
1.	prophecy
2.	teaching
3.	miracles
4.	healing
5.	tongues	and	interpretation
6.	word	of	wisdom/	word	of	knowledge
7.	distinguishing	between	spirits
A.	Prophecy
Although	several	definitions	have	been	given	for	the	gift	of
prophecy,	a	fresh	examination	of	the	New	Testament	teaching	on
this	gift	will	show	that	it	should	be	defined	not	as	“predicting	the
future,”	nor	as	“proclaiming	a	word	from	the	Lord,”	nor	as
“powerful	preaching”—but	rather	as	“
telling	something	that	God
has	spontaneously	brought	to	mind.”	
The	first	four	points	in	the
following	material	support	this	conclusion;	the	remaining	points
deal	with	other	considerations	regarding	this	gift.
1
1.
	The	New	Testament	Counterparts	to	Old	Testament.	Prophets	Are
New	Testament	Apostles.
	Old	Testament	prophets	had	an	amazing
responsibility—they	were	able	to	speak	and	write	words	that	had	absolute
divine	authority.	They	could	say,	“Thus	says	the	Lord,”	and	the	words	that
followed	were	the	very	words	of	God.	The	Old	Testament	prophets	wrote
their	words	as	God’s	words	in	Scripture	for	all	time	(see	Num.	22:38;	Deut.
18:18–20;	Jer.	1:9;	Ezek.	2:7;	et	al.).	Therefore,	to	disbelieve	or	disobey	a
prophet’s	words	was	to	disbelieve	or	disobey	God	(see	Deut.	18:19;	1	Sam.
8:7;	1	Kings	20:36;	and	many	other	passages).
In	the	New	Testament	there	were	also	people	who	spoke	and	wrote
God’s	very	words	and	had	them	recorded	in	Scripture,	but	we	may
be	surprised	to	find	that	Jesus	no	longer	calls	them	“prophets”	but
uses	a	new	term,	“apostles.”	The	apostles	are	the	New	Testament
counterpart	to	the	Old	Testament	prophets	(see	1	Cor.	2:13;	2	Cor.
13:3;	Gal.	1:8–9;	11–12;	2	Thess.	12:13;	4:8,15;	2	Peter	3:2).	It	is
the	apostles,	not	the	prophets,	who	have	authority	to	write	the
words	of	New	Testament	Scripture.
When	the	apostles	want	to	establish	their	unique	authority	they
never	appeal	to	the	title	“prophet”	but	rather	call	themselves
“apostles”	(Rom.	1:1;	1	Cor.	1:1;	9:1–2;	2	Cor.	1:1;	11:12–13;
12:11–12;	Gal.	1:1;	Eph.	1:1;	1	Peter	1:1;	2	Peter	1:1;	3:2;	et	al.).
2.	The	Meaning	of	the	Word	
Prophet	
in	the	Time	of	the	New	Testament.
Why	did	Jesus	choose	the	new	term	
apostle	
to	designate	those	who	had	the
authority	to	write	Scripture?	It	was	probably	because	the	Greek	word
prophētēs	
(“prophet”)	at	the	time	of	the	New	Testament	had	a	very	broad
range	of	meanings.	It	generally	did	not	have	the	sense	“one	who	speaks	God’s
very	words”	but	rather	“one	who	speaks	on	the	basis	of	some	external
influence”	(often	a	spiritual	influence	of	some	kind).	Titus	1:12	uses	the	word
in	this	sense,	where	Paul	quotes	the	pagan	Greek	poet	Epimenides:	“One	of
themselves,	a	
prophet	
of	their	own,	said,	‘Cretans	are	always	liars,	evil	beasts,
lazy	gluttons.’	”	The	soldiers	who	mock	Jesus	also	seem	to	use	the	word
prophesy	
in	this	way,	when	they	blindfold	Jesus	and	cruelly	demand,
“Prophesy!	Who	is	it	that	struck	you?”	(Luke	22:64).	They	do	not	mean,
“Speak	words	of	absolute	divine	authority,”	but,	“Tell	us	something	that	has
been	revealed	to	you”	(cf.	John	4:19).
Many	writings	outside	the	Bible	use	the	word	
prophet	
(Gk.
prophētēs
)	in	this	way,	without	signifying	any	divine	authority	in
the	words	of	one	called	a	“prophet.”	In	fact,	by	the	time	of	the	New
Testament	the	term	
prophet	
in	everyday	use	often	simply	meant
“one	who	has	supernatural	knowledge”	or	“one	who	predicts	the
future”—or	even	just	“spokesman”	(without	any	connotations	of
divine	authority).	Several	examples	near	the	time	of	the	New
Testament	are	given	in	Helmut	Krämer’s	article	in	
Theological
Dictionary	of	the	New	Testament:
2
A	philosopher	is	called	“a	
prophet	
of	immortal	nature”	(Dio
Chrysostom,	A.D.	40–120)
A	teacher	(Diogenes)	wants	to	be	“a	
prophet	
of	truth	and	candor”
(Lucian	of	Samosata,	A.D.	120–180)
Those	who	advocate	Epicurean	philosophy	are	called	“
prophets	
of
Epicurus”	(Plutarch,	A.D.	50–120)
Written	history	is	called	“the	
prophetess	
of	truth”	(Diodorus	Siculus,
wrote	c.	60–30	B.C.)
A	“specialist”	in	botany	is	called	a	
“prophet”	
(Dioscurides	of	Cilicia,
first	century	A.D.)
A	“quack”	in	medicine	is	called	a	
“prophet”	
(Galen	of	Pergamum,
A.D.	129–199)
Krämer	concludes	that	the	Greek	word	for	“prophet”	(
prophētēs
)	“simply
expresses	the	formal	function	of	declaring,	proclaiming,	making	known.”	Yet,
because	“every	prophet	declares	something	which	is	not	his	own,”	the	Greek
word	for	“herald”	(
kēryx
)	“is	the	closest	synonym.”
3
Of	course,	the	words	
prophet	
and	
prophecy	
were	
sometimes	used	of
the	apostles	
in	contexts	that	emphasized	the	external	spiritual
influence	(from	the	Holy	Spirit)	under	which	they	spoke	(so	Rev.
1:3;	22:7;	and	Eph.	2:20;	3:5),
4
	but	this	was	not	the	ordinary
terminology	used	for	the	apostles,	nor	did	the	terms	
prophet	
and
prophecy	
in	themselves	imply	divine	authority	for	their	speech	or
writing.	Much	more	commonly,	the	words	
prophet	
and	
prophecy
were	used	of	ordinary	Christians	who	spoke	not	with	absolute
divine	authority,	but	simply	to	report	something	that	God	had	laid
on	their	hearts	or	brought	to	their	minds.	There	are	many
indications	in	the	New	Testament	that	this	ordinary	gift	of	prophecy
had	authority	less	than	that	of	the	Bible,	and	even	less	than	that	of
recognized	Bible	teaching	in	the	early	church,	as	is	evident	from	the
following	section.
3.	Indications	That	“Prophets”	Did	Not	Speak	With	Authority	Equal	to
the	Words	of	Scripture.
a.	Acts	21:4:
	In	Acts	21:4,	we	read	of	the	disciples	at	Tyre:	“Through	the
Spirit	they	told	Paul	not	to	go	on	to	Jerusalem.”	This	seems	to	be	a	reference
to	prophecy	directed	towards	Paul,	but	Paul	disobeyed	it!	He	never	would
have	done	this	if	this	prophecy	contained	God’s	very	words	and	had	authority
equal	to	Scripture.
b.	Acts	21:10–11:
	Then	in	Acts	21:10–11,	Agabus	prophesied	that	the	Jews	at
Jerusalem	would	bind	Paul	and	“deliver	him	into	the	hands	of	the	Gentiles,”	a
prediction	that	was	nearly	correct	but	not	quite:	the	Romans,	not	the	Jews,
bound	Paul	(v.	
33;	also	22:29),
5
	and	the	Jews,	rather	than	delivering	him
voluntarily,	tried	to	kill	him	and	he	had	to	be	rescued	by	force	(v.	
32).
6
	The
prediction	was	not	far	off,	but	it	had	inaccuracies	in	detail	that	would	have
called	into	question	the	validity	of	any	Old	Testament	prophet.	On	the	other
hand,	this	text	could	be	perfectly	well	explained	by	supposing	that	Agabus
had	had	a	vision	of	Paul	as	a	prisoner	of	the	Romans	in	Jerusalem,	surrounded
by	an	angry	mob	of	Jews.	His	own	interpretation	of	such	a	“vision”	or
“revelation”	from	the	Holy	Spirit	would	be	that	the	Jews	had	bound	Paul	and
handed	him	over	to	the	Romans,	and	that	is	what	Agabus	would	(somewhat
erroneously)	prophesy.	This	is	exactly	the	kind	of	fallible	prophecy	that
would	fit	the	definition	of	New	Testament	congregational	prophecy	proposed
above—reporting	in	one’s	own	words	something	that	God	has	spontaneously
brought	to	mind.
One	objection	to	this	view	is	to	say	that	Agabus’	prophecy	was	in
fact	fulfilled,	and	that	Paul	even	reports	that	in	Acts	28:17:	“I	was
delivered	prisoner	from	Jerusalem	into	the	hands	of	the	Romans.”
7
But	the	verse	itself	will	not	support	that	interpretation.	The	Greek
text	of	Acts	28:17	explicitly	refers	to	Paul’s	transfer	
out	of
Jerusalem	as	
a	prisoner.
8
	Therefore	Paul’s	statement	describes	his
transfer	out	of	the	Jewish	judicial	system	(the	Jews	were	seeking	to
bring	him	again	to	be	examined	by	the	Sanhedrin	in	Acts	23:15,	20)
and	
into	
the	Roman	judicial	system	at	Caesarea	(Acts	23:23–35).
Therefore	Paul	correctly	says	in	Acts	28:18	that	the	same	Romans
into	whose	hands	he	had	been	delivered	as	a	prisoner	(v.	
17)	were
the	ones	who	(Gk.	
hoitines,	
v.	18),	“When	they	had	examined	me
.	.	.	wished	to	set	me	at	liberty,	because	there	was	no	reason	for	the
death	penalty	in	my	case”	(Acts	28:18;	cf.	23:29;	also	25:11,	18–19;
26:31–32).	Then	Paul	adds	that	when	the	Jews	objected	he	was
compelled	“to	appeal	to	Caesar”	(Acts	28:19;	cf.	25:11).	This	whole
narrative	in	Acts	28:17–19	refers	to	Paul’s	transfer	out	of	Jerusalem
to	Caesarea	in	Acts	23:12–35,	and	explains	to	the	Jews	in	Rome
why	Paul	is	in	Roman	custody.	The	narrative	does	not	refer	to	Acts
21:27–36	and	the	mob	scene	near	the	Jerusalem	temple	at	all.	So
this	objection	is	not	persuasive.	The	verse	does	not	point	to	a
fulfillment	of	either	half	of	Agabus’	prophecy:	it	does	not	mention
any	binding	by	the	Jews,	nor	does	it	mention	that	the	Jews	handed
Paul	over	to	the	Romans.	In	fact,	in	the	scene	it	refers	to	(Acts
23:12–35),	once	again	Paul	had	just	been	taken	from	the	Jews	“by
force”	(Acts	23:10),	and,	far	from	seeking	to	hand	him	over	to	the
Romans,	they	were	waiting	in	an	ambush	to	kill	him	(Acts	23:13–
15).
Another	objection	to	my	understanding	of	Acts	21:10–11	is	to	say
that	the	Jews	did	not	really	have	to	bind	Paul	and	deliver	him	into
the	hands	of	the	Gentiles	for	the	prophecy	of	Agabus	to	be	true,
because	the	Jews	were	
responsible	
for	these	activities	even	if	they
did	not	carry	them	out.	Robert	Thomas	says,	“It	is	common	to
speak	of	the	responsible	party	or	parties	as	performing	an	act	even
though	he	or	they	may	not	have	been	the	immediate	agent(s).”
9
Thomas	cites	similar	examples	from	Acts	2:23	(where	Peter	says
that	the	Jews	crucified	Christ,	whereas	the	Romans	actually	did	it)
and	John	19:1	(we	read	that	Pilate	scourged	Jesus,	whereas	his
soldiers	no	doubt	carried	out	the	action).	Thomas	concludes,
therefore,	“the	Jews	were	the	ones	who	put	Paul	in	chains	just	as
Agabus	predicted.”
10
In	response,	I	agree	that	Scripture	can	speak	of	someone	as	doing
an	act	that	is	carried	out	by	that	person’s	agent.	But	
in	every	case
the	person	who	is	said	to	do	the	action	both	
wills	
the	act	to	be	done
and	
gives	directions	
to	others	to	do	it.	Pilate	directed	his	soldiers	to
scourge	Jesus.	The	Jews	actively	demanded	that	the	Romans	would
crucify	Christ.	By	contrast,	in	the	situation	of	Paul’s	capture	in
Jerusalem,	there	is	no	such	parallel.	The	Jews	did	not	order	him	to
be	bound	but	the	Roman	tribune	did	it:	“Then	the	tribune	came	up
and	arrested	him,	and	ordered	him	to	be	bound	with	two	chains”
(Acts	21:33).	And	in	fact	the	parallel	form	of	speech	is	found	here,
because,	although	the	tribune	
ordered	
Paul	to	be	bound,	later	we
read	that	“the	tribune	also	was	afraid,	for	he	realized	that	Paul	was	a
Roman	citizen	and	that	
he	had	bound	him”	
(Acts	22:29).	So	this
narrative	does	speak	of	the	binding	as	done	either	by	the
responsible	agent	or	by	the	people	who	carried	it	out,	but	in	both
cases	these	are	Romans,	not	Jews.	In	summary,	this	objection	says
that	the	Jews	put	Paul	in	chains.	But	Acts	says	twice	that	the
Romans	bound	him.	This	objection	says	that	the	Jews	turned	Paul
over	to	the	Gentiles.	But	Acts	says	that	they	violently	refused	to
turn	him	over,	so	that	he	had	to	be	taken	from	them	by	force.	The
objection	does	not	fit	the	words	of	the	text.
11
c.	
1
	Thessalonians	5:
1
9–2
1
:
	Paul	tells	the	Thessalonians,	“do	not	despise
prophesying,	but	test	everything;	hold	fast	what	is	good”	(1	Thess.	5:20–21).
If	the	Thessalonians	had	thought	that	prophecy	equaled	God’s	Word	in
authority,	he	would	never	have	had	to	tell	the	Thessalonians	not	to	despise	it
—they	“received”	and	“accepted”	God’s	Word	“with	joy	from	the	Holy
Spirit”	(1	Thess.	1:6;	2:13;	cf.	4:15).	But	when	Paul	tells	them	to	“test
everything”	it	must	include	at	least	the	prophecies	he	mentioned	in	the
previous	phrase.	He	implies	that	prophecies	contain	some	things	that	are	good
and	some	things	that	are	not	good	when	he	encourages	them	to	“hold	fast
what	is	good.”	
This	is	something	that	could	never	have	been	said	of	the	words
of	an	Old	Testament	prophet,	or	the	authoritative	teachings	of	a	New
Testament	apostle.
d.	
1
	Corinthians	
1
4:29–38:
	More	extensive	evidence	on	New	Testament
prophecy	is	found	in	1	Corinthians	14.	When	Paul	says,	“Let	two	or	three
prophets	speak,	and	
let	the	others	weigh	what	is	said”	
(1	Cor.	14:29),	he
suggests	that	they	should	listen	carefully	and	sift	the	good	from	the	bad,
accepting	some	and	rejecting	the	rest	(for	this	is	the	implication	of	the	Greek
word	
diakrinō,	
here	translated	“weigh	what	is	said”).	We	cannot	imagine	that
an	Old	Testament	prophet	like	Isaiah	would	have	said,	“Listen	to	what	I	say
and	weigh	what	is	said—sort	the	good	from	the	bad,	what	you	accept	from
what	you	should	not	accept”!	If	prophecy	had	absolute	divine	authority,	it
would	be	sin	to	do	this.	But	here	Paul	commands	that	it	be	done,	suggesting
that	New	Testament	prophecy	did	not	have	the	authority	of	God’s	very
words.
12
In	1	Corinthians	14:30,	Paul	allows	one	prophet	to	interrupt	another
one:	“If	a	revelation	is	made	to	another	sitting	by,	let	the	first	be
silent.	For	you	can	all	prophesy	one	by	one.”	Again,	if	prophets	had
been	speaking	God’s	very	words,	equal	in	value	to	Scripture,	it	is
hard	to	imagine	that	Paul	would	say	they	should	be	interrupted	and
not	be	allowed	to	finish	their	message.	But	that	is	what	Paul
commands.
Paul	suggests	that	no	one	at	Corinth,	a	church	that	had	much
prophecy,	was	able	to	speak	God’s	very	words.	He	says	in	1
Corinthians	14:36,	“What!	
Did	the	word	of	God	come	forth	from
you,	
or	are	you	the	only	ones	it	has	reached?”	(author’s
translation).
13
Then	in	verses	37	and	38,	in	he	claims	authority	far	greater	than	any
prophet	at	Corinth:	“If	any	one	thinks	that	he	is	a	prophet,	or
spiritual,	he	should	acknowledge	that	what	I	am	writing	to	you	is	a
command	of	the	Lord.	If	any	one	does	not	recognize	this,	he	is	not
recognized.”
All	these	passages	indicate	that	the	common	idea	that	prophets
spoke	“words	of	the	Lord”	when	the	apostles	were	not	present	in
the	early	churches	is	simply	incorrect.
e.	Apostolic	Preparations	for	Their	Absence:
	In	addition	to	the	verses	we
have	considered	so	far,	one	other	type	of	evidence	suggests	that	New
Testament	congregational	prophets	spoke	with	less	authority	than	New
Testament	apostles	or	Scripture:	the	problem	of	successors	to	the	apostles	is
solved	not	by	encouraging	Christians	to	listen	to	the	
prophets	
(even	though
there	were	prophets	around)	but	by	pointing	to	the	
Scriptures.
14
So	Paul,	at	the	end	of	his	life,	emphasizes	“rightly	handling	the
word	of	truth”	(2	Tim.	2:15),	and	the	“God-breathed”	character	of
“scripture”	for	“teaching,	for	reproof,	for	correction,	and	for
training	in	righteousness”	(2	Tim.	3:16).	Jude	urges	his	readers	to
“contend	for	the	faith	which	was	once	for	all	delivered	to	the
saints”	(Jude	3).	Peter,	at	the	end	of	his	life,	encourages	his	readers
to	“pay	attention”	to	Scripture,	which	is	like	“a	lamp	shining	in	a
dark	place”	(2	Peter	1:19–20),	and	reminds	them	of	the	teaching	of
the	apostle	Paul	“in	all	his	letters”	(2	Peter	3:16).	In	no	case	do	we
read	exhortations	to	“give	heed	to	the	prophets	in	your	churches”	or
to	“obey	the	words	of	the	Lord	through	your	prophets,”	etc.	Yet
there	certainly	were	prophets	prophesying	in	many	local
congregations	after	the	death	of	the	apostles.	It	seems	that	they	did
not	have	authority	equal	to	the	apostles,	and	the	authors	of	Scripture
knew	that.	The	conclusion	is	that	prophecies	today	are	not	“the
words	of	God”	either.
4.	How	Should	We	Speak	About	the	Authority	of	Prophecy	Today?
	So
prophecies	in	the	church	today	should	be	considered	merely	human	words,
not	God’s	words,	and	not	equal	to	God’s	words	in	authority.	But	does	this
conclusion	conflict	with	current	charismatic	teaching	or	practice?	I	think	it
conflicts	with	much	charismatic	practice,	but	not	with	most	charismatic
teaching.
Most	charismatic	teachers	today	would	agree	that	contemporary
prophecy	is	not	equal	to	Scripture	in	authority.	Though	some	will
speak	of	prophecy	as	being	the	“word	of	God”	for	today,	there	is
almost	uniform	testimony	from	all	sections	of	the	charismatic
movement	that	prophecy	is	imperfect	and	impure,	and	will	contain
elements	that	are	not	to	be	obeyed	or	trusted.	For	example,	Bruce
Yocum,	the	author	of	a	widely	used	charismatic	book	on	prophecy,
writes,	“Prophecy	can	be	impure—our	own	thoughts	or	ideas	can
get	mixed	into	the	message	we	receive—whether	we	receive	the
words	directly	or	only	receive	a	sense	of	the	message.”
15
But	it	must	be	said	that	in	actual	practice	much	confusion	results
from	the	habit	of	prefacing	prophecies	with	the	common	Old
Testament	phrase,	“Thus	says	the	Lord”	(a	phrase	nowhere	spoken
in	the	New	Testament	by	any	prophets	in	New	Testament	churches).
This	is	unfortunate,	because	it	gives	the	impression	that	the	words
that	follow	are	God’s	very	words,	whereas	the	New	Testament	does
not	justify	that	position	and,	when	pressed,	most	responsible
charismatic	spokesmen	would	not	want	to	claim	it	for	every	part	of
their	prophecies	anyway.	So	there	would	be	much	gain	and	no	loss
if	that	introductory	phrase	were	dropped.
Now	it	is	true	that	Agabus	uses	a	similar	phrase	(“Thus	says	the
Holy	Spirit”)	in	Acts	21:11,	but	the	same	words	(Gk.	
tade	legei
)	are
used	by	Christian	writers	just	after	the	time	of	the	New	Testament
to	introduce	very	general	paraphrases	or	greatly	expanded
interpretations	of	what	is	being	reported	(so	Ignatius,	
Epistle	to	the
Philadelphians	
7:1–2	[about	A.D.	108]	and	
Epistle	of	Barnabas
6:8;	9:2,	5	[A.D.	70–100]).	The	phrase	can	apparently	mean,	“This
is	generally	(or	approximately)	what	the	Holy	Spirit	is	saying	to
us.”
If	someone	really	does	think	God	is	bringing	something	to	mind
which	should	be	reported	in	the	congregation,	there	is	nothing
wrong	with	saying,	“
I	think	
the	Lord	is	putting	on	my	mind	that
.	.	.”	or	“
It	seems	to	me	that	
the	Lord	is	showing	us	.	.	.”	or	some
similar	expression.	Of	course	that	does	not	sound	as	“forceful”	as
“Thus	says	the	Lord,”	but	if	the	message	is	really	from	God,	the
Holy	Spirit	will	cause	it	to	speak	with	great	power	to	the	hearts	of
those	who	need	to	hear.
5.	A	Spontaneous	“Revelation”	Made	Prophecy	Different	From	Other
Gifts.
	If	prophecy	does	not	contain	God’s	very	words,	then	what	is	it?	In	what
sense	is	it	from	God?
Paul	indicates	that	God	could	bring	something	spontaneously	to
mind	so	that	the	person	prophesying	would	report	it	in	his	or	her
own	words.	Paul	calls	this	a	“revelation”:	“If	a	revelation	is	made	to
another	sitting	by,	let	the	first	be	silent.	For	you	can	all	prophesy
one	by	one,	so	that	all	may	learn	and	all	be	encouraged”	(1	Cor.
14:30–31).	Here	he	uses	the	word	
revelation	
in	a	broader	sense	than
the	technical	way	theologians	have	used	it	to	speak	of	the	words	of
Scripture—but	the	New	Testament	elsewhere	uses	the	terms	
reveal
and	
revelation	
in	this	broader	sense	of	communication	from	God
that	does	not	result	in	written	Scripture	or	words	equal	to	written
Scripture	in	authority	(see	Phil.	3:15;	Rom.	1:18;	Eph.	1:17;	Matt.
11:27).
Paul	is	simply	referring	to	something	that	God	may	suddenly	bring
to	mind,	or	something	that	God	may	impress	on	someone’s
consciousness	in	such	a	way	that	the	person	has	a	sense	that	it	is
from	God.	It	may	be	that	the	thought	brought	to	mind	is
surprisingly	distinct	from	the	person’s	own	train	of	thought,	or	that
it	is	accompanied	by	a	sense	of	vividness	or	urgency	or	persistence,
or	in	some	other	way	gives	the	person	a	rather	clear	sense	that	it	is
from	the	Lord.
16
Figure	53.1	illustrates	the	idea	of	a	revelation	from	God	that	is
reported	in	the	prophet’s	own	(merely	human)	words.
Thus,	if	a	stranger	comes	in	and	all	prophesy,	“the	secrets	of	his
heart	are	disclosed;	and	so,	falling	on	his	face,	he	will	worship	God
and	declare	that	God	is	really	among	you”	(1	Cor.	14:25).	I	have
heard	a	report	of	this	happening	in	a	clearly	noncharismatic	Baptist
church	in	America.	A	missionary	speaker	paused	in	the	middle	of
his	message	and	said	something	like	this:	“I	didn’t	plan	to	say	this,
but	it	seems	the	Lord	is	indicating	that	someone	in	this	church	has
just	walked	out	on	his	wife	and	family.	If	that	is	so,	let	me	tell	you
that	God	wants	you	to	return	to	them	and	learn	to	follow	God’s
pattern	for	family	life.”	The	missionary	did	not	know	it,	but	in	the
unlit	balcony	sat	a	man	who	had	entered	the	church	moments
before	for	the	first	time	in	his	life.	The	description	fitted	him
exactly,	and	he	made	himself	known,	acknowledged	his	sin,	and
began	to	seek	after	God.
PROPHECY	OCCURS	WHEN	A	REVELATION	FROM	GOD	IS	REPORTED	IN	THE	PROPHET’S
OWN(MERELY	HUMAN)	WORDS
Figure	53.1
In	this	way,	prophecy	serves	as	a	“sign”	for	believers	(1	Cor.	14:22)—it	is	a
clear	demonstration	that	God	is	definitely	at	work	in	their	midst,	a	“sign”	of
God’s	hand	of	blessing	on	the	congregation.	And	since	it	will	work	for	the
conversion	of	unbelievers	as	well,	Paul	encourages	this	gift	to	be	used	when
“unbelievers	or	outsiders	enter”	(1	Cor.	14:23).
Many	Christians	in	all	periods	of	the	church	have	experienced	or
heard	of	similar	events—for	example,	an	unplanned	but	urgent
request	may	have	been	given	to	pray	for	certain	missionaries	in
Nigeria.	Then	much	later	those	who	prayed	discovered	that	just	at
that	time	the	missionaries	had	been	in	an	auto	accident	or	at	a	point
of	intense	spiritual	conflict,	and	had	needed	those	prayers.	Paul
would	call	the	sense	or	intuition	of	those	things	a	“revelation,”	and
the	report	to	the	assembled	church	of	that	prompting	from	God
would	be	called	a	“prophecy.”	It	may	have	elements	of	the
speaker’s	own	understanding	or	interpretation	in	it	and	it	certainly
needs	evaluation	and	testing,	yet	it	has	a	valuable	function	in	the
church	nonetheless.
17
6.	The	Difference	Between	Prophecy	and	Teaching.
	As	far	as	we	can	tell,
all	New	Testament	“prophecy”	was	based	on	this	kind	of	spontaneous
prompting	from	the	Holy	Spirit	(cf.	Acts	11:28;	21:4,	10–11;	and	note	the
ideas	of	prophecy	represented	in	Luke	7:39;	23:63–64;	John	4:19;	11:51).
Unless	a	person	receives	a	spontaneous	“revelation”	from	God,	there	is	no
prophecy.
By	contrast,	no	human	speech	act	that	is	called	a	“teaching”	or	done
by	a	“teacher,”	or	described	by	the	verb	“teach,”	is	ever	said	to	be
based	on	a	“revelation”	in	the	New	Testament.	Rather,	“teaching”	is
often	simply	an	explanation	or	application	of	Scripture	(Acts	15:35;
11:11,	25;	Rom.	2:21;	15:4;	Col.	3:16;	Heb.	5:12)	or	a	repetition
and	explanation	of	apostolic	instructions	(Rom.	16:17;	2	Tim.	2:2;
3:10;	et	al.).	It	is	what	we	would	call	“Bible	teaching”	or
“preaching”	today.
So	prophecy	has	less	authority	than	“teaching,”	and	prophecies	in
the	church	are	always	to	be	subject	to	the	authoritative	teaching	of
Scripture.	Timothy	was	not	told	to	
prophesy	
Paul’s	instructions	in
the	church;	he	was	to	
teach	
them	(1	Tim.	4:11;	6:2).	Paul	did	not
prophesy	
his	lifestyle	in	Christ	in	every	church;	he	
taught	
it	(1	Cor.
4:17).	The	Thessalonians	were	not	told	to	hold	firm	to	the	traditions
that	were	“prophesied”	to	them	but	to	the	traditions	that	they	were
“taught”	by	Paul	(2	Thess.	2:15).	Contrary	to	some	views,	it	was
teachers,	not	prophets,	who	gave	leadership	and	direction	to	the
early	churches.
Among	the	elders,	therefore,	were	“those	who	labor	in	preaching
and	teaching”	(1	Tim.	5:17),	and	an	elder	was	to	be	“an	apt	teacher”
(1	Tim.	3:2;	cf.	Titus	1:9)—but	nothing	is	said	about	any	elders
whose	work	was	prophesying,	nor	is	it	ever	said	that	an	elder	has	to
be	“an	apt	prophet”	or	that	elders	should	be	“holding	firm	to	sound
prophecies.”	In	his	leadership	function	Timothy	was	to	take	heed	to
himself	and	to	his	“teaching”	(1	Tim.	4:16),	but	he	is	never	told	to
take	heed	to	his	prophesying.	James	warned	that	those	who	teach,
not	those	who	prophesy,	will	be	judged	with	greater	strictness
(James	3:1).
The	task	of	interpreting	and	applying	Scripture,	then,	is	called
“teaching”	in	the	New	Testament.	Although	a	few	people	have
claimed	that	the	prophets	in	New	Testament	churches	gave
“charismatically	inspired”	interpretations	of	Old	Testament
Scripture,	that	claim	has	hardly	been	persuasive,	primarily	because
it	is	hard	to	find	in	the	New	Testament	any	convincing	examples
where	the	“prophet”	word	group	is	used	to	refer	to	someone
engaged	in	this	kind	of	activity.
So	the	distinction	is	quite	clear:	if	a	message	is	the	result	of
conscious	reflection	on	the	text	of	Scripture,	containing
interpretation	of	the	text	and	application	to	life,	then	it	is	(in	New
Testament	terms)	a	teaching.	But	if	a	message	is	the	report	of
something	God	brings	suddenly	to	mind,	then	it	is	a	prophecy.	And
of	course,	even	prepared	teachings	can	be	interrupted	by	unplanned
additional	material	that	the	Bible	teacher	suddenly	felt	God	was
bringing	to	his	mind—in	that	case,	it	would	be	a	“teaching”	with	an
element	of	prophecy	mixed	in.
7.	Objection:	This	Makes	Prophecy	“Too	Subjective.”
	At	this	point	some
have	objected	that	waiting	for	such	“promptings”	from	God	is	“just	too
subjective”	a	process.	But	in	response,	it	may	be	said	that,	for	the	health	of
the	church,	it	is	often	the	people	who	make	this	objection	who	need	this
subjective	process	most	in	their	own	Christian	lives!	This	gift	requires	waiting
on	the	Lord,	listening	for	him,	hearing	his	prompting	in	our	hearts.	For
Christians	who	are	completely	evangelical,	doctrinally	sound,	intellectual,	and
“objective,”	probably	what	is	needed	most	is	the	strong	balancing	influence	of
a	more	vital	“subjective”	relationship	with	the	Lord	in	everyday	life.	And
these	people	are	also	those	who	have	the	least	likelihood	of	being	led	into
error,	for	they	already	place	great	emphasis	on	solid	grounding	in	the	Word	of
God.
Yet	there	is	an	opposite	danger	of	excessive	reliance	on	subjective
impressions	for	guidance,	and	that	must	be	clearly	guarded	against.
People	who	continually	seek	subjective	“messages”	from	God	to
guide	their	lives	must	be	cautioned	that	subjective	personal
guidance	is	not	a	primary	function	of	New	Testament	prophecy.
They	need	to	place	much	more	emphasis	on	Scripture	and	seeking
God’s	sure	wisdom	written	there.
Many	charismatic	writers	would	agree	with	this	caution,	as	the
following	quotations	indicate:
Michael	Harper	(Anglican	charismatic	pastor):
Prophecies	which	tell	other	people	what	they	are	to	do—are	to	be
regarded	with	great	suspicion.
18
Donald	Gee	(Assemblies	of	God):
Many	of	our	errors	where	spiritual	gifts	are	concerned	arise	when	we
want	the	extraordinary	and	exceptional	to	be	made	the	frequent	and
habitual.	Let	all	who	develop	excessive	desire	for	“messages”	through
the	gifts	take	warning	from	the	wreckage	of	past	generations	as	well
as	of	contemporaries.	.	.	.	The	Holy	Scriptures	are	a	lamp	unto	our	feet
and	a	light	unto	our	path.
19
Donald	Bridge	(British	charismatic	pastor):
The	illuminist	constantly	finds	that	“God	tells	him”	to	do	things.	.	.	.
Illuminists	are	often	very	sincere,	very	dedicated,	and	possessed	of	a
commitment	to	obey	God	that	shames	more	cautious	Christians.
Nevertheless	they	are	treading	a	dangerous	path.	Their	ancestors	have
trodden	it	before,	and	always	with	disastrous	results	in	the	long	run.
Inner	feelings	and	special	promptings	are	by	their	very	nature
subjective.	The	Bible	provides	our	objective	guide.
20
8.	Prophecies	Could	Include	Any	Edifying	Content.
	The	examples	of
prophecies	in	the	New	Testament	mentioned	above	show	that	the	idea	of
prophecy	as	only	“predicting	the	future”	is	certainly	wrong.	There	were	some
predictions	(Acts	11:28;	21:11),	but	there	was	also	the	disclosure	of	sins	(1
Cor.	14:25).	In	fact,	anything	that	edified	could	have	been	included,	for	Paul
says,	“He	who	prophesies	speaks	to	men	
for	their	upbuilding	and
encouragement	and	consolation”	
(1	Cor.	14:3).	Another	indication	of	the
value	of	prophecy	was	that	it	could	speak	to	the	needs	of	people’s	hearts	in	a
spontaneous,	direct	way.
9.	Many	People	in	the	Congregation	Can	Prophesy.
	Another	great	benefit
of	prophecy	is	that	it	provides	opportunity	for	participation	by	everyone	in	the
congregation,	not	just	those	who	are	skilled	speakers	or	who	have	gifts	of
teaching.	Paul	says	that	he	wants	“all”	the	Corinthians	to	prophesy	(1	Cor.
14:5),	and	he	says,	“You	can	all	prophesy	one	by	one,	so	that	all	may	learn
and	all	be	encouraged”	(1	Cor.	14:31).
21
	This	does	not	mean	that	every
believer	will	actually	be	able	to	prophesy,	for	Paul	says,	“Not	all	are	prophets,
are	they?”	(1	Cor.	12:29,	author’s	translation).	But	it	does	mean	that	anyone
who	receives	a	“revelation”	from	God	has	permission	to	prophesy	(within
Paul’s	guidelines),	and	it	suggests	that	many	will.
22
	Because	of	this,	greater
openness	to	the	gift	of	prophecy	could	help	overcome	the	situation	where
many	who	attend	our	churches	are	merely	spectators	and	not	participants.
Perhaps	we	are	contributing	to	the	problem	of	“spectator	Christianity”	by
quenching	the	work	of	the	spirit	in	this	area.
1
0.	We	Should	“Earnestly	Desire”	Prophecy.
	Paul	valued	this	gift	so	highly
that	he	told	the	Corinthians,	“Make	love	your	aim,	and	earnestly	desire	the
spiritual	gifts	
especially	that	you	may	prophesy”	
(1	Cor.	14:1).	Then	at	the
end	of	his	discussion	of	spiritual	gifts	he	said	again,	“So,	my	brethren,
earnestly	desire	to	prophesy”	
(1	Cor.	14:39).	And	he	said,	“He	who
prophesies	edifies	the	church”	(1	Cor.	14:4).
If	Paul	was	eager	for	the	gift	of	prophecy	to	function	at	Corinth,
troubled	as	the	church	was	by	immaturity,	selfishness,	divisions,
and	other	problems,	then	should	we	not	also	actively	seek	this
valuable	gift	in	our	congregations	today?	We	evangelicals	who
profess	to	believe	and	obey	all	that	Scripture	says,	should	we	not
also	believe	and	obey	this?	And	might	a	greater	openness	to	the	gift
of	prophecy	perhaps	help	to	correct	a	dangerous	imbalance	in
church	life,	an	imbalance	that	comes	because	we	are	too
exclusively	intellectual,	objective,	and	narrowly	doctrinal?
11.
	Encouraging	and	Regulating	Prophecy	in	the	Local	Church.
	Finally,	if
a	church	begins	to	encourage	the	use	of	prophecy	where	it	has	not	been	used
before,	what	should	it	do?	How	can	it	encourage	this	gift	without	falling	into
abuse?
For	all	Christians,	and	especially	for	pastors	and	others	who	have
teaching	responsibilities	in	the	church,	several	steps	would	be	both
appropriate	and	pastorally	wise:	(1)	Pray	seriously	for	the	Lord’s
wisdom	on	how	and	when	to	approach	this	subject	in	the	church.
(2)	There	should	be	teaching	on	this	subject	in	the	regular	Bible
teaching	times	the	church	already	provides.	(3)	The	church	should
be	patient	and	proceed	slowly—church	leaders	should	not	be
“domineering”	(or	“pushy”)	(1	Peter	5:3),	and	a	patient	approach
will	avoid	frightening	people	away	or	alienating	them
unnecessarily.	(4)	The	church	should	recognize	and	encourage	the
gift	of	prophecy	in	ways	it	has	already	been	functioning	in	the
church—at	church	prayer	meetings,	for	example,	when	someone
has	felt	unusually	“led”	by	the	Holy	Spirit	to	pray	for	something,	or
when	it	has	seemed	that	the	Holy	Spirit	was	bringing	to	mind	a
hymn	or	Scripture	passage,	or	when	giving	a	common	sense	of	the
tone	or	the	specific	focus	of	a	time	of	group	worship	or	prayer.
Even	Christians	in	churches	not	open	to	the	gift	of	prophecy	can	at
least	be	sensitive	to	promptings	from	the	Holy	Spirit	regarding	what
to	pray	for	in	church	prayer	meetings,	and	can	then	express	those
promptings	in	the	form	of	a	prayer	(what	might	be	called	a
“prophetic	prayer”)	to	the	Lord.
(5)	If	the	first	four	steps	have	been	followed,	and	if	the
congregation	and	its	leadership	will	accept	it,	some	opportunities
for	the	gift	of	prophecy	to	be	used	might	be	made	in	the	less	formal
worship	services	of	the	church,	or	in	smaller	home	groups.	If	this	is
allowed,	those	who	prophesy	should	be	kept	within	scriptural
guidelines	(1	Cor.	14:29–36),	should	genuinely	seek	the	edification
of	the	church	and	not	their	own	prestige	(1	Cor.	14:12,	26),	and
should	not	dominate	the	meeting	or	be	overly	dramatic	or	emotional
in	their	speech	(and	thus	attract	attention	to	themselves	rather	than
to	the	Lord).	Prophecies	should	certainly	be	evaluated	according	to
the	teachings	of	Scripture	(1	Cor.	14:29–36;	1	Thess.	5:19–21).
(6)	If	the	gift	of	prophecy	begins	to	be	used	in	a	church,	the	church
should	place	even	more	emphasis	on	the	vastly	superior	value	of
Scripture	as	the	source	to	which	Christians	can	always	go	to	hear
the	voice	of	the	living	God.	Prophecy	is	a	valuable	gift,	as	are	many
other	gifts,	but	it	is	in	Scripture	that	God	and	only	God	speaks	to	us
his	very	words,	even	today,	and	throughout	our	lives.	Rather	than
hoping	at	every	worship	service	that	the	highlight	would	be	some
word	of	prophecy,	those	who	use	the	gift	of	prophecy	need	to	be
reminded	that	we	should	find	our	focus	of	joy,	our	expectation,	and
our	delight	in	God	himself	as	he	speaks	to	us	through	the	Bible.
There	we	have	a	treasure	of	infinite	worth:	the	actual	words	of	our
Creator	speaking	to	us	in	language	we	can	understand.	And	rather
than	seeking	frequent	guidance	through	prophecy,	we	should
emphasize	that	it	is	in	Scripture	that	we	are	to	find	guidance	for	our
lives.	In	Scripture	is	our	source	of	direction,	our	focus	when
seeking	God’s	will,	our	sufficient	and	completely	reliable	standard.
It	is	of	God’s	words	in	Scripture	that	we	can	with	confidence	say,
“Your	word	is	a	lamp	to	my	feet	and	a	light	to	my	path”	(Ps.
119:105).
B.	Teaching
The	gift	of	teaching	in	the	New	Testament	is	
the	ability	to	explain
Scripture	and	apply	it	to	people’s	lives.	
This	is	evident	from	a
number	of	passages.	In	Acts	15:35,	Paul	and	Barnabas	and	“many
others”	are	in	Antioch	
“teaching	
and	preaching	the	word	of	the
Lord.”	At	Corinth,	Paul	stayed	one	and	a	half	years	
“teaching	
the
word	of	God	among	them”	(Acts	18:11).	And	the	readers	of	the
epistle	to	the	Hebrews,	though	they	ought	to	have	been	teachers,
needed	rather	to	have	someone	to	teach	them	again	“the	first
principles	of	God’s	word”	(Heb.	5:12).	Paul	tells	the	Romans	that
the	words	of	the	Old	Testament	Scriptures	“were	written	for	our
instruction	(or	“teaching,”	Gk.	
didaskalia
)”	(Rom.	15:4),	and	writes
to	Timothy	that	“all	scripture”	is	“profitable	for	teaching
[
didaskalia
]”	(2	Tim.	3:16).
Of	course,	if	“teaching”	in	the	early	church	was	so	often	based	on
Old	Testament	Scripture,	it	is	not	surprising	that	it	could	also	be
based	on	something	equal	to	Scripture	in	authority,	namely,	a
received	body	of	apostolic	instructions.	So	Timothy	was	to	take	the
teaching	he	had	received	from	Paul	and	commit	it	to	faithful	men
who	would	be	able	to	“teach	others	also”	(2	Tim.	2:2).	And	the
Thessalonians	were	to	“hold	firm	to	the	traditions”	they	were
“taught”	by	Paul	(2	Thess.	2:15).	Far	from	being	based	on	a
spontaneous	revelation	that	came	during	the	worship	service	of	the
church	(as	prophecy	was),	this	kind	of	“teaching”	was	the	repetition
and	explanation	of	authentic	apostolic	teaching.	To	teach	contrary
to	Paul’s	instructions	was	to	teach	different	or	heretical	doctrine
(
heterodidaskalō
)	and	to	fail	to	give	heed	to	“the	sound	words	of
our	Lord	Jesus	Christ	and	the	
teaching	
that	accords	with	godliness”
(1	Tim.	6:3).	In	fact,	Paul	said	that	Timothy	was	to	remind	the
Corinthians	of	Paul’s	ways	“as	I	
teach	
them	everywhere	in	every
church”	(1	Cor.	4:17).	Similarly,	Timothy	was	to	“command	and
teach”	(1	Tim.	4:11)	and	to	“teach	and	urge”	(1	Tim.	6:2)	Paul’s
instructions	to	the	Ephesian	church.	Thus	it	was	not	prophecy	but
teaching	which	in	a	primary	sense	(from	the	apostles)	first	provided
the	doctrinal	and	ethical	norms	by	which	the	church	was	regulated.
And	as	those	who	learned	from	the	apostles	also	taught,	their
teaching	guided	and	directed	the	local	churches.
23
So	teaching	in	terms	of	the	New	Testament	epistles	consisted	of
repeating	and	explaining	the	words	of	Scripture	(or	the	equally
authoritative	teachings	of	Jesus	and	of	the	apostles)	and	applying
them	to	the	hearers.	In	the	New	Testament	epistles,	“teaching”	is
something	very	much	like	what	is	described	by	our	phrase	“Bible
teaching”	today.
C.	Miracles
Just	after	apostles,	prophets	and	teachers,	Paul	says	“then	miracles”
(1	Cor.	12:28).	Although	many	of	the	miracles	seen	in	the	New
Testament	were	specifically	miracles	of	healing,	Paul	here	lists
healing	as	a	separate	gift.	Therefore	in	this	context	he	must	have
something	other	than	physical	healing	in	view.
We	should	realize	that	the	English	word	
miracles	
may	not	give	a
very	close	approximation	to	what	Paul	intended,	since	the	Greek
word	is	simply	the	plural	form	of	the	word	
dynamis,	
“power.”
24
This	means	that	the	term	may	refer	to	any	kind	of	activity	where
God’s	mighty	power	is	evident.	It	may	include	answers	to	prayer
for	deliverance	from	physical	danger	(as	in	the	deliverance	of	the
apostles	from	prison	in	Acts	5:19–20	or	12:6–11),	or	powerful
works	of	judgment	on	the	enemies	of	the	gospel	or	those	who
require	discipline	within	the	church	(see	Acts	5:1–11;	13:9–12),	or
miraculous	deliverance	from	injury	(as	with	Paul	and	the	viper	in
Acts	28:3–6).	But	such	acts	of	spiritual	power	may	also	include
power	to	triumph	over	demonic	opposition	(as	in	Acts	16:18;	cf.
Luke	10:17).
Since	Paul	does	not	define	“works	of	miracles”	any	more
specifically	than	this,	we	can	say	that	the	gift	of	miracles	may
include	the	working	of	divine	power	in	deliverance	from	danger,	in
intervention	to	meet	special	needs	in	the	physical	world	(as	in	the
case	of	Elijah	in	1	Kings	17:1–16),	in	judgment	on	those	who
irrationally	and	violently	oppose	the	gospel	message,	in
vanquishing	the	demonic	forces	that	wage	war	against	the	church,
and	in	any	other	way	in	which	God’s	power	is	manifested	in	an
evident	way	to	further	God’s	purposes	in	a	situation.	All	of	these
would	be	works	of	“power”	in	which	the	church	would	be	helped
and	God’s	glory	would	be	made	evident.	(See	also	the	discussion	of
miracles	in	chapter	17.)
D.	Healing
1.
	Introduction:	Sickness	and	Health	in	the	History	of	Redemption.
	We
must	realize	at	the	outset	that	physical	sickness	came	as	a	result	of	the	fall	of
Adam,	and	illness	and	disease	are	simply	part	of	the	outworking	of	the	curse
after	the	fall,	and	will	eventually	lead	toward	physical	death.	However,	Christ
redeemed	us	from	that	curse	when	he	died	on	the	cross:	“Surely	
he	took	up
our	infirmities	
and	carried	our	sorrows	.	.	.	
by	his	wounds	we	are	healed”	
(Isa.
53:4–5	NIV).	This	passage	refers	to	both	physical	and	spiritual	healing	that
Christ	purchased	for	us,	for	Peter	quotes	it	to	refer	to	our	salvation:	“He
himself	
bore	our	sins	
in	his	body	on	the	tree,	that	we	might	die	to	sin	and	live
to	righteousness.	
By	his	wounds	you	have	been	healed”	
(1	Peter	2:24).
But	Matthew	quotes	the	same	passage	from	Isaiah	with	reference	to
the	physical	healings	Jesus	performed:	“and	he	cast	out	the	spirits
with	a	word,	and	
healed	all	who	were	sick.	
This	was	to	fulfill	what
was	spoken	by	the	prophet	Isaiah,	‘
He	took	our	infirmities	
and	bore
our	diseases’	”	(Matt.	8:16–17).
All	Christians	would	probably	agree	that	in	the	atonement	Christ
has	purchased	for	us	not	only	complete	freedom	from	sin	but	also
complete	freedom	from	physical	weakness	and	infirmity	in	his
work	of	redemption	(see	
chapter	42
	on	glorification).	And	all
Christians	would	also	no	doubt	agree	that	our	full	and	complete
possession	of	all	the	benefits	that	Christ	earned	for	us	will	not	come
until	Christ	returns:	it	is	only	“at	his	coming”	(1	Cor.	15:23)	that	we
receive	our	perfect	resurrection	bodies.	So	it	is	with	physical
healing	and	redemption	from	the	physical	sickness	that	came	as	a
result	of	the	curse	in	Genesis	3:	our	complete	possession	of
redemption	from	physical	illness	will	not	be	ours	until	Christ
returns	and	we	receive	resurrection	bodies.
25
But	the	question	that	confronts	us	with	respect	to	the	gift	of	healing
is	whether	God	may	from	time	to	time	grant	us	a	foretaste	or	a
down	payment	of	the	physical	healing	which	he	will	grant	us	fully
in	the	future.
26
	The	healing	miracles	of	Jesus	certainly	demonstrate
that	at	times	God	is	willing	to	grant	a	partial	foretaste	of	the	perfect
health	that	will	be	ours	for	eternity.	And	the	ministry	of	healing
seen	in	the	lives	of	the	apostles	and	others	in	the	early	church	also
indicates	that	this	was	part	of	the	ministry	of	the	new	covenant	age.
As	such,	it	fits	the	larger	pattern	of	blessings	in	the	new	covenant,
many	or	all	of	which	give	partial	foretastes	of	the	blessings	that	will
be	ours	when	Christ	returns.	We	“already”	possess	some	of	the
blessings	of	the	kingdom,	but	those	blessings	are	“not	yet”	fully
ours.
2.	The	Purposes	of	Healing.
	As	with	other	spiritual	gifts,	healing	has	several
purposes.	Certainly	it	functions	as	a	“sign”	to	authenticate	the	gospel
message,	and	show	that	the	kingdom	of	God	has	come.	Then	also	healing
brings	comfort	and	health	to	those	who	are	ill,	and	thereby	demonstrates
God’s	attribute	of	mercy	toward	those	in	distress.	Third,	healing	equips
people	for	service,	as	physical	impediments	to	ministry	are	removed.	Fourth,
healing	provides	opportunity	for	God	to	be	glorified	as	people	see	physical
evidence	of	his	goodness,	love,	power,	wisdom,	and	presence.
3.	What	About	the	Use	of	Medicine?
	What	is	the	relationship	between
prayer	for	healing	and	the	use	of	medicine	and	the	skill	of	a	physician?
Certainly	we	should	use	medicine	if	it	is	available	because	God	has	also
created	substances	in	the	earth	that	can	be	made	into	medicine	with	healing
properties.	Medicines	thus	should	be	considered	part	of	the	whole	creation
that	God	considered	“very	good”	(Gen.	1:31).	We	should	willingly	use
medicine	with	thankfulness	to	the	Lord,	for	“The	earth	is	the	L
ORD
’s	and	the
fulness	thereof”	(Ps.	24:1).	In	fact,	when	medicine	is	available	and	we	refuse
to	use	it	(in	cases	where	it	would	put	ourselves	or	others	in	danger),	then	it
seems	that	we	are	wrongly	“forcing	a	test”	on	the	Lord	our	God	(cf.	Luke
4:12):	this	is	similar	to	the	case	of	Satan	tempting	Jesus	to	jump	from	the
temple	rather	than	walking	down	the	steps.	Where	ordinary	means	of	getting
down	from	the	temple	(the	steps)	are	available,	it	is	“forcing	a	test”	on	God	to
jump	and	thereby	demand	that	he	perform	a	miracle	at	that	exact	moment.	To
refuse	to	use	effective	medicine,	insisting	that	God	perform	a	miracle	of
healing	instead	of	healing	through	the	medicine,	is	very	similar	to	this.
Of	course,	it	is	wrong	to	rely	on	doctors	or	medicine	
instead	
of
relying	on	the	Lord,	a	mistake	tragically	made	by	King	Asa:
In	the	thirty-ninth	year	of	his	reign	Asa	was	diseased	in	his	feet,	and
his	disease	became	severe;	yet	even	in	his	disease	he	did	not	seek	the
L
ORD
,	but	sought	help	from	physicians.	And	Asa	slept	with	his
fathers,	dying	in	the	forty-first	year	of	his	reign.	(2	Chron.	16:12–13)
But	if	medicine	is	used	in	connection	with	prayer,	then	we	should
expect	God	to	bless	and	often	multiply	the	effectiveness	of	the
medicine.
27
	Even	when	Isaiah	had	received	from	the	Lord	a
promise	of	healing	for	King	Hezekiah,	he	told	Hezekiah’s	servants
to	bring	a	cake	of	figs	and	apply	it	(as	a	medical	remedy)	to	a	boil
that	Hezekiah	suffered	from:	“And	Isaiah	said,	‘Bring	a	cake	of
figs.	And	let	them	take	and	lay	it	on	the	boil,	that	he	may	recover’	”
(2	Kings	20:7).
However,	sometimes	there	is	no	appropriate	medicine	available,	or
the	medicine	does	not	work.	Certainly	we	must	remember	that	God
can	heal	where	doctors	and	medicine	cannot	heal	(and	it	may	amaze
us	to	realize	how	frequently	doctors	cannot	heal,	even	in	the	most
medically	advanced	countries).	Moreover,	there	may	be	many	times
when	an	illness	is	not	putting	us	or	others	in	immediate	danger,	and
we	decide	to	ask	God	to	heal	our	sickness	without	the	use	of
medicine,	simply	because	we	wish	for	another	opportunity	to
exercise	our	faith	and	give	him	glory,	and	perhaps	because	we	wish
to	avoid	spending	the	time	or	money	to	use	medical	means,	or	we
wish	to	avoid	the	side-effects	that	some	medicines	have.	In	all	of
these	cases,	it	is	simply	a	matter	of	personal	choice	and	would	not
seem	to	be	“forcing	a	test”	on	God.	(However,	a	decision	not	to	use
medicine	in	these	cases	should	be	a	personal	choice	and	not	one
that	is	forced	on	others.)
We	see	Jesus	healing	explicitly	where	medical	means	have	failed,
when	“a	woman	who	had	had	a	flow	of	blood	for	twelve	years	and
could	not	be	healed	by	any	one”	
then	“came	up	behind	him,	and
touched	the	fringe	of	his	garment;	and	immediately	her	flow	of
blood	ceased”	(Luke	8:43–44).	There	were	no	doubt	many	people
beyond	the	help	of	physicians	who	came	whenever	Jesus	was
teaching	and	healing,	yet	we	read	that	“
all	
those	who	had	
any	
that
were	sick	with	various	diseases	brought	them	to	him;	and	he	laid
his	hands	on	
every	one	of	them	
and	healed	them”	(Luke	4:40).
There	was	no	disease	that	Jesus	was	unable	to	heal.
4.	Does	the	New	Testament	Show	Common	Methods	Used	in	Healing?
The	methods	used	by	Jesus	and	the	disciples	to	bring	healing	varied	from	case
to	case,	but	most	frequently	they	included	laying	on	of	hands.
28
	In	the	verse
just	quoted,	Jesus	no	doubt	could	have	spoken	a	powerful	word	of	command
and	healed	everyone	in	the	large	crowd	instantly,	but	instead,	“
he	laid	his
hands	on	every	one	of	them	
and	healed	them”	(Luke	4:40).	Laying	on	of
hands	seems	to	have	been	the	primary	means	Jesus	used	to	heal,	because
when	people	came	and	asked	him	for	healing	they	did	not	simply	ask	for
prayer	but	said,	for	example,	“come	and	lay	your	hand	on	her,	and	she	will
live”	(Matt.	9:18).
29
Another	physical	symbol	of	the	Holy	Spirit’s	power	coming	for
healing	was	anointing	with	oil.	Jesus’	disciples	“
anointed	with	oil
many	that	were	sick	and	healed	them”	(Mark	6:13).	And	James	tells
the	elders	of	the	church	to	anoint	the	sick	person	with	oil	when	they
pray:	“Is	any	among	you	sick?	Let	him	call	for	the	elders	of	the
church,	and	let	them	pray	over	him,	
anointing	him	with	oil	
in	the
name	of	the	Lord;	and	the	prayer	of	faith	will	save	the	sick	man,
and	the	Lord	will	raise	him	up;	and	if	he	has	committed	sins,	he
will	be	forgiven”	(James	5:14–15).
30
The	New	Testament	often	emphasizes	the	role	of	faith	in	the
healing	process—sometimes	the	faith	of	the	sick	person	(Luke
8:48;	17:19),	but	at	other	times	the	faith	of	others	who	bring	the
sick	person	for	healing.	In	James	5:15	it	is	the	elders	who	pray,	and
James	says	it	is	“the	prayer	of	faith”	that	saves	the	sick	person—
this	then	must	be	the	faith	of	the	elders	praying,
31
	not	the	faith	of
the	one	who	is	sick.	When	the	four	men	let	down	a	paralytic
through	a	hole	in	the	roof	where	Jesus	was	preaching,	we	read,
“And	when	Jesus	saw	
their	
faith	.	.	.”	(Mark	2:5).	At	other	times
Jesus	mentions	the	faith	of	the	Canaanite	woman	regarding	the
healing	of	her	daughter	(Matt.	15:28),	or	of	the	centurion	for	the
healing	of	his	servant	(Matt.	8:10,	13).
32
5.	How	Then	Should	We	Pray	for	Healing?
	How	then	should	we	pray
regarding	physical	illness?	Certainly	it	is	right	to	ask	God	for	healing,	for
Jesus	tells	us	to	pray,	“Deliver	us	from	evil”	(Matt.	6:13),	and	the	apostle	John
writes	to	Gaius,	“I	pray	that	all	may	go	well	with	you	and	
that	you	may	be	in
health”	
(3	John	2).	Moreover,	Jesus	frequently	healed	
all	
who	were	brought
to	him,	and	he	never	sent	people	away,	telling	them	it	would	be	good	for	them
to	remain	ill	for	a	longer	time!	In	addition	to	this,	whenever	we	take	any	kind
of	medicine	or	seek	any	medical	help	for	an	illness,	
by	those	actions	we	admit
that	we	think	it	to	be	God’s	will	that	we	seek	to	be	well.	
If	we	thought	that
God	wanted	us	to	continue	in	our	illness,	we	would	never	seek	medical	means
for	healing!	So	when	we	pray	it	seems	right	that	our	first	assumption,	unless
we	have	specific	reason	to	think	otherwise,	should	be	that	God	would	be
pleased	to	heal	the	person	we	are	praying	for—as	far	as	we	can	tell	from
Scripture,	this	is	God’s	revealed	will.
33
Ken	Blue	has	a	helpful	observation	here.	He	argues	that	if	we	want
to	understand	God’s	attitude	toward	physical	healing	we	should
look	at	Jesus’	life	and	ministry.	Blue	says,	“If	Jesus	truly	reveals	the
character	of	God	to	us,	then	we	may	cease	speculating	about	and
arguing	over	God’s	will	in	sickness	and	healing.	Jesus	healed
people	because	he	loved	them.	Very	simply,	he	had	compassion	for
them;	he	was	on	their	side;	he	wanted	to	solve	their	problems.”
34
This	is	a	strong	argument,	especially	when	coupled	with	the
realization	that	Jesus	came	to	inaugurate	the	presence	of	the
kingdom	of	God	among	us	and	to	show	us	what	the	kingdom	of
God	would	be	like.
How	then	should	we	pray?	Certainly	it	is	right	to	ask	God	for
healing,	and	we	should	go	to	him	with	the	simple	request	that	he
give	physical	healing	in	time	of	need.	James	warns	us	that	simple
unbelief	can	lead	to	prayerlessness	and	failure	to	receive	answers
from	God:	“You	do	not	have,	because	you	do	not	ask”	(James	4:2).
But	when	we	pray	for	healing	we	should	remember	that	we	must
pray	for	God	to	be	glorified	in	the	situation,	whether	he	chooses	to
heal	or	not.	And	we	also	ought	to	pray	out	of	the	same	compassion
of	heart	that	Jesus	felt	for	those	whom	he	healed.	When	we	pray
this	way,	God	will	sometimes—and	perhaps	often—grant	answers
to	our	prayers.
Someone	may	object	at	this	point	that,	from	a	pastoral	standpoint,
much	harm	is	done	when	people	are	encouraged	to	believe	that	a
miracle	of	healing	will	occur	and	then	nothing	happens—
disappointment	with	the	church	and	anger	at	God	may	result.	Those
who	pray	for	people	to	be	healed	today	need	to	hear	this	objection
and	use	wisdom	in	what	they	tell	people	who	are	ill.
But	we	also	need	to	realize	that	there	is	more	than	one	kind	of
mistake	to	make:	(1)	
Not	praying	for	healing	at	all	
is	not	a	correct
solution,	for	it	involves	disobedience	to	James	5.	(2)	Telling	people
that	
God	seldom	heals	today	
and	that	they	should	expect	nothing	to
happen	is	not	a	correct	solution	either,	for	it	does	not	provide	an
atmosphere	conducive	to	faith	and	is	inconsistent	with	the	pattern
we	see	in	the	ministry	of	Jesus	and	the	early	church	in	the	New
Testament.	(3)	Telling	people	that	
God	always	heals	today	
if	we
have	enough	faith	is	a	cruel	teaching	not	supported	by	Scripture
(see	
section	6
	below).
The	pastorally	wise	solution,	it	seems,	lies	between	(2)	and	(3)
above.	We	can	tell	people	that	God	frequently	heals	today	(if	we
believe	that	is	true),	and	that	it	is	very	possible	that	they	will	be
healed,
35
	but	that	we	are	still	living	in	an	age	when	the	kingdom	of
God	is	“already”	here	but	“not	yet”	fully	here.	Therefore	Christians
in	this	life	will	experience	healing	(and	many	other	answers	to
prayer),	but	they	will	also	experience	continuing	illness	and
eventual	death.	In	each	individual	case	it	is	God’s	sovereign
wisdom	that	decides	the	outcome,	and	our	role	is	simply	to	ask	him
and	wait	for	him	to	answer	(whether	“yes”	or	“no”	or	“keep	praying
and	wait”).
Those	with	“gifts	of	healings”	(a	literal	translation	of	the	plurals	in
1	Cor.	12:9,	28)	will	be	those	people	who	find	that	their	prayers	for
healing	are	answered	more	frequently	and	more	thoroughly	than
others.	When	that	becomes	evident,	a	church	would	be	wise	to
encourage	them	in	this	ministry	and	give	them	more	opportunities
to	pray	for	others	who	are	ill.	We	should	also	realize	that	gifts	of
healing	could	include	ministry	not	only	in	terms	of	physical
healing,	but	also	in	terms	of	emotional	healing.	And	it	may	at	times
include	the	ability	to	set	people	free	from	demonic	attack,	for	this	is
also	called	“healing”	sometimes	in	Scripture	(see	Luke	6:18;	Acts
10:38).	Perhaps	the	gifts	of	being	able	to	pray	effectively	in
different	kinds	of	situations	and	for	different	kinds	of	needs	are
what	Paul	referred	to	when	he	used	the	plural	expression,	
“gifts	of
healings.”
6
.
	But	What	if	God	Does	Not	Heal?
	Nonetheless,	we	must	realize	that	not
all	prayers	for	healing	will	be	answered	in	this	age.	Sometimes	God	will	not
grant	the	special	“faith”	(James	5:15)	that	healing	will	occur,	and	at	times
God	will	choose	not	to	heal,	because	of	his	own	sovereign	purposes.	In	these
cases	we	must	remember	that	Romans	8:28	is	still	true:	though	we	experience
the	“sufferings	of	this	present	time,”	and	though	we	“groan	inwardly	as	we
wait	for	.	.	.	the	redemption	of	our	bodies”	(Rom.	8:18,	23),	nonetheless,	“we
know	that	in	everything	God	works	for	good	with	those	who	love	him,	who
are	called	according	to	his	purpose”	(Rom.	8:28).	This	includes	working	in
our	circumstances	of	suffering	and	illness	as	well.
Whatever	Paul’s	“thorn	in	the	flesh”	was	(and	centuries	of	work	by
Bible-believing	interpreters	have	failed	to	turn	up	a	definitive
answer),	Paul	realized	that	God	allowed	it	to	remain	with	him	“to
keep	me	from	being	too	elated”	(2	Cor.	12:7),	that	is,	to	keep	Paul
humble	before	the	Lord.
36
	So	the	Lord	told	him,	“My	grace	is
sufficient	for	you,	for	my	power	is	made	perfect	in	weakness”	(2
Cor.	12:9).	There	are	indications	in	the	early	church	that	even	in	the
presence	of	the	apostles	not	all	people	were	healed.	Paul	recognized
that	“our	outer	nature	is	wasting	away”	(2	Cor.	4:16),	and
sometimes	disease	and	illness	will	not	be	healed.	When
Epaphroditus	came	to	visit	Paul,	he	had	an	illness	that	brought	him
“near	to	death”	(Phil.	2:27).	Paul	indicates	in	the	narrative	of
Philippians	2	that	it	appeared	as	though	Epaphroditus	were	going	to
die—that	God	did	not	heal	him	immediately	when	he	became	ill.
But	eventually	God	did	heal	(Phil.	2:27)	in	answer	to	prayer.	Paul
told	Timothy	that	he	should	drink	a	little	wine	“for	the	sake	of	your
stomach	and	your	frequent	ailments”	(1	Tim.	5:23).	He	said,
“Trophimus	I	left	
ill	
at	Miletus”	(2	Tim.	4:20).	And	both	Peter	(1
Peter	1:6–7;	4:19)	and	James	(James	1:2–4)	have	words	of
encouragement	and	counsel	for	those	who	are	suffering	trials	of
various	kinds:
37
Count	it	all	joy,	my	brethren,	when	you	meet	various	trials,	for	you
know	that	the	testing	of	your	faith	produces	steadfastness.	And	let
steadfastness	have	its	full	effect,	that	you	may	be	perfect	and
complete,	lacking	in	nothing.	(James	1:2–4)
When	God	chooses	not	to	heal,	even	though	we	ask	him	for	it,	then
it	is	right	that	we	“give	thanks	in	all	circumstances”	(1	Thess.	5:18)
and	realize	that	God	can	use	sickness	to	draw	us	closer	to	himself
and	to	increase	in	us	obedience	to	his	will.	So	the	psalmist	can	say,
“
It	is	good	for	me	that	I	was	afflicted,	
that	I	might	learn	your
statutes”	(Ps.	119:71),	and,	“Before	I	was	afflicted	I	went	astray;
but	now	I	keep	your	word”	(Ps.	119:67).
Therefore	God	can	bring	increased	sanctification	to	us	through
illness	and	suffering—just	as	he	can	bring	sanctification	and	growth
in	faith	through	miraculous	healing.	But	the	emphasis	of	the	New
Testament,	both	in	Jesus’	ministry	and	in	the	ministry	of	the
disciples	in	Acts,	seems	to	be	one	that	encourages	us	in	most	cases
eagerly	and	earnestly	to	seek	God	for	healing,	and	then	to	continue
to	trust	him	to	bring	good	out	of	the	situation,	whether	he	grants	the
physical	healing	or	not.	The	point	is	that	in	everything	God	should
receive	glory	and	our	joy	and	trust	in	him	should	increase.
E.	Tongues	and	Interpretation
It	should	be	said	at	the	outset	that	the	Greek	word	
glōssa,	
translated
“tongue,”	is	used	not	only	to	mean	the	physical	tongue	in	a	person’s
mouth,	but	also	to	mean	“language.”	In	the	New	Testament
passages	where	speaking	in	tongues	is	discussed,	the	meaning
“languages”	is	certainly	in	view.	It	is	unfortunate,	therefore,	that
English	translations	have	continued	to	use	the	phrase	“speaking	in
tongues,”	which	is	an	expression	not	otherwise	used	in	ordinary
English	and	which	gives	the	impression	of	a	strange	experience,
something	completely	foreign	to	ordinary	human	life.	But	if
English	translations	were	to	use	the	expression	“speaking	in
languages,”	it	would	not	seem	nearly	as	strange,	and	would	give	the
reader	a	sense	much	closer	to	what	first	century	Greek	speaking
readers	would	have	heard	in	the	phrase	when	they	read	it	in	Acts	or
1	Corinthians.
38
	However,	because	current	usage	of	the	phrase
“speaking	in	tongues”	is	so	widely	established,	we	will	continue	to
use	it	in	this	discussion.
1.
	Tongues	in	the	History	of	Redemption.
	The	phenomenon	of	speaking	in
tongues	is	unique	to	the	new	covenant	age.	Before	Adam	and	Eve	fell	into
sin,	there	was	no	need	to	speak	in	other	languages,	because	they	spoke	the
same	language	
and	were	
united	in	service	of	God	
and	in	fellowship	with	him.
After	the	fall	people	spoke	the	
same	language	
but	eventually	became	
united
in	opposition	to	God,	
and	“the	wickedness	of	man	was	great	in	the	earth”	and
“every	imagination	of	the	thoughts	of	his	heart	was	only	evil	continually”
(Gen.	6:5).	This	unified	language	used	in	rebellion	against	God	culminated	in
the	building	of	the	tower	of	Babel	at	a	time	when	“the	whole	earth	had	one
language	and	few	words”	(Gen.	11:1).	In	order	to	stop	this	united	rebellion
against	him,	God	at	Babel	“confused	the	language	of	all	the	earth”	and
scattered	people	abroad	over	the	face	of	the	earth	(Gen.	11:9).
When	God	called	Abraham	to	himself	(Gen.	12:1),	he	promised	to
make	of	Abraham	a	“great	nation”	(Gen.	12:2),	and	the	nation	of
Israel	that	resulted	from	this	call	had	one	language	that	God	wanted
them	to	use	in	service	for	him.	Yet	this	language	was	not	spoken	by
the	rest	of	the	nations	of	the	world,	and	they	remained	outside	the
reach	of	God’s	plan	of	redemption.	So	the	situation	was	improved
somewhat,	for	
one	language	out	of	all	the	languages	of	the	world
was	used	in	service	of	God,	
whereas	in	Genesis	11	God	was	not
praised	with	any	language.
Now	if	we	pass	over	the	age	of	the	New	Testament	church	and	look
at	eternity	future,	we	see	that	once	again	unity	of	language	will	be
restored,	but	this	time	everyone	will	once	again	speak	the	
same
language	in	service	of	God,	
and	in	praise	to	him	(Rev.	7:9–12;	cf.
Zeph.	3:9;	1	Cor.	13:8;	perhaps	Isa.	19:18).
In	the	New	Testament	church,	there	is	something	of	a	foretaste	of
the	unity	of	language	that	will	exist	in	heaven,	but	it	is	given	only	at
some	times,	and	only	in	a	partial	way.	At	Pentecost,	which	was	the
point	at	which	the	gospel	began	to	go	to	all	nations,	it	was
appropriate	that	the	disciples	gathered	in	Jerusalem	“began	to	speak
in	other	tongues,	as	the	Spirit	gave	them	utterance”	(Acts	2:4).
39
The	result	was	that	Jewish	visitors	to	Jerusalem	from	various
nations	all	heard	in	their	own	languages	a	proclamation	of	“the
mighty	works	of	God”	(Acts	2:11).	This	was	a	remarkable	symbol
of	the	fact	that	the	gospel	message	was	about	to	go	forth	to	all	the
nations	of	the	world.
40
	Such	a	symbolic	action	would	have	been
inappropriate	in	the	Old	Testament,	for	there	the	evangelistic
message	was	one	of	inviting	people	from	other	nations	to	come	and
join	themselves	to	the	Jewish	people	and	become	Jews,	and	thereby
worship	God.	But	here	the	message	is	about	to	go	to	each	nation	in
its	own	language,	inviting	people	in	every	place	to	turn	to	Christ
and	be	saved.
41
Moreover,	within	the	context	of	the	worship	service	of	the	church,
speaking	in	tongues	plus	interpretation	gives	further	indication	of	a
promise	that	one	day	the	differences	in	languages	that	originated	at
Babel	will	be	overcome.	If	this	gift	is	operating	in	a	church,	no
matter	what	language	a	word	of	prayer	or	praise	is	given	in,	once
there	is	an	interpretation,	everyone	can	understand	it.	This	is,	of
course,	a	two-step	process	that	is	“imperfect,”	as	are	all	gifts	in	this
age	(1	Cor.	13:9),	but	it	is	still	an	improvement	on	the	situation
from	Babel	to	Pentecost	when	there	was	no	provision	to	enable
people	to	understand	a	message	in	a	language	they	did	not	know.
Finally,	prayer	in	tongues	in	a	private	setting	is	another	form	of
prayer	to	God.	Paul	says,	“If	I	pray	in	a	tongue,	
my	spirit	prays	
but
my	mind	is	unfruitful”	(1	Cor.	14:14).	In	the	overall	context	of	the
history	of	redemption,	this	also	may	be	seen	as	one	more	partial
solution	to	the	results	of	the	fall,	whereby	we	were	cut	off	from
fellowship	with	God.	Of	course,	this	does	not	mean	that	people’s
spirits	can	
only	
have	fellowship	with	God	when	they	speak	in
tongues—for	Paul	affirms	that	he	prays	and	sings	both	in	tongues
and	in	his	own	language	(1	Cor.	14:15).	However,	Paul	does	see
prayer	in	tongues	as	an	additional	means	of	fellowship	directly	with
God	in	prayer	and	worship.	Once	again,	this	aspect	of	the	gift	of
speaking	in	tongues	was	not	operative,	so	far	as	we	know,	before
the	new	covenant	age.
2.	What	Is	Speaking	in	Tongues?
	We	may	define	this	gift	as	follows:
Speaking	in	tongues	is	prayer	or	praise	spoken	in	syllables	not	understood	by
the	speaker.
a.	Words	of	Prayer	or	Praise	Spoken	to	God:
	This	definition	indicates	that
speaking	in	tongues	is	primarily	speech	directed	toward	God	(that	is,	prayer
or	praise).	Therefore	it	is	unlike	the	gift	of	prophecy,	which	frequently
consists	of	messages	directed	
from	
God	toward	people	in	the	church.	Paul
says,	“one	who	speaks	in	a	tongue	speaks	not	to	men	but	
to	God”	
(1	Cor.
14:2),	and	if	there	is	no	interpreter	present	at	the	church	service,	Paul	says
that	someone	who	has	a	gift	of	speaking	in	tongues	should	“keep	silence	in
church	and	speak	to	himself	and	
to	God”	
(1	Cor.	14:28).
What	kind	of	speech	is	this	that	is	directed	toward	God?	Paul	says,
“If	I	
pray	
in	a	tongue,	
my	spirit	prays	
but	my	mind	is	unfruitful”	(1
Cor.	14:14;	cf.	vv.	14–17,	where	Paul	categorizes	speech	in	tongues
as	praying	and	giving	thanks,	and	v.	
28).	Therefore	speaking	in
tongues	apparently	is	prayer	or	praise	directed	to	God,	and	it	comes
from	the	“spirit”	of	the	person	who	is	speaking.	This	is	not
inconsistent	with	the	narrative	in	Acts	2,	because	the	crowd	said,
“we	hear	them	telling	in	our	own	tongues	the	mighty	works	of
God”	(Acts	2:11),	a	description	that	certainly	could	mean	that	the
disciples	were	all	glorifying	God	and	proclaiming	his	mighty	works
in	worship,	and	the	crowd	began	to	listen	to	this	as	it	occurred	in
various	languages.	In	fact,	there	is	no	indication	that	the	disciples
themselves	were	speaking	to	the	crowd	until	Acts	2:14,	when	Peter
then	stands	and	addresses	the	crowd	directly,	presumably	in
Greek.
42
b.	Not	Understood	by	the	Speaker:
	Paul	says	that	“one	who	speaks	in	a
tongue	speaks	not	to	men	but	to	God;	
for	no	one	understands	him,	
but	he
utters	mysteries	in	the	Spirit”	(1	Cor.	14:2).	Similarly,	he	says	that	if	there	is
speaking	in	tongues	without	interpretation	no	meaning	will	be	communicated:
“I	shall	be	a	foreigner	to	the	speaker	and	the	speaker	a	foreigner	to	me”	(1
Cor.	14:11).	Moreover,	the	entire	paragraph	of	1	Corinthians	14:13–19
assumes	that	speech	in	tongues	in	the	congregation,	when	it	is	not
accompanied	by	interpretation,	is	not	understood	by	those	who	hear:
Therefore,	he	who	speaks	in	a	tongue	should	pray	for	the	power	to
interpret.	For	if	I	pray	in	a	tongue,	my	spirit	prays	but	my	mind	is
unfruitful.	What	am	I	to	do?	I	will	pray	with	the	spirit	and	I	will	pray
with	the	mind	also;	I	will	sing	with	the	spirit	and	I	will	sing	with	the
mind	also.	Otherwise,	if	you	bless	with	the	spirit,	how	can	any	one	in
the	position	of	an	outsider	say	the	“Amen”	to	your	thanksgiving	when
he	does	not	know	what	you	are	saying?	For	you	may	give	thanks	well
enough,	but	the	other	man	is	not	edified.	I	thank	God	that	I	speak	in
tongues	more	than	you	all;	nevertheless,	in	church	I	would	rather
speak	five	words	with	my	mind,	
in	order	to	instruct	others,	
than	ten
thousand	words	in	a	tongue.
Now	at	Pentecost	speech	in	tongues	was	in	known	languages	that
were	understood	by	those	who	heard:	“each	one	heard	them
speaking	
in	his	own	language”	
(Acts	2:6).	But	once	again	the
speech	was	not	understood	by	the	speakers,	for	what	caused	the
amazement	was	that	Galileans	were	speaking	all	these	different
languages	(v.	
7).	It	seems,	therefore,	that	
at	times	
speaking	in
tongues	may	involve	speech	in	actual	human	languages,	sometimes
even	languages	that	are	understood	by	some	of	those	who	hear.	But
at	other	times—and	Paul	assumes	that	this	will	ordinarily	be	the
case—the	speech	will	be	in	a	language	that	“no	one	understands”	(1
Cor.	14:2).
Some	have	objected	that	speaking	in	tongues	must	always	consist
of	speech	in	
known	
human	languages,	since	that	is	what	happened
at	Pentecost.	But	the	fact	that	speaking	in	tongues	occurred	in
known	human	languages	
once	
in	Scripture	does	not	require	that	it
always	
happen	with	known	languages,	especially	when	another
description	of	speaking	in	tongues	(1	Cor.	14)	indicates	exactly	the
opposite.	Paul	does	not	say	that	foreign	visitors	to	Corinth	will
understand	the	speaker,	but	he	says	that	when	someone	speaks	in
tongues	
“no	one”	
will	understand	and	the	outsider	will	not	know
what	the	person	is	saying	(1	Cor.	14:2,	16).
43
	In	fact,	Paul	explicitly
says	that	quite	the	opposite	of	the	phenomenon	at	Pentecost	will
happen	in	the	ordinary	conduct	of	church	life:	if	“all	speak	in
tongues”	and	“outsiders	or	unbelievers	enter,”	far	from
understanding	the	message,	they	will	say	“that	you	are	mad”	(1	Cor.
14:23).	Moreover,	we	must	realize	that	1	Corinthians	14	is	Paul’s
general	instruction	based	on	a	wide	experience	of	tongues-speaking
in	many	different	churches,	whereas	Acts	2	simply	describes	one
unique	event	at	a	significant	turning	point	in	the	history	of
redemption	(Acts	2	is	historical	narrative	while	1	Cor.	14	is
doctrinal	instruction).	Therefore	it	would	seem	appropriate	to	take	1
Corinthians	14	as	the	passage	that	most	closely	describes	the
ordinary	experience	of	New	Testament	churches,	and	to	take	Paul’s
instructions	there	as	the	standard	by	which	God	intends	churches	to
regulate	the	use	of	this	gift.
44
Are	tongues	known	human	languages	then?	Sometimes	this	gift
may	result	in	speaking	in	a	human	language	that	the	speaker	has	not
learned,	but	ordinarily	it	seems	that	it	will	involve	speech	in	a
language	that	no	one	understands,	whether	that	be	a	human
language	or	not.
45
c.	Prayer	With	the	Spirit,	Not	With	the	Mind:
	Paul	says:	“If	I	pray	in	a
tongue,	
my	spirit	prays	
but	my	
mind	is	unfruitful.	
What	am	I	to	do?	I	will	pray
with	the	spirit	and	I	will	pray	with	the	mind	also;	I	will	sing	with	the	spirit
and	I	will	sing	with	the	mind	also”	(1	Cor.	14:14–15).
Paul	is	not	here	talking	about	the	Holy	Spirit	praying	through	us.
The	contrast	between	“my	spirit”	and	“my	mind”	in	verse	14
indicates	that	it	is	Paul’s	own	human	spirit	that	he	is	talking	about,
the	nonmaterial	aspect	of	his	being.	As	he	uses	this	gift,	his	spirit
speaks	directly	to	God,	even	though	his	mind	does	not	have	to
formulate	words	and	sentences	and	decide	what	to	pray	for.
46
	Paul
sees	this	kind	of	prayer	as	an	activity	that	occurs	in	the	spiritual
realm,	whereby	our	spirits	speak	directly	to	God	but	our	mind	is
somehow	bypassed	and	does	not	understand	what	we	are	praying.
We	may	wonder	why	God	would	give	the	church	a	gift	that
operates	in	the	unseen,	spiritual	realm	and	that	is	not	understood	by
our	minds.	One	reason	may	be	to	keep	us	humble,	and	to	help
prevent	intellectual	pride.	Another	reason	may	be	to	remind	us	that
God	is	greater	than	our	understanding	and	that	he	works	in	ways
that	transcend	our	understanding.	Finally,	it	is	characteristic	of
much	that	God	does	in	the	new	covenant	age	that	it	is	done	in	the
unseen,	spiritual	realm:	regeneration,	genuine	prayer,	worship	“in
spirit	and	in	truth,”	the	spiritual	blessings	that	come	through	the
Lord’s	Supper,	spiritual	warfare,	laying	up	treasures	in	heaven,
setting	our	minds	on	things	above,	where	Christ	is—all	these	and
many	more	elements	of	the	Christian	life	involve	activities	that
occur	in	the	unseen,	spiritual	realm,	activities	that	we	do	not	see	or
fully	understand.	In	that	light,	speaking	in	tongues	is	simply	another
activity	that	occurs	in	the	unseen	spiritual	realm,	an	activity	we
believe	is	effective	because	Scripture	tells	us	it	is,	not	because	we
can	comprehend	it	with	our	minds	(cf.	1	Cor.	14:5).
d.	Not	Ecstatic	but	Self-controlled:
	The	New	English	Bible	translated	the
phrase	“speaking	in	tongues”	as	“ecstatic	speech,”	thus	giving	further	support
to	the	idea	that	those	who	speak	in	tongues	lose	awareness	of	their
surroundings	or	lose	self-control	or	are	forced	to	speak	against	their	will.
Moreover,	some	of	the	extreme	elements	in	the	Pentecostal	movement	have
allowed	frenzied	and	disorderly	conduct	at	worship	services,	and	this	has,	in
the	minds	of	some,	perpetuated	the	notion	that	speaking	in	tongues	is	a	kind
of	ecstatic	speech.
But	this	is	not	the	picture	given	in	the	New	Testament.	Even	when
the	Holy	Spirit	came	with	overwhelming	power	at	Pentecost,	the
disciples	were	able	to	stop	speaking	in	tongues	so	that	Peter	could
give	his	sermon	to	the	assembled	crowd.	More	explicitly,	Paul	says:
If	any	speak	in	a	tongue,	let	there	be	
only	two	or	at	most	three,	and
each	in	turn;	
and	let	one	interpret.	But	if	there	is	no	one	to	interpret,
let	each	of	them	keep	silence	in	church	and	speak	to	himself	and	to
God.	(1	Cor.	14:27–28)
Here	Paul	requires	that	those	who	speak	in	tongues	take	turns,	and	he	limits
the	number	to	three,	indicating	clearly	that	those	who	spoke	in	tongues	were
aware	of	what	was	going	on	around	them,	and	were	able	to	control
themselves	so	as	to	speak	only	when	it	was	their	turn,	and	when	no	one	else
was	speaking.	If	there	was	no	one	to	interpret,	they	were	easily	able	to	keep
silence	and	not	speak.	All	of	these	factors	indicate	a	high	degree	of	self-
control	and	give	no	support	to	the	idea	that	Paul	thought	of	tongues	as	ecstatic
speech	of	some	kind.
e.	Tongues	Without	Interpretation:
	If	no	one	known	to	have	the	gift	of
interpretation	is	present	in	the	assembly,	the	passage	just	quoted	indicates	that
speaking	in	tongues	should	be	in	private.	No	speech	in	tongues	without
interpretation	should	be	given	in	the	church	service.
47
Paul	speaks	of	praying	in	tongues	and	singing	in	tongues	when	he
says,	“I	will	
pray	with	the	spirit	
and	I	will	pray	with	the	mind	also;
I	will	
sing	with	the	spirit	
and	I	will	sing	with	the	mind	also”	(1	Cor.
14:15).	This	gives	further	confirmation	to	the	definition	given
above	in	which	we	viewed	tongues	as	something	primarily	directed
toward	God	in	prayer	and	praise.	It	also	gives	legitimacy	to	the
practice	of	singing	in	tongues,	whether	publicly	or	privately.	Yet	the
same	rules	apply	for	singing	as	for	speaking:	if	there	is	no
interpreter,	it	should	only	be	done	in	private.
48
In	1	Corinthians	14:20–25	Paul	says	that	if	believers	speak	in
tongues	without	interpretation	in	church,	they	will	be	acting	and
thinking	like	“children”	(1	Cor.	14:20).	He	first	quotes	a	prophecy
of	judgment	from	Isaiah	28:11–12:	“In	the	law	it	is	written,	‘By
men	of	strange	tongues	and	by	the	lips	of	foreigners	will	I	speak	to
this	people,	and	even	then	they	will	not	listen	to	me,	says	the
Lord’	”	(1	Cor.	14:21).
In	the	context	of	Isaiah	28,	God	is	warning	the	rebellious	people	of
Israel	that	the	next	words	they	heard	from	him	would	be	words	of
foreigners	that	they	could	not	understand—the	Assyrian	army
would	come	on	them	as	agents	of	God’s	judgment.	Now	Paul	is
about	to	take	this	as	a	general	principle—when	God	speaks	to
people	in	language	they	cannot	understand,	it	is	quite	evidently	a
sign	of	God’s	judgment.
Paul	rightly	applies	that	to	the	situation	of	speaking	in	tongues
without	interpretation	in	the	church	service.	He	calls	it	a	sign	(that
is,	a	sign	of	judgment)	on	unbelievers:
Thus,	
tongues	are	a	sign	
not	for	believers	but	
for	unbelievers,	while
prophecy	is	
not	for	unbelievers	but	
for	believers.	
If,	therefore,	the
whole	church	assembles	and	all	speak	in	tongues,	and	outsiders	or
unbelievers	enter,	will	they	not	say	that	you	are	mad?	(1	Cor.	14:22–
23)
Here	Paul	uses	the	word	“sign”	to	mean	
“sign	of	God’s	attitude”	
(whether
positive	or	negative).	Tongues	that	are	not	understood	by	outsiders	are
certainly	a	
negative	
sign—a	sign	of	judgment.	Therefore	Paul	cautions	the
Corinthians	not	to	give	such	a	sign	to	outsiders	who	come	in.	He	tells	them	if
an	outsider	comes	in	and	hears	only	unintelligible	speech,	he	will	certainly
not	be	saved	but	will	conclude	that	the	Corinthians	are	mad,	and	the
uninterpreted	tongues	will	in	his	case	function	as	a	sign	of	God’s	judgment.
By	contrast,	Paul	says	that	prophecy	is	a	sign	of	God’s	attitude	as
well,	but	here	a	
positive	
sign	of	God’s	blessing.	This	is	why	he	can
say	that	prophecy	is	a	sign	“for	believers”	(v.	
22).	And	this	is	why
he	concludes	his	section	by	saying,	“If	all	prophesy,	and	an
unbeliever	or	outsider	enters,	he	is	convicted	by	all,	he	is	called	to
account	by	all,	the	secrets	of	his	heart	are	disclosed;	and	so,	falling
on	his	face,	he	will	worship	God	and	declare	that	God	is	really
among	you”	(vv.	24–25).	When	this	happens,	believers	will
certainly	realize	that	God	is	active	among	them	to	bring	blessing,
and	prophecy	will	regularly	function	as	a	sign	
for	believers	
of
God’s	positive	attitude	for	them.
49
Nevertheless,	however	much	Paul	warns	against	using	tongues
without	interpretation	
in	church,	
he	certainly	views	it	positively	and
encourages	it	in	
private.	
He	says,	“He	who	speaks	in	a	tongue
edifies	himself,	
but	he	who	prophesies	edifies	the	church”	(1	Cor.
14:4).	What	is	his	conclusion?	It	is	not	(as	some	would	argue)	that
Christians	should	decide	not	to	use	the	gift	or	decide	that	it	has	no
value	when	used	privately.	Rather	he	says,	“What	am	I	to	do?	I	will
pray	with	the	spirit	and	I	will	pray	with	the	mind	also”	(v.	
15).	And
he	says,	“I	thank	God	that	I	speak	in	tongues	more	than	you	all”	(v.
18),	and	“Now	
I	want	you	all	to	speak	in	tongues,	
but	even	more	to
prophesy”	(v.	
5),	and	“Earnestly	desire	to	prophesy,	and	do	not
forbid	speaking	in	tongues”	(v.	
39).	If	our	previous	understanding
of	tongues	as	prayer	or	praise	to	God	is	correct,	then	we	would
certainly	expect	that	edification	would	follow,	even	though	the
speaker’s	mind	does	not	understand	what	is	being	said,	but	his	or
her	own	human	spirit	is	communicating	directly	with	God.	Just	as
prayer	and	worship	in	general	edify	us	as	we	engage	in	them,	so
this	kind	of	prayer	and	worship	edifies	us	too,	according	to	Paul.
f.	Tongues	With	Interpretation:	Edification	for	the	Church:
	Paul	says,
“He	who	prophesies	is	greater	than	he	who	speaks	in	tongues,	
unless	someone
interprets,	
so	that	the	church	may	be	edified”	(1	Cor.	14:5).	Once	a	message
in	tongues	is	interpreted,	all	can	understand.	In	that	case,	Paul	says	that	the
message	in	tongues	is	
as	valuable	
to	the	church	as	prophecy.	We	should	note
that	he	does	not	say	they	have	the	same	functions	(for	other	passages	indicate
that	prophecy	is	communication	from	God	toward	human	beings,	while
tongues	is	generally	communication	from	human	beings	to	God).	But	Paul
clearly	says	they	have	equal	value	in	edifying	the	church.
g.	Not	All	Speak	in	Tongues:
	Just	as	not	all	Christians	are	apostles,	and	not
all	are	prophets	or	teachers,	and	not	all	possess	gifts	of	healing,	so	not	all
speak	with	tongues.	Paul	clearly	implies	this	when	he	asks	a	series	of
questions,	all	of	which	expect	the	answer	“no,”	and	includes	the	question	“Do
all	speak	with	tongues?”	(1	Cor.	12:30).	The	implied	answer	is	no.
50
	Some
have	argued	that	Paul	here	only	means	that	not	all	speak	with	tongues
publicly,	
but	that	perhaps	he	would	have	admitted	that	all	can	speak	in
tongues	privately.	But	this	distinction	seems	foreign	to	the	context	and
unconvincing.	He	does	not	specify	that	not	all	speak	with	tongues	
publicly	
or
in	church,	
but	simply	says	that	not	all	speak	with	tongues.	His	next	question
is,	“Do	all	interpret?”	(v.	
30).	His	previous	two	questions	were,	“Do	all	work
miracles?	Do	all	possess	gifts	of	healing?”	(vv.	29–30).	Would	we	wish	to
make	the	same	arguments	about	these	gifts—that	not	all	interpret	tongues
publicly,	
but	that	all	Christians	are	able	to	do	it	
privately?	
Or	that	not	all	work
miracles	publicly,	but	that	all	are	able	to	work	miracles	privately?	Such	a
distinction	seems	unwarranted	by	the	context	in	every	case.
In	actuality,	the	desire	to	say	that	every	Christian	can	speak	in
tongues	(even	though	Paul	says	that	not	all	speak	in	tongues)	is
probably	motivated	in	most	cases	by	a	prior	doctrinal	understanding
that	views	baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit	as	an	experience	subsequent
to	conversion,
51
	and	sees	speaking	in	tongues	as	an	initial	“sign”	of
receiving	this	baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit.
52
	But	there	are	serious
questions	that	remain	about	this	doctrinal	position	(as	explained	in
chapter	39).	It	seems	better	to	take	1	Corinthians	12:30	to	mean	just
what	it	says:	not	all	speak	in	tongues.	The	gift	of	tongues—just	like
every	other	gift—is	not	given	by	the	Holy	Spirit	to	every	Christian
who	seeks	it.	He	“apportions	to	each	one	individually	as	he	wills”
(1	Cor.	12:11).
However,	there	is	nothing	in	Scripture	that	says	that	only	a	few	will
receive	the	gift	of	speaking	in	tongues,	and,	since	it	is	a	gift	Paul
views	as	edifying	and	useful	in	prayer	and	worship	(on	a	personal
level	even	if	not	in	church),	it	would	not	be	surprising	if	the	Holy
Spirit	gave	a	very	widespread	distribution	of	this	gift	and	many
Christians	in	fact	received	it.
53
h.	What	About	the	Danger	of	Demonic	Counterfeit?
	At	times	Christians
have	been	afraid	to	speak	in	tongues,	wondering	if	speaking	something	they
do	not	understand	might	involve	them	in	speaking	blasphemy	against	God	or
speaking	something	that	is	prompted	by	a	demon	rather	than	by	the	Holy
Spirit.
First,	it	must	be	said	that	this	is	not	Paul’s	concern,	even	in	the	city
of	Corinth	where	many	had	come	from	pagan	temple	worship,	and
where	Paul	had	clearly	said	that	“what	pagans	sacrifice	they	offer	to
demons	and	not	to	God”	(1	Cor.	10:20).	Nonetheless,	Paul	says,	“I
want	you	all	to	speak	in	tongues”	(1	Cor.	14:5).	He	gives	no
warning	that	they	should	beware	of	demonic	counterfeit	or	even
think	that	this	would	be	a	possibility	when	they	use	this	gift.
The	theological	reason	underlying	Paul’s	encouragement	at	that
point	is	the	fact	that	the	Holy	Spirit	is	working	powerfully	within
the	lives	of	believers.	Paul	says,	“I	want	you	to	understand	that	no
one	speaking	by	the	Spirit	of	God	ever	says	‘Jesus	be	cursed!’	and
no	one	can	say	‘Jesus	is	Lord’	except	by	the	Holy	Spirit”	(1	Cor.
12:3).	Here	Paul	reassures	the	Corinthians	that	if	they	are	speaking
by	the	power	of	the	Holy	Spirit	working	within	them,	they	will	not
say,	“Jesus	be	cursed!”
54
	Coming	as	it	does	at	the	beginning	of	a
discussion	of	spiritual	gifts,	1	Corinthians	12:3	is	intended	to
function	as	reassurance	to	the	Corinthians	who	may	have	suspected
some	Christians	who	came	from	backgrounds	of	demon	worship	in
the	temples	at	Corinth.	Might	this	demonic	influence	still	affect
their	use	of	a	spiritual	gift?	Paul	lays	down	the	ground	rule	that
those	who	genuinely	profess	faith	that	“Jesus	is	Lord”	are	doing	so
by	the	Holy	Spirit	working	within,	and	that	no	one	speaking	by	the
power	of	the	Holy	Spirit	will	ever	speak	blasphemy	or	curses
against	Jesus.
55
	This	fear,	then,	is	not	one	that	Paul	seemed	troubled
by.	He	simply	encouraged	believers	to	pray	in	tongues	and	said	that
if	they	did	so	they	would	be	edifying	themselves.
56
i.	Is	Romans	8:26–27	Related	to	Speaking	in	Tongues?
	Paul	writes	in
Romans	8:26–27:
Likewise	the	Spirit	helps	us	in	our	weakness;	for	we	do	not	know	how
to	pray	as	we	ought,	but	the	Spirit	himself	intercedes	for	us	with	sighs
too	deep	for	words.	And	he	who	searches	the	hearts	of	men	knows
what	is	the	mind	of	the	Spirit,	because	the	Spirit	intercedes	for	the
saints	according	to	the	will	of	God.
Paul	does	not	mention	speaking	in	tongues	explicitly	here,	and	the	statement
is	a	general	one	concerning	the	life	of	all	Christians,	so	it	does	not	seem
correct	to	say	that	Paul	here	is	referring	to	speaking	in	tongues.	He	is	referring
to	a	more	general	experience	that	occurs	in	the	prayer	life	of	every	Christian.
But	what	exactly	is	he	talking	about?	Some	have	thought	that	he	is
referring	to	an	intercessory	activity	completely	imperceptible	to	us,
in	which	the	Holy	Spirit	intercedes	for	us	by	making	sighs	and
groans	to	the	Father.	On	this	view,	such	intercessory	work	of	the
Spirit	goes	on	continually,	but	we	have	no	idea	that	it	is	happening
(except	for	the	fact	that	Scripture	tells	us	this).	In	this	way	it	would
be	similar	to	the	intercessory	work	of	Christ	mentioned	in	Romans
8:34	and	Hebrews	7:25.
But	this	does	not	appear	to	be	a	satisfactory	explanation	of	the
passage,	for	several	reasons:	(1)	It	would	not	seem	probable	that
Paul	would	say	that	the	intercessory	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit,	who	is
the	infinite,	omnipotent,	omniscient	God,	would	be	carried	out	in
“wordless	
groans”	
(literal	translation	of	
stenagmois	alalētois	
in
Rom.	8:26),	especially	when	we	realize	that	“groans”	refers	to	the
intense	sighs	of	fatigue	that	are	appropriate	to	weary,	burdened
creatures	in	a	fallen	world.
57
	(2)	Within	the	larger	context	the
groanings	in	view	seem	to	be	those	due	to	the	burden	of	living	in
this	present	evil	age,	particularly	the	groans	associated	with	our
suffering	in	this	age	(see	vv.	17,	18,	23).	(3)	The	verb	“helps”	in
Romans	8:26	(“The	Spirit	
helps	
us	in	our	weakness”)	does	not	refer
to	something	the	Holy	Spirit	does	
apart	from	us	and	on	our	behalf,
but	rather	something	the	Holy	Spirit	does	
in	cooperation	with	us.
The	verb	Paul	uses	here	(
sunantilambanomai
)	is	also	used	in	Luke
10:40,	where	Martha	wants	Jesus	to	tell	Mary	“to	
help	
me”—
certainly	she	does	not	want	Mary	to	do	the	food	preparation	
instead
of	her,	but	rather	to	come	and	take	part	
with	
her	in	doing	it.
58
Therefore	Paul	is	not	talking	about	something	the	Holy	Spirit	does
completely	apart	from	our	participation,	but	something	the	Holy
Spirit	does	in	cooperation	with	our	activity.
These	reasons	combine	to	indicate	that	Paul	is	not	talking	about	a
work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	done	apart	from	us	and	unknown	by	us,	but
about	the	inarticulate	sighs	and	groans	which	we	ourselves	utter	in
prayer,	which	the	Holy	Spirit	then	makes	into	effective	intercession
before	the	throne	of	God.	We	could	paraphrase,	“The	Holy	Spirit
assists	our	prayers	when	he	intercedes	(for	us)	by	taking	our
wordless	groans	and	making	them	into	effective	prayer.”
59
What	is	the	relationship	between	this	and	speaking	in	tongues?
There	is	some	similarity	because	it	is	effective	prayer	which	
we
pray	
even	though	we	do	not	understand	fully	what	we	are	praying.
But	there	are	some	differences	in	that	the	sighs	or	groans	that	we
utter	in	prayer	very	often	relate	to	situations	or	hardships	that	we
are	very	conscious	of	in	our	minds	as	we	pray,	so	we	know	what	we
are	praying	about.	But	Paul	says	that	we	do	not	know	how	to	pray
for	these	situations	as	we	ought	to	pray.	Therefore	the	Holy	Spirit
helps	us	and	intercedes	in	these	situations	“according	to	the	will	of
God”	(Rom.	8:27).	There	is	no	explicit	mention	of	our	spirit
praying	(though	that	may	indeed	be	true	as	well),	nor	is	there
mention	of	our	mind	being	unfruitful	or	lacking	understanding
(though	that	may	at	times	be	at	least	partially	true).	Nor	do	these
sighs	or	groans	come	forth	in	anything	that	could	be	called	“other
tongues”	or	“other	languages.”	So	there	are	several	differences,
even	though	Romans	8:26–27	talks	about	intercession	that	we	make
in	sounds	that	are	not	fully	understood	by	us,	and	therefore	it	is	a
phenomenon	that	has	some	similarities	to	speaking	in	tongues.
F.	Word	of	Wisdom	and	Word	of	Knowledge
Paul	writes,	“For	to	one	is	given	the	
word	of	wisdom	
through	the
Spirit,	and	to	another	the	
word	of	knowledge	
according	to	the	same
Spirit”	(1	Cor.	12:8	NASB).	At	the	beginning	of	this	discussion	it
must	be	understood	that	these	two	gifts	are	mentioned	nowhere	else
in	Scripture,
60
	and	no	other	early	Christian	literature	outside	the
Bible	has	been	found	to	use	these	phrases	of	any	spiritual	gift
either.	This	means	that	the	
only	
information	we	have	about	these
gifts	is	contained	in	this	verse:	we	have	the	words	used	to	describe
these	two	gifts,	and	we	have	the	context	in	which	the	phrases	occur.
No	interpreter	anywhere	has	any	more	information	than	this	to
work	with.	This	warns	us	that	our	conclusions	will	probably	be
somewhat	tentative	in	any	case.
The	major	alternatives	for	understanding	these	gifts	are	two:	(1)
These	gifts	are	commonly	thought	to	be	the	ability	to	receive	a
special	revelation	from	the	Holy	Spirit	and	on	that	basis	to	speak
words	that	give	wisdom	in	a	situation	or	give	specific	knowledge	of
a	situation	in	the	life	of	someone	present	in	a	congregation.	In	this
interpretation	these	gifts	would	be	more	“miraculous,”	in	that	they
would	call	forth	wonder	and	amazement	from	the	people	present
since	they	would	not	be	based	on	information	ordinarily	available
to	the	person	using	the	gift.
(2)	The	other	interpretation	of	these	gifts	would	see	them	as	more
“non-miraculous”	or	ordinary:	the	“word	of	wisdom”	simply	means
the	ability	to	speak	a	wise	word	in	various	situations,	and	“word	of
knowledge”	is	the	ability	to	speak	with	knowledge	about	a
situation.	In	both	cases	the	knowledge	and	wisdom	would	not	be
based	on	a	special	revelation	spontaneously	given	by	the	Holy
Spirit,	but	would	be	based	on	wisdom	acquired	in	the	ordinary
course	of	life,	the	knowledge	and	wisdom	that	would	be
characteristic	of	Bible	teachers	or	elders	and	other	mature
Christians	in	a	church,	for	example.	These	would	be	empowered	by
the	Holy	Spirit	and	thereby	made	effective	when	they	were	spoken.
Examples	of	“words	of	wisdom”	in	this	sense	would	be	found	in
Acts	6:1–6	(the	appointment	of	the	first	“deacons”	or	assistants	to
the	apostles);	Acts	6:10	(Stephen’s	wisdom	in	proclaiming	the
gospel);	Acts	15:19–29	(the	decision	of	the	Jerusalem	council);	and
even	in	King	Solomon’s	statement,	“Divide	the	living	child	in	two,
and	give	half	to	the	one,	and	half	to	the	other”	(1	Kings	3:25;	see
also	1	Cor.	6:5–6).
In	favor	of	the	first	interpretation,	it	might	be	argued	that	all	the
other	seven	gifts	listed	in	1	Corinthians	12:8–10	are	in	the
“miraculous”	category,	and	therefore	these	two	gifts	should	be
understood	that	way	as	well.
However,	there	are	some	weighty	considerations	against	this	view:
(1)	The	words	Paul	uses	for	“word”	(
logos
),	“wisdom”	(
sophia
),
and	“knowledge”	(
gnōsis
)	are	not	specialized	or	technical	terms,
but	are	extremely	common	words	in	the	Greek	New	Testament.
They	are	simply	the	ordinary	words	frequently	used	for	“word”	and
“wisdom”	and	“knowledge.”	Moreover,	they	are	not	ordinarily	used
to	denote	miraculous	events	(as	are	the	words	
revelation	
and
prophecy,	
for	example),	but	are	simply	the	words	used	for	human
knowledge	and	wisdom.	So	from	the	meanings	of	the	words
themselves,	no	indication	of	a	miraculous	gift	seems	to	be	given.
(2)	In	the	context	of	1	Corinthians	12:8,	Paul’s	purpose	in	the
argument	seems	to	weigh	against	thinking	of	them	as	miraculous.
Paul’s	larger	purpose	in	verses	8–10	is	to	demonstrate	that	
no
matter	what	kind	of	gift	a	person	has,	
he	or	she	can	be	assured	that
that	gift	has	been	given	by	the	Holy	Spirit.	He	precedes	the	section
by	saying,	“To	
each	
is	given	the	manifestation	of	the	Spirit	for	the
common	good,”	and	follows	this	immediate	section	by	saying,	“All
these	are	inspired	by	one	and	the	same	Spirit,	who	apportions	to
each	one	
individually	as	he	wills”	(vv.	7,	11).	But	if	Paul’s	purpose
in	this	section	is	to	show	that	
every	Christian’s	gift	
is	given	by	the
Holy	Spirit,	then	that	purpose	would	not	be	well	served	by	giving
only	examples	of	miraculous	gifts.	If	he	did	that,	those	with	non-
miraculous	gifts	would	feel	left	out	of	the	argument	and	would	not
be	persuaded	that	their	gifts	are	included	in	Paul’s	discussion.	Even
more	importantly,	those	with	miraculous	gifts	might	look	at	this	list
and	conclude	that	
only	
those	with	miraculous	gifts	really	had	the
Holy	Spirit	at	work	within	them	to	empower	those	gifts.	This	would
lead	to	a	dangerous	kind	of	elitism	in	the	congregation.	Therefore	it
seems	necessary	that	Paul	would	include	some	
nonmiraculous	
gifts
in	his	list	in	1	Corinthians	12:8–10.
But	which	are	the	nonmiraculous	gifts	in	this	list?
Word	of	wisdom
Word	of	knowledge
Faith
Gifts	of	healings
Miracles
Prophecy
Distinguishing	between	spirits
Tongues
Interpretation	of	tongues
All	the	other	gifts	seem	to	fall	in	the	more	“miraculous”	category	(with	the
possible	exceptions	of	speaking	in	tongues	and	perhaps	faith).	But	that	would
make	it	almost	necessary	that	word	of	wisdom	and	word	of	knowledge	be
nonmiraculous	to	guarantee	that	there	are	
some	
nonmiraculous	gifts	in	the	list.
This	would	demonstrate	Paul’s	pastoral	wisdom	in	selecting	examples	of
different	kinds	of	gifts	being	exercised	in	the	actual	congregation.	So	there
must	be	some	nonmiraculous	gifts	on	the	list—and	if	there	are	some,	then
these	are	very	good	candidates.
61
(3)	Probably	the	most	decisive	consideration	is	the	fact	that	the
New	Testament	already	has	a	term	to	describe	the	action	of
receiving	a	special	revelation	from	the	Holy	Spirit	and	reporting	it
in	the	congregation—this	is	what	Paul	calls	“prophecy.”	Since	he
discusses	prophecy	at	some	length,	describing	it	and	regulating	it,
we	can	know	fairly	clearly	what	prophecy	was.	But	to	say	that	these
other	gifts	functioned	in	exactly	the	same	way	(perhaps	differing
only	in	content)	does	not	seem	justified	by	anything	in	the	text
other	than	a	preconceived	notion	of	what	these	gifts	should	be.
62
Therefore	it	would	seem	preferable	to	understand	these	in	a
“nonmiraculous”	way,	simply	as	the	ability	to	speak	with	wisdom
or	with	knowledge	in	various	situations.	What	many	people	today
call	“word	of	wisdom”	and	“word	of	knowledge”	in	charismatic
circles,	it	would	seem	better	simply	to	refer	to	as	“prophecy.”
63
G.	Distinguishing	Between	Spirits	and	Spiritual	Warfare
The	gift	of	distinguishing	between	spirits	is	another	gift	that	is
mentioned	only	once	in	the	New	Testament	(in	the	list	at	1	Cor.
12:10),	but	the	nature	of	this	gift	connects	it	with	a	number	of	other
passages	that	describe	the	spiritual	warfare	that	occurs	between
Christians	and	demonic	spirits.	We	may	define	the	gift	of
distinguishing	between	spirits	as	follows:	
Distinguishing	between
spirits	is	a	special	ability	to	recognize	the	influence	of	the	Holy
Spirit	or	of	demonic	spirits	in	a	person.
In	the	perspective	of	the	history	of	redemption,	this	gift	also	gives	a
foretaste	of	the	age	to	come	in	that	it	is	a	foretaste	of	the	ability	to
recognize	Satan	and	his	influence,	which	ability	will	be	made
perfect	for	us	in	heaven,	when	everything	that	is	covered	or	hidden
will	be	revealed	and	brought	to	the	light	(Matt.	10:26;	cf.	Rev.
20:11–15).	This	ability	is	probably	also	stronger	than	that	possessed
by	most	or	all	believers	in	the	old	covenant,	where	mentions	of
demonic	activity	are	infrequent,	and	where	demonic	attacks	against
God’s	people	most	often	were	embodied	in	military	attacks	by
unbelieving	nations	against	the	people	of	Israel,	or	in	overt
temptations	to	go	and	serve	pagan	deities.	Demonic	activity	was
therefore	perceived	primarily	through	observation	of	outward
physical	events	and	circumstances	in	which	Satan’s	purpose	was
carried	out,	and	which	could	be	clearly	seen.
This	New	Testament	gift	of	distinguishing	between	spirits	involves
the	ability	to	distinguish	the	presence	of	evil	spirits	from	the
presence	of	the	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in	a	person’s	life.	Paul
knows	that	the	Corinthians	previously	were	“led	astray	to	dumb
idols”	(1	Cor.	12:2),	and	John	similarly	realizes	that	there	is	a	need
for	Christians	to	“test	the	spirits	to	see	whether	they	are	of	God;	for
many	false	prophets	have	gone	out	into	the	world”	(1	John	4:1).
Beyond	this,	it	is	also	possible	that	the	gift	would	involve
distinguishing	between	various	
types	
of	evil	spirits,	such	as	a	spirit
of	infirmity	(Luke	13:11),	a	spirit	of	divination	(Acts	16:16),	a
dumb	and	deaf	spirit	(Mark	9:25,	29),	and	a	spirit	of	error	(1	John
4:6).	From	a	lexical	and	grammatical	standpoint	there	is	nothing
that	would	prevent	us	from	understanding	the	gift	of
“distinguishing	between	spirits”	to	include	this	kind	of	ability	as
well.
64
Of	course,	to	some	degree	the	presence	of	demonic	activity	is
outwardly	evident,	sometimes	from	the	blurting	out	of	blatantly
false	doctrinal	statements	(see	1	Cor.	12:2–3;	1	John	4:1–6),	and
sometimes	from	violent	and	bizarre	physical	actions,	especially	in
the	face	of	Christian	preaching	(see	Mark	1:24;	9:20;	Matt.	8:29;
etc.).	Satan’s	influence	is	characteristically	destructive,	and	the
person	influenced	by	a	demon	will	have	a	destructive	influence	on
the	church	and	others	around	him	or	her,	and	also	a	self-destructive
influence	that	harms	the	life	of	the	troubled	individual	himself	or
herself.
But	in	addition	to	these	outward	indications	of	demonic	influence,
there	is	probably	also	a	more	subjective	perception	that	occurs	at
the	spiritual	and	emotional	level,	whereby	the	presence	of	demonic
activity	is	distinguished.	When	this	is	more	highly	developed,	and
is	able	to	function	for	the	benefit	of	the	church	as	a	whole,	then
Paul	would	no	doubt	call	it	a	gift	of	distinguishing	between
spirits.
65
In	connection	with	the	gift	of	distinguishing	between	spirits,	the
discussion	of	spiritual	warfare	given	above	in	chapter	20	(on	Satan
and	demons)	is	also	relevant.
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
Have	you	ever	experienced	a	gift	of	prophecy	as	defined	in	this	chapter?
What	have	you	called	it?	Has	this	gift	(or	something	like	it)	functioned	in
your	church?	If	so,	what	have	been	the	benefits—and	dangers?	If	not,	do
you	think	this	gift	might	be	of	help	to	your	church?	(Why	or	why	not?)
2
.	
Does	the	gift	of	teaching	function	effectively	in	your	church?	Who	uses
this	gift	in	addition	to	the	pastor	or	elders?	Do	you	think	your	church
adequately	appreciates	sound	Bible	teaching?	In	what	areas	(if	any)	do
you	think	your	church	needs	to	grow	in	its	knowledge	and	love	of	the
teachings	of	Scripture?
3
.	
Of	the	other	gifts	discussed	in	this	chapter,	have	you	ever	used	any	of
them	yourself?	Are	there	any	which	you	think	your	church	needs	but
does	not	have	at	this	time?	What	do	you	think	would	be	best	for	you	to
do	in	response	to	this	need?
SPECIAL	TERMS
(This	list	applies	to	chapters	52	and	53.)
	
apostle
nonmiraculous	gifts
cessationist
office
distinguishing	between	spirits
prophecy
gifts	of	the	Holy	Spirit
speaking	in	tongues
healing
teaching
interpretation	of	tongues
word	of	wisdom
miracles
word	of	knowledge
miraculous	gifts
	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the
bibliography	to	chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be
found	
Appendix	4
.).	Note:	Very	few	systematic	theologies	have
sections	on	spiritual	gifts,	but	a	few	that	do	are	listed	below.	This
bibliography	applies	to	chapters	52	and	53.)
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
			(no	explicit	treatment)
2.	Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1983			Carter,	1:449–57
3.			Baptist
1983–85			Erickson,	877–83
4.			Dispensational
1947			Chafer,	7:215–20
1986			Ryrie,	367–74
5.			Lutheran
(no	explicit	treatment)
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
(no	explicit	treatment)
7.			Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988–92			Williams,	2:209–36,	243–63,	323–409,	3:159–77
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
(no	explicit	treatment)
2.			Roman	Catholic:	Post-Vatican	II
1980			McBrien,	2:1086–88
Other	Works
Baker,	J.	P.	“Gifts	of	the	Spirit.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	269–71.
Bennett,	Dennis	and	Rita.	
The	Holy	Spirit	and	You.	
Plainfield,	N.J.:
Logos,	1971.	(Charismatic)
Blue,	Ken.	
Authority	to	Heal.	
Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,
1987.
Bridge,	Donald.	
Signs	and	Wonders	Today.	
Leicester:	Inter-Varsity	Press,
1985.	(Charismatic)
_____,	and	David	Phypers.	
Spiritual	Gifts	and	the	Church.	
Downers
Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,	1973.	(Charismatic)
Budgen,	Victor.	
The	Charismatics	and	the	Word	of	God.	
Phillipsburg,
N.J.:	Presbyterian	and	Reformed,	1985.	(Cessationist)
Carson,	D.	A.	
Showing	the	Spirit:	A	Theological	Exposition	of	1
Corinthians	12–14.	
Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1987.
Chantry,	Walter	J.	
Signs	of	the	Apostles.	
2d	ed.	Edinburgh	and	Carlisle,
Pa.:	Banner	of	Truth,	1976.	(Cessationist)
Clements,	Roy.	
Word	and	Spirit:	The	Bible	and	the	Gift	of	Prophecy
Today.	
Leicester:	UCCF	Booklets,	1986.
Deere,	Jack.	
Surprised	by	the	Power	of	the	Holy	Spirit:	A	Former	Dallas
Seminary	Professor	Discovers	That	God	Still	Speaks	and	Heals	Today.
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1993.	(This	is	the	most	balanced	and
persuasive	argument	I	have	ever	read	against	the	cessationist	position.)
Edgar,	Thomas.	“The	Cessation	of	the	Sign	Gifts.”	In	
BibSac	
145:180
(Oct.–Dec.	1988),	pp.	371–86.	(Cessationist)
Ellis,	E.	E.	“Prophecy,	Theology	of.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	537–38.
Farnell	F.	David.	“The	Current	Debate	About	New	Testament	Prophecy.”
In	
BibSac	
149:595	(July–Sept.	1992),	pp.	277–303.
_____.	“Does	the	New	Testament	Teach	Two	Prophetic	Gifts?”	In	
BibSac
150	(Jan.–March,	1993),	pp.	62–88.
_____.	“Fallible	New	Testament	Prophecy/Prophets?	A	Critique	of
Wayne	Grudem’s	Hypothesis.”	In	
The	Master’s	Seminary	Journal	
2:2
(Fall	1991),	pp.	157–80.
_____.	“The	Gift	of	Prophecy	in	the	Old	and	New	Testaments.”	In
BibSac	
149:596	(Oct.–Dec.,	1992),	pp.	387–410.
_____.	“When	Will	the	Gift	of	Prophecy	Cease?”	In	
BibSac	
150	(April–
June,	1993),	pp.	171–202.
Gaffin,	Richard	B.	
Perspectives	on	Pentecost:	Studies	in	New	Testament
Teaching	on	the	Gifts	of	the	Holy	Spirit.	
Phillipsburg,	N.J.:	Presbyterian
and	Reformed,	1979.	(Cessationist)
Gee,	Donald.	
Concerning	Spiritual	Gifts.	
Springfield,	Mo.:	Gospel
Publishing	House,	1972	(revised	edition).	(Traditional	Pentecostal)
_____.	
Spiritual	Gifts	in	the	Work	of	Ministry	Today.	
Springfield,	Mo.:
Gospel	Publishing	House,	1963.	(Traditional	Pentecostal)
Gentry,	Kenneth	L.,	Jr.	
The	Charismatic	Gift	of	Prophecy:	A	Reformed
Response	to	Wayne	Grudem.	
2d	ed.	Memphis,	Tenn.:	Footstool
Publications,	1989.	(Cessationist)
Green,	Michael.	
I	Believe	in	the	Holy	Spirit.	
London:	Hodder	and
Stoughton,	and	Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1975.
Greig,	Gary,	and	Kevin	Springer,	eds.	
The	Kingdom	and	the	Power:	Are
Healing	and	the	Spiritual	Gifts	Used	by	Jesus	and	the	Early	Church
Meant	for	the	Church	Today?	
Ventura,	Calif.:	Regal	Books,	1993.
Gromacki,	Robert	G.	
The	Modern	Tongues	Movement.	
Rev.	ed.
Phillipsburg,	N.J.:	Presbyterian	and	Reformed,	1972.	(Cessationist)
Grudem,	Wayne.	“Does	God	Still	Give	Revelation	Today?”	In	
Charisma,
Sept.,	1992,	pp.	38–42.
_____.	
The	Gift	of	Prophecy	in	1	Corinthians.	
Lanham,	Md.:	University
Press	of	America,	1982.
_____.	
The	Gift	of	Prophecy	in	the	New	Testament	and	Today.
Westchester,	Ill.:	Crossway,	1988.
_____.	
Power	and	Truth:	A	Response	to	the	Critiques	of	Vineyard
Teaching	and	Practice	by	D.	A.	Carson,	James	Montgomery	Boice,	and
John	H.	Armstrong	in	Power	Religion.	
Anaheim,	Calif.:	Association	of
Vineyard	Churches,	1993.
_____.	“What	Is	the	Real	Meaning	of	a	‘Word	of	Wisdom’	and	a	‘Word
of	Knowledge’?”	In	
Ministries	Today	
(Jan.–Feb.	1993),	pp.	60–65.
_____.	“What	Should	Be	the	Relationship	Between	Prophet	and	Pastor?”
In	
Equipping	the	Saints	
(Fall	1990),	pp.	7–9,	21–22.
Hayford,	Jack	W.	
The	Beauty	of	Spiritual	Language.	
Irvine,	Tex.:	Waco,
1993.
Horton,	Michael	Scott,	ed.	
Power	Religion:	The	Selling	Out	of	the
Evangelical	Church?	
Chicago:	Moody	Press,	1992.
Houston,	Graham.	
Prophecy:	A	Gift	For	Today?	
Leicester	and	Downers
Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,	1989.
Hummel,	Charles	E.	
Fire	in	the	Fireplace:	Charismatic	Renewal	in	the
Nineties.	
Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,	1993.
MacArthur,	John	F.,	Jr.	
Charismatic	Chaos.	
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,
1992.	(Cessationist)
_____.	
The	Charismatics:	A	Doctrinal	Perspective.	
Grand	Rapids:
Zondervan,	1978.	(Cessationist)
Mallone,	George.	
Those	Controversial	Gifts.	
Downers	Grove,	Ill.:
InterVarsity	Press,	1983.
Moo,	Douglas.	“Divine	Healing	in	the	Health	and	Wealth	Gospel.”	In
TrinJ,	
Vol.	9	N.S.,	No.	2	(Fall	1988),	pp.	191–209.
Nathan,	Richard.	
A	Response	to	Charismatic	Chaos.	
Anaheim,	Calif.:
Association	of	Vineyard	Churches,	1993.	(An	extensive	response	to	John
MacArthur’s	1992	book)
Osborne,	Grant.	“Tongues,	Speaking	in.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	1100–1103.
Poythress,	Vern.	“Linguistic	and	Sociological	Analyses	of	Modern
Tongues-Speaking:	Their	Contributions	and	Limitations.”	In	
WTJ	
42
(1979):	367–98.
Pytches,	David.	
Spiritual	Gifts	in	the	Local	Church.	
Originally	published
as	
Come,	Holy	Spirit.	
Minneapolis:	Bethany,	1985.	(Charismatic)
Reymond,	Robert	L.	
What	About	Continuing	Revelations	and	Miracles	in
the	Presbyterian	Church	Today?	
Phillipsburg,	N.J.:	Presbyterian	and
Reformed,	1977.	(Cessationist)
Robertson,	O.	Palmer.	
The	Final	Word.	
Edinburgh	and	Carlisle,	Pa.:
Banner	of	Truth,	1993.	(Cessationist)
Ruthven,	Jon.	
On	the	Cessation	of	the	Charismata:	The	Protestant
Polemic	on	Post-Biblical	Miracles.	
Sheffield:	Sheffield	University
Academic	Press,	1993.	(Charismatic;	a	revision	and	expansion	of	the
author’s	Ph.D.	dissertation,	in	which	he	responds	to	the	arguments	of
cessationists	from	Warfield	to	the	present)
Saucy,	Robert.	“Prophecy	Today?	An	Initial	Response.”	In	
Sundoulos
(Talbot	Seminary;	Spring	1990),	pp.	1–5.	(Cessationist)
Schatzmann,	Siegfried.	
A	Pauline	Theology	of	Charismata.	
Peabody,
Mass.:	Hendrickson,	1987.
Stephanou,	Eusebius	A.	“The	Charismata	in	the	Early	Church	Fathers,”
The	Greek	Orthodox	Theological	Review	
21:2	(Summer	1976),	pp.	125–
46.
Storms,	C.	Samuel.	
Healing	and	Holiness:	A	Biblical	Response	to	the
Faith-Healing	Phenomenon.	
Phillipsburg,	N.J.:	Presbyterian	and
Reformed,	1990.
Thomas,	Robert	L.	“Prophecy	Rediscovered?	A	Review	of	
The	Gift	of
Prophecy	in	the	New	Testament	and	Today.”	
In	
BibSac	
149:593	(Jan.–
Mar.	1992),	pp.	83–96.	(Cessationist)
Thompson,	J.	G.	S.	S.	and	Walter	A.	Elwell.	“Spiritual	Gifts.”	In	
EDT,
pp.	1042–46.
Turner,	M.	M.	B.	“Spiritual	Gifts	Then	and	Now.”	In	
Vox	Evangelica	
15
(1985),	pp.	7–64.
Warfield,	Benjamin	B.	
Counterfeit	Miracles.	
London:	Banner	of	Truth,
1972	(first	published	in	1918).
White,	John.	
When	the	Spirit	Comes	with	Power.	
Downers	Grove,	Ill.:
Inter-Varsity	Press,	1988.
White,	R.	Fowler.	“Gaffin	and	Grudem	on	Ephesians	2:20:	In	Defense	of
Gaffin’s	Cessationist	Exegesis.”	In	
WTJ	
54	(Fall	1993),	pp.	303–20.
(Cessationist)
_____.	“Richard	Gaffin	and	Wayne	Grudem	on	1	Corinthians	13:10:	A
Comparison	of	Cessationist	and	Noncessationist	Argumentation.”	In
JETS	
35:2	(June	1992),	pp.	173–82.	(Cessationist)
Wilkenson,	J.	“Healing.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	287–88.
Wimber,	John.	With	Kevin	Springer.	
Power	Evangelism.	
San	Francisco:
Harper	and	Row,	1986.
_____.	
Power	Healing.	
San	Francisco:	Harper	and	Row,	1987.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
1
	Corinthians	12:7–11:	
To	each	is	given	the	manifestation	of	the	Spirit	for
the	common	good.	To	one	is	given	through	the	Spirit	the	utterance	of	wisdom,
and	to	another	the	utterance	of	knowledge	according	to	the	same	Spirit,	to
another	faith	by	the	same	Spirit,	to	another	gifts	of	healing	by	the	one	Spirit,
to	another	the	working	of	miracles,	to	another	prophecy,	to	another	the	ability
to	distinguish	between	spirits,	to	another	various	kinds	of	tongues,	to	another
the	interpretation	of	tongues.	All	these	are	inspired	by	one	and	the	same
Spirit,	who	apportions	to	each	one	individually	as	he	wills.
HYMN
“Come,	O	Come	Thou	Quickening	Spirit”
(A	possible	alternative	tune	is	the	tune	for	“Guide	Me,	O	Thou
Great	Jehovah.”)
Come,	O	come,	thou	quick’ning	Spirit,	God	from	all	eternity!
May	thy	power	never	fail	us;	dwell	within	us	constantly.
Then	shall	truth	and	life	and	light	banish	all	the	gloom	of	night.
Grant	our	hearts	in	fullest	measure	wisdom,	counsel,	purity,
That	we	ever	may	be	seeking	only	that	which	pleaseth	thee.
Let	thy	knowledge	spread	and	grow,	working	error’s	overthrow.
Show	us,	Lord,	the	path	of	blessing;	when	we	trespass	on	our	way,
Cast,	O	Lord,	our	sins	behind	thee	and	be	with	us	day	by	day.
Should	we	stray,	O	Lord,	recall;	work	repentance	when	we	fall.
Holy	Spirit,	strong	and	mighty,	thou	who	makest	all	things	new,
Make	thy	work	within	us	perfect	and	the	evil	foe	subdue.
Grant	us	weapons	for	the	strife	and	with	vict’ry	crown	our	life.
AUTHOR:	HEINRICH	HELD,	1664
NOTES
1
For	a	more	extensive	development	of	all	of	the	following	points	about	the	gift	of	prophecy,	see	Wayne	Grudem,	
The	Gift	of
Prophecy	in	1	Corinthians,	
and	Wayne	Grudem,	
The	Gift	of	Prophecy	in	the	New	Testament	and	Today.	
(The	first	book	is	more
technical,	with	much	more	interaction	with	the	scholarly	literature.)
Much	of	the	following	material	on	prophecy	is	adapted	from	my	article,	“Why	Christians	Can	Still	Prophesy,”	in	
CT	
(Sept.	16,
1988),	pp.	29–35,	and	is	used	by	permission;	see	also	my	articles,	“What	Should	Be	the	Relationship	Between	Prophet	and
Pastor?”	in	
Equipping	the	Saints	
(Fall	1990),	pp.	7–9,	21–22;	and	“Does	God	Still	Give	Revelation	Today?”	in	
Charisma	
(Sept.
1992),	pp.	38–42.
Several	writers	have	differed	with	my	understanding	of	the	gift	of	prophecy.	For	alternative	views	to	the	position	presented	in	this
chapter,	see	Richard	Gaffin,	
Perspectives	on	Pentecost:	
(Gaffin	is	primarily	responding	to	an	unpublished	version	of	my	1982
book),	and	the	bibliography	entries	at	the	end	of	the	chapter	under	Victor	Budgen,	F.	David	Farnell,	Kenneth	L.	Gentry,	Jr.,	Robert
Saucy,	Robert	L.	Thomas,	and	R.	Fowler	White.	On	the	other	hand,	the	studies	listed	in	the	bibliography	by	D.	A.	Carson,	Roy
Clements,	Graham	Houston,	Charles	Hummel,	and	M.	M.	B.	Turner,	along	with	several	book	reviews,	have	expressed	substantial
agreement	with	the	position	I	advocated	in	my	1982	and	1988	books.
2
The	following	examples	are	taken	from	
TDNT	
6,	p.	
794.
3
Ibid.,	p.	
795.
4
I	have	a	long	discussion	of	Eph.	2:20	in	
The	Gift	of	Prophecy	in	the	New	Testament	and	Today,	
pp.	45–63,	in	which	I	argue	that
Paul	says	that	the	church	is	“built	up	on	the	foundation	of	the	apostle-prophets”	(or	“apostles	who	are	also	prophets”).	This	is	a
grammatically	acceptable	translation	of	the	phrase	
tōn	apostolōn	kai	prophetōn.	
As	such,	the	passage	refers	to	the	apostles,	to
whom	the	mystery	of	Gentile	inclusion	in	the	church	was	revealed	(see	Eph.	3:5,	which	specifies	that	this	mystery	“has	now	been
revealed	to	his	holy	apostles	and	prophets	[or	“apostle-prophets”	or,	“apostles	who	are	also	prophets”]	by	the	Spirit”).
I	do	not	think	that	Eph.	2:20	has	much	relevance	to	the	entire	discussion	of	the	nature	of	the	gift	of	prophecy.	Whether	we	see	one
group	here	as	I	do	(apostle-prophets)	or	two	groups,	as	Richard	Gaffin	and	several	others	do	(apostles	and	prophets),	we	all	agree
that	
these	
prophets	are	ones	who	provided	the	foundation	of	the	church,	and	therefore	these	are	prophets	who	spoke	infallible
words	of	God.	Where	we	disagree	is	on	the	question	of	whether	this	verse	describes	the	character	of	
all	who	had	the	gift	of
prophecy	
in	the	New	Testament	churches.	I	see	no	convincing	evidence	that	it	describes	all	who	prophesied	in	the	early	church.
Rather,	the	context	clearly	indicates	a	very	limited	group	of	prophets	who	were	(a)	part	of	the	very	foundation	of	the	church,	(b)
closely	connected	with	the	apostles,	and	(c)	recipients	of	the	revelation	from	God	that	the	Gentiles	were	equal	members	with	Jews
in	the	church	(Eph.	3:5).	Whether	we	say	this	group	was	only	the	apostles,	or	was	a	small	group	of	prophets	closely	associated
with	the	apostles	who	spoke	Scripture-quality	words,	we	are	still	left	with	a	picture	of	a	very	small	and	unique	group	of	people
who	provide	this	foundation	for	the	church	universal.
5
In	both	verses	Luke	uses	the	same	Greek	verb	(
deō
)	that	Agabus	had	used	to	predict	that	the	Jews	would	bind	Paul.
6
The	verb	that	Agabus	used	(
paradidōmi,	
“to	deliver,	hand	over”)	requires	the	sense	of	voluntarily,	consciously,	deliberately
giving	over	or	handing	over	something	to	someone	else.	That	is	the	sense	it	has	in	all	119	other	instances	of	the	word	in	the	New
Testament.	But	that	sense	is	not	true	with	respect	to	the	treatment	of	Paul	by	the	Jews:	they	did	not	voluntarily	hand	Paul	over	to
the	Romans!
7
This	is	the	view	of	Gaffin,	
Perspectives,	
pp.	65–66,	and	F.	David	Farnell,	“The	Gift	of	Prophecy	in	the	Old	and	New
Testaments,”	
BibSac	
149:596	(Oct.–Dec.	1992),	p.	
395,	both	of	whom	refer	to	Acts	28:17	for	support.
8
The	NIV	translation,	“I	was	arrested	
in	
Jerusalem	and	handed	over	to	the	Romans,”	completely	misses	the	idea	(which	the	Greek
text	requires)	of	being	delivered	
out	of	
(
ex
)	Jerusalem,	and	removes	the	idea	that	he	was	delivered	as	a	prisoner	(Gk.	
desmios
),
adding	rather	the	idea	that	he	was	arrested	in	Jerusalem,	an	event	that	is	not	mentioned	in	the	Greek	text.
9
Robert	L.	Thomas,	“Prophecy	Rediscovered?	A	Review	of	The	Gift	of	Prophecy	in	the	New	Testament	and	Today,”	
BibSac
149:593	(Jan.–Mar.	1992),	p.	
91.	The	same	argument	is	made	by	Kenneth	L.	Gentry,	Jr.	
The	Charismatic	Gift	of	Prophecy:	A
Reformed	Response	to	Wayne	Grudem,	
2d	ed.	(Memphis,	Tenn.:	Footstool	Publications,	1989),	p.	
43.
10
Thomas,	“Prophecy	Rediscovered?,”	p.	
91.
11
See	
section	A4
	of	this	chapter	on	the	question	of	Agabus’	introductory	phrase,	“Thus	says	the	Holy	Spirit.”
12
Paul’s	instructions	are	different	from	those	in	the	early	Christian	document	known	as	the	
Didache,	
which	tells	people,	“Do	not
test	or	examine	any	prophet	who	is	speaking	in	a	spirit	(or:	in	the	Spirit)”	(chapter	11).	But	the	
Didache	
says	several	things	that
are	contrary	to	New	Testament	doctrine	(see	W.	Grudem,	
The	Gift	of	Prophecy	in	the	New	Testament	and	Today,	
pp.	106–8;	also	p.
67,	above).
13
The	RSV	translates,	“Did	the	word	of	God	
originate	
with	you?”	but	there	is	no	need	to	make	the	Greek	verb	here	(the	aorist	of
exerchomai,	
“to	go	out”)	speak	so	specifically	of	the	origin	of	the	gospel	message:	Paul	does	not	say,	“Did	the	word	of	God	
first
go	forth	from	you?”	but	simply,	“Did	the	word	of	God	go	forth	from	you?”	He	realizes	they	must	admit	that	the	Word	of	God	
has
not	
come	forth	from	them—therefore,	their	prophets	cannot	have	been	speaking	words	of	God	equal	to	Scripture	in	authority.
14
I	have	taken	this	idea	from	the	very	helpful	booklet	by	Roy	Clements,	
Word	and	Spirit:	The	Bible	and	the	Gift	of	Prophecy
Today	
(Leicester:	UCCF	Booklets,	1986),	p.	
24;	cf.	D.	A.	Carson,	
Showing	the	Spirit,	
p.	96.
15
See	
Prophecy	
(Ann	Arbor:	Word	of	Life,	1976),	p.	
79.
16
Although	we	argued	above	that	the	
authority	
of	prophecy	in	the	New	Testament	church	is	far	different	from	the	authority	of	Old
Testament	canonical	prophecy,	this	does	not	mean	that	everything	about	New	Testament	prophecy	has	to	be	different.	With	respect
to	
the	form	in	which	the	revelation	comes	
to	the	prophet,	there	may	be	not	only	words	or	ideas	that	come	to	mind,	but	also	mental
pictures	(or	“visions,”	Acts	2:17)	and	dreams	(Acts	2:17)	as	well.
17
We	must	caution	people,	however,	that	the	mere	fact	of	a	“revelation”	that	seems	supernatural	(and	that	even	may	contain	some
surprisingly	accurate	information)	does	not	guarantee	that	a	message	is	a	true	prophecy	from	God,	for	false	prophets	can
“prophesy”	under	demonic	influence.	(See	
chapter	20
,	on	the	fact	that	demons	can	know	about	hidden	activities	or	private
conversations	in	our	lives,	even	though	they	cannot	know	the	future	or	read	our	thoughts.)
John	warns	that	“many	false	prophets	have	gone	out	into	the	world”	(1	John	4:1),	and	he	gives	tests	of	true	doctrine	to	discern
them	(vv.	1–6),	and	says	“The	world	listens	to	them”	(v.	
5).	Other	marks	of	false	prophets	can	be	found	in	2	John	7–9	(denying	the
incarnation	and	not	abiding	in	the	doctrine	of	Christ);	Matt.	7:15–20	(“You	will	know	them	by	their	fruits,”	v.	
16);	Matt.	24:11
(leading	many	astray);	and	Matt.	24:24	(showing	signs	and	wonders	for	the	purpose	of	leading	astray	the	elect).	On	the	other
hand,	1	Cor.	12:3	seems	to	tell	us	that	we	should	not	think	that	genuine	Christians	will	be	false	prophets,	speaking	by	the	power	of
demons	(see	the	discussion	of	1	Cor.	12:3	on	p.	
1316,	and	1	John	4:4	reassures	Christians	that	“he	who	is	in	you	is	greater	than	he
who	is	in	the	world.”
18
Prophecy:	A	Gift	for	the	Body	of	Christ	
(Plainfield,	N.J.:	Logos,	1964),	p.	
26.
19
Spiritual	Gifts	in	the	Work	of	Ministry	Today	
(Springfield,	Mo.:	Gospel	Publishing	House,	1963),	pp.	51–52.
20
Signs	and	Wonders	Today	
(Leicester:	Inter-Varsity	Press,	1985),	p.	
183.
21
Here	Paul’s	meaning	is	that	all	who	receive	a	revelation	in	the	sense	just	mentioned	in	v.	
29	will	be	able	to	take	turns	and
prophesy	one	at	a	time.	He	does	not	mean	that	every	single	Christian	at	Corinth	had	the	gift	of	prophecy.
22
In	a	large	church,	only	few	would	be	able	to	speak	when	the	whole	church	assembled,	for	Paul	says,	“Let	two	or	three	prophets
speak”	(1	Cor.	14:29).	But	many	more	would	find	opportunities	to	prophesy	in	smaller	gatherings	in	homes.
23
See	also	the	discussion	in	
section	A.6	above
,	on	the	differences	between	prophecy	and	teaching.
24
The	NIV	translates	this	word	“miraculous	powers”	at	1	Cor.	12:10,	and	the	NASB	mg.	translates	“works	of	power”	in	both
places.
25
When	people	say	that	complete	healing	is	“in	the	atonement,”	the	statement	is	true	in	an	ultimate	sense,	but	it	really	does	not
tell	us	anything	about	when	we	will	receive	“complete	healing”	(or	any	part	of	it).
26
For	two	very	helpful	treatments	of	this	question,	and	of	the	gift	of	healing	in	general,	see	John	Wimber,	with	Kevin	Springer,
Power	Healing,	
and	Ken	Blue,	
Authority	to	Heal	
(Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,	1987).	See	also	the	excellent	discussion
in	Jack	Deere,	
Surprised	by	the	Power	of	the	Holy	Spirit	
(Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1993).	Several	scholarly	defenses	of	a
ministry	of	healing	today	are	found	in	Gary	Greig	and	Kevin	Springer,	eds.,	
The	Kingdom	and	the	Power	
(Ventura,	Calif.:	Gospel
Light,	1993).
27
Note	Paul’s	recommendation	of	a	use	of	wine	for	health	purposes	in	1	Tim.	5:23:	“No	longer	drink	only	water,	but	use	a	little
wine	for	the	sake	of	your	stomach	and	your	frequent	ailments.”
28
See	the	discussion	of	laying	on	of	hands	in	
chapter	48
.
29
See	also	Luke	5:13;	13:13;	Acts	28:8;	also	Mark	6:2,	and	several	other	verses	in	the	gospels	that	mention	laying	on	of	hands.
Jesus	did	not	always	heal	in	this	way,	however.
30
The	anointing	with	oil	in	James	5:14	should	be	understood	as	a	symbol	of	the	power	of	the	Holy	Spirit,	not	simply	as
medicinal,	because	oil	would	not	be	appropriate	as	a	medicine	for	all	diseases.	Moreover,	if	its	use	were	just	medicinal,	it	is	hard
to	see	why	only	the	elders	should	apply	it.	Oil	is	frequently	a	symbol	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in	the	Old	Testament	(see	Ex.	29:7;	1	Sam.
16:13;	cf.	Ps.	45:7),	and	this	seems	to	be	the	case	here	as	well.	(See	the	thorough	discussion	in	Douglas	J.	Moo,	
The	Letter	of
James,	
pp.	177–81.)
31
We	may	wonder	why	it	is	the	elders	who	are	called	to	come	and	pray	for	healing	in	James	5:14–15.	Although	James	does	not
give	a	reason,	it	may	be	because	they	had	responsibilities	for	pastoral	care,	maturity	and	wisdom	in	dealing	with	the	possible	sin
involved	(see	vv.	15–16),	and	a	measure	of	spiritual	authority	that	accompanied	their	office.	They	would	certainly	be	able	to	bring
others	with	gifts	of	healing	if	they	wished.	Moreover,	James	broadens	his	directions	to	include	all	Christians	in	v.	
16:	“Therefore
confess	your	sins	to	one	another,	and	
pray	for	one	another,	that	you	may	be	healed.”
32
By	contrast,	we	can	note	that	when	the	disciples	could	not	cast	out	a	demon,	Jesus	says	it	was	“because	of	your	little	faith”
(Matt.	17:20).
33
See	discussion	in	
chapter	13
,	on	the	secret	and	revealed	will	of	God.	Of	course	we	realize	that	God’s	
secret	
will,	unknown	to	us
in	any	specifics,	is	that	not	all	will	be	healed,	just	as	it	is	his	secret	will	that	not	all	will	be	saved.	But	in	both	situations	we	should
pray	for	what	we	see	in	Scripture	to	be	God’s	revealed	will:	to	save	sinners	and	to	heal	those	who	are	ill.
34
Authority	to	Heal,	
pp.	72,	78.
35
Sometimes	God	may	grant	a	strong	subjective	assurance	of	faith,	something	like	what	James	calls	“the	prayer	of	faith”	(James
5:15),	and	Heb.	11:1	calls	“the	assurance	of	things	hoped	for,”	and	Mark	11:24	calls	believing	“that	you	have	received	it.”	In	those
cases	the	person	praying	may	feel	confidence	to	say	that	it	is	probable	or	even	very	likely	that	someone	will	be	healed.	But	I	do
not	think	that	God	gives	anyone	warrant	to	promise	or	“guarantee”	healing	in	this	age,	for	his	written	Word	makes	no	such
guarantee,	and	our	subjective	sense	of	his	will	is	always	subject	to	some	degree	of	uncertainty	and	some	measure	of	error	in	this
life.
36
After	some	study	of	2	Cor.	12:7,	my	own	conclusion	at	this	point	is	that	there	is	not	enough	information	in	the	text	to	decide
what	Paul’s	thorn	in	the	flesh	was.	There	are	reasons	that	can	be	given	in	support	of	all	three	main	possibilities:	(1)	a	physical
ailment	of	some	kind;	(2)	a	demon	that	was	harassing	him;	or	(3)	Jewish	persecutors.	The	fact	that	we	are	unable	to	decide
conclusively	has	some	benefits,	however:	it	means	that	we	can	apply	this	text	to	all	of	these	kinds	of	situations	in	our	own	lives,
when	the	Lord	in	his	sovereign	wisdom	decides	not	to	remove	them	from	us.
37
Some	have	attempted	to	establish	a	difference	between	sickness	and	other	kinds	of	suffering,	and	to	say	that	the	passages	in
Scripture	that	tell	Christians	they	should	expect	to	suffer	have	to	do	with	
other	
kinds	of	suffering,	such	as	persecution,	but	do	not
include	physical	sickness.
This	argument	seems	unconvincing	to	me	for	two	reasons:	first,	Scripture	talks	about	“
various	
trials”	(James	1:2;	also	1	Peter	1:6),
and	the	intention	of	the	authors	in	both	cases	seems	to	be	to	speak	of	
all	
the	kinds	of	trials	that	we	experience	in	this	life,	including
physical	illness	and	affliction.	Did	James	and	Peter	
not	
want	Christians	who	were	ill	to	apply	those	passages	to	their	own
situations?	This	is	hardly	likely.	(These	are	both	general	epistles	written	to	thousands	of	Christians.)
Second,	unless	the	Lord	returns,	we	will	all	know	the	progressive	aging	and	deterioration	of	our	physical	bodies,	and	eventually
we	will	die.	Paul	says,	“Our	outer	nature	is	wasting	away”	(2	Cor.	4:16).	Almost	inevitably	this	aging	process	includes	various
kinds	of	physical	ailments.
It	seems	best	to	conclude	that	the	sufferings	which	God	allows	us	to	experience	from	time	to	time	in	this	life	may	at	times	include
physical	illness,	which	God	in	his	sovereign	wisdom	decides	not	to	heal.	There	may	in	fact	be	many	cases	when,	for	various
reasons,	we	do	not	feel	freedom	to	ask	in	faith	for	God	to	heal.	Yet	even	in	these	cases	the	heart	of	faith	will	take	God’s	Word	as
true	and	believe	that	this	also	has	come	into	our	lives	“for	good”	(Rom.	8:28),	and	that	God	will	bring	good	to	us	from	it.
38
The	NIV	margin	does	translate	“or	
languages”	
or	
“other	languages”	
in	Acts	2:4,	11;	10:46;	19:6,	and	throughout	1	Cor.	12–14.
This	is	a	preferable	translation,	for	reasons	mentioned	above.
39
This	verse	shows	that	the	miracle	was	one	of	speaking,	not	of	hearing.	The	disciples	“began	to	
speak	
in	other	tongues	(or
languages).”
40
The	speaking	in	tongues	at	Pentecost	was	unusual	in	that	it	was	accompanied	by	“tongues	as	of	fire,	distributed	and	resting	on
each	one	of	them”	(Acts	2:3).	Since	fire	in	Scripture	is	often	a	symbol	of	God’s	purifying	judgment,	the	presence	of	fire	here	may
be	a	symbol	of	the	fact	that	God	was	purifying	language	for	use	in	his	service.
41
It	is	true	that	the	first	hearers	of	this	message	were	still	only	Jews	in	Jerusalem	(Acts	2:5),	not	Gentiles,	but	the	symbolism	of
the	gospel	being	proclaimed	in	many	languages	did	give	an	indication	of	the	worldwide	evangelistic	effort	that	would	soon	follow.
42
In	Acts	10:46	the	people	at	Cornelius’	household	began	“speaking	in	tongues	and	extolling	God.”	Again,	this	either	means	that
the	speech	consisted	of	praise	to	God	or	was	very	closely	connected	with	it—grammatically	one	cannot	tell	from	the	text	itself.
I	do	not	want	to	rule	out	the	possibility	that	speaking	in	tongues	could	sometimes	include	speech	directed	to	people,	not	to	God,
because	it	is	just	possible	that	Paul’s	statement	in	1	Cor.	14:2	is	a	generalization	that	is	not	intended	to	cover	every	instance,	and,
in	any	case,	the	main	point	of	the	verse	is	that	only	God	can	
understand	
uninterpreted	tongues,	not	that	God	is	the	only	one	to
whom	speech	in	tongues	can	be	addressed.	In	fact,	speech	to	men	might	be	what	is	happening	in	Acts	2.	Nevertheless,	the
evidence	that	we	do	have	in	1	Cor.	14	indicates	speech	directed	toward	God,	and	it	seems	safe	to	say	that	that	is	generally	what
speaking	in	tongues	will	be.
43
Robertson	and	Plummer	note	that	1	Cor.	14:18,	“I	thank	God	that	I	speak	in	tongues	more	than	you	all,”	is	“strong	evidence	that
Tongues	are	not	foreign	languages”	(A.	Robertson	and	A.	Plummer,	
A	Critical	and	Exegetical	Commentary	on	the	First	Epistle	of
St.	Paul	to	the	Corinthians,	
ICC	[Edinburgh:	T.	&	T.	Clark,	1914],	p.	
314).	If	they	were	known	foreign	languages	that	foreigners
could	understand,	as	at	Pentecost,	why	would	Paul	speak	more	than	all	the	Corinthians	in	private,	where	no	one	would	understand,
rather	than	in	church	where	foreign	visitors	could	understand?
44
Note	that	at	Pentecost	this	speaking	in	tongues	had	another	characteristic	that	was	not	shared	by	any	later	speech	in	tongues:
there	were	tongues	of	fire	appearing	over	the	heads	of	those	who	spoke	(Acts	2:3).	But	this	is	not	a	paradigm	for	all	later
experiences	of	speaking	in	tongues,	not	even	for	those	found	later	in	Acts.
45
Paul	does	say,	“If	I	speak	in	the	tongues	of	men	
and	of	angels”	
(1	Cor.	13:1),	suggesting	that	he	sees	the	possibility	that
speaking	in	tongues	may	include	more	than	merely	human	speech.	Whether	he	thinks	this	is	only	a	hypothetical	possibility	or	a
real	one	is	difficult	to	say,	but	we	certainly	cannot	rule	out	the	idea	that	angelic	languages	would	be	involved	with	this	speech	as
well.
Some	have	objected	that	since	
glōssa	
elsewhere	in	Greek	(outside	the	New	Testament)	refers	to	
known	
human	languages,	it	must
refer	to	known	languages	in	the	New	Testament	as	well.	But	this	objection	is	not	convincing,	since	there	was	no	other	word	in
Greek	better	suited	to	refer	to	this	phenomenon,	even	if	it	involved	talking	to	God	in	languages	that	were	not	human	languages	or
not	fully	developed	languages	of	any	sort,	so	long	as	some	content	or	information	was	conveyed	by	the	speech.
I	am	not	here	arguing	that	speaking	in	tongues	in	Acts	2	was	a	different	phenomenon	from	the	speaking	in	tongues	that	Paul
discusses	in	1	Cor.	14.	I	am	simply	saying	that	the	phrase	“speaking	in	tongues”	in	Acts	2	and	1	Cor.	14	refers	to	speech	in
syllables	not	understood	by	the	speaker	but	understood	by	God,	to	whom	this	speech	is	directed.	In	Acts	2	this	happened	to	be
speech	in	known	human	languages	that	had	not	been	learned	by	the	speakers,	whereas	in	1	Cor.	14	the	speech	may	have	been	in
unknown	human	languages,	or	in	angelic	languages,	or	in	some	specialized	kind	of	language	given	by	the	Holy	Spirit	to	various
speakers	individually.	The	expression	is	broad	enough	to	include	a	wide	variety	of	phenomena.
46
The	phrase	“pray	in	the	Holy	Spirit”	in	Jude	20	is	not	the	same	expression,	since	it	is	specifically	the	“Holy	Spirit”	who	is
designated.	Jude	is	simply	saying	that	Christians	should	pray	in	conformity	to	the	character	and	leading	of	the	Holy	Spirit,	and
that	may	certainly	include	prayer	in	tongues,	but	it	would	include	any	other	kind	of	prayer	in	an	understandable	language	as	well.
Similarly,	“Pray	at	all	times	
in	the	Spirit,	
with	all	prayer	and	supplication”	(Eph.	6:18)	is	specifically	a	statement	that	claims	to
cover	all	prayer	that	is	made	at	all	times.	It	refers	to	prayer	in	conformity	to	the	character	of	the	Holy	Spirit	and	sensitive	to	the
leading	of	the	Holy	Spirit,	but	it	should	not	be	restricted	to	speaking	in	tongues.	Once	again,	it	may	include	speaking	in	tongues,
but	should	include	all	other	types	of	prayer	as	well.	(See	the	discussion	of	activities	done	“in	the	Holy	Spirit”	in	
chapter	30
.)
47
It	is	troubling	that,	in	some	churches	today	where	speaking	in	tongues	is	allowed,	those	who	do	
not	
give	a	message	publicly
(perhaps	because	it	is	not	the	appropriate	time	in	the	service	or	perhaps	because	they	do	not	know	if	someone	will	interpret)	will
still	sometimes	speak	in	tongues	not	“silently”	but	so	that	four	or	five	people	nearby	can	hear	their	speech	in	tongues.	This	is
simply	disobedience	to	Paul’s	directive,	and	is	not	acting	in	love	toward	others	in	the	church.	Paul	says	to	“keep	
silence	
in	church”
if	one	is	not	giving	a	public	message	in	tongues.	(Many	who	have	spoken	in	tongues	today	say	that	it	can	easily	be	done	in	an
inaudible	whisper,	so	that	no	one	else	will	hear,	and	Paul’s	directions	will	be	obeyed.)
48
Many	churches	today,	however,	practice	what	is	sometimes	called	“singing	in	the	Spirit,”	in	which	many	or	all	the	congregation
will	simultaneously	sing	in	tongues,	individually	improvising	their	melodies	around	a	certain	dominant	musical	chord.	While
many	people	will	testify	that	there	is	beauty	and	spiritual	power	in	such	occurrences,	once	again	we	must	object	that	it	is	directly
contrary	to	Paul’s	instructions	in	1	Cor.	14:27–28,	where	those	who	speak	in	tongues	are	to	take	turns,	and	there	are	to	be	at	most
three	in	a	worship	service,	and	interpretation	is	to	follow.	Though	this	practice	may	sound	beautiful	to	those	who	are	familiar	with
it,	and	though	God	may	at	times	graciously	use	it	as	a	means	of	winning	an	unbeliever,	Paul	explicitly	says	that	the	expected	result
generally	will	be	that	unbelievers	will	say	“that	you	are	mad”	(1	Cor.	14:23).	An	alternative	to	this	practice,	and	one	that	would
both	be	consistent	with	Scripture	and	follow	the	path	of	love	toward	outsiders,	would	be	for	everyone	to	sing	in	this	way,	not	in
tongues,	but	in	an	understandable	language	(whether	English	or	whatever	language	is	commonly	understood	in	the	area	where	the
church	assembles).
49
For	further	discussion	of	this	passage,	see	Wayne	Grudem,	“1	Corinthians	14:20–25:	Prophecy	and	Tongues	as	Signs	of	God’s
Attitude,”	
WTJ	
41:2	(Spring	1979),	pp.	381–96.
50
The	Greek	particle	
mē,	
which	precedes	this	question,	expects	the	answer	“no”	from	the	reader.	The	NASB	captures	this	sense:
“All	do	not	speak	with	tongues,	do	they?”
51
See	
chapter	39
	for	a	discussion	of	baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit.
52
This	is	still	the	official	doctrinal	position	of	the	Assemblies	of	God,	for	example.
53
Mark	16:17	is	sometimes	used	to	claim	that	all	Christians	can	speak	in	tongues:	“And	these	signs	will	accompany	those	who
believe:	in	my	name	they	will	cast	out	demons;	they	will	speak	in	new	tongues.”	But	in	response	to	this	verse	it	must	be	noted	(1)
that	the	verse	probably	was	not	originally	part	of	Mark’s	gospel,	since	many	early	and	very	reliable	manuscripts	do	not	include
Mark	16:9–20,	and	its	doubtful	status	means	that	it	is	a	precarious	basis	upon	which	to	build	doctrine	(see	
chapter	17
);	(2)	that
even	if	it	is	not	part	of	Scripture,	it	does	of	course	bear	witness	to	a	very	early	tradition	in	the	history	of	the	church,	but	even	in
this	case,	it	does	not	affirm	that	all	believers	will	speak	with	tongues:	the	immediately	following	phrase	says,	“They	will	pick	up
serpents”	(v.	
18),	something	that	no	responsible	interpreter	would	say	should	be	true	of	every	Christian;	and	(3)	that	no	connection
is	made	between	speaking	in	tongues	and	baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit	in	this	passage.
54
It	might	be	objected	at	this	point	that	speaking	in	tongues	is	not	speech	empowered	by	the	Holy	Spirit,	but	is	speech	that	comes
from	the	speaker’s	own	human	spirit.	But	Paul	clearly	views	all	these	spiritual	gifts	as	generally	
empowered	
by	the	Holy	Spirit,
even	the	ones	in	which	human	personality	comes	fully	into	play.	This	would	be	true	of	teachers	and	helpers	and	administrators,	as
well	as	those	who	speak	with	tongues.	In	each	of	these	cases	the	active	agent	in	performing	the	activity	is	the	Christian	who	has
the	particular	gift	and	uses	it,	but	all	these	are	nonetheless	empowered	by	the	Holy	Spirit	in	their	functioning,	and	that	would	also
be	true	of	the	gift	of	tongues	as	well.
55
Also	relevant	at	this	point	is	John’s	reassurance	to	his	readers,	in	the	context	of	demonic	spirits	that	had	gone	out	into	the	world:
“He	who	is	in	you	is	greater	than	he	who	is	in	the	world”	(1	John	4:4).
56
Some	popular	books	have	given	anecdotal	accounts	of	Christians	who	say	they	spoke	in	tongues	for	a	time	and	then	found	that
there	was	a	demon	within	them	who	was	empowering	this	speech,	and	the	demon	was	cast	out.	(See,	for	example,	C.	Fred
Dickason,	
Demon	Possession	and	the	Christian	
[Westchester,	Ill.:	Crossway,	1987],	pp.	126–27;	188–91;	193–97.)	But	this	is	just
another	example	of	a	case	where	experience	is	to	be	subject	to	Scripture	and	tested	by	Scripture,	and	the	teaching	of	Scripture
should	not	be	subject	to	experience.	We	must	be	careful	that	we	not	let	such	reports	of	experiences	cause	us	to	adopt	a	different
position	than	Scripture	itself	on	this	issue.	Specifically,	if	1	Cor.	12–14	views	tongues	as	a	good	gift	from	the	Holy	Spirit	that	is
valuable	for	edification	and	for	the	good	of	the	church,	and	if	Paul	can	say,	“I	want	you	all	to	speak	in	tongues”	(1	Cor.	14:5),	then
interpretations	of	contemporary	experiences	that,	in	effect,	say,	“I	want	you	all	to	be	afraid	of	tongues,”	go	contrary	to	the
emphasis	of	the	New	Testament.	(Note	Dickason’s	quotation	of	Kurt	Koch:	“Seeking	this	gift	for	ourselves	can	be	a	very
dangerous	experience”	[p.	
127].)	This	is	just	not	the	perspective	Paul	has	in	the	New	Testament.
I	realize	that	Dickason	has	a	cessationist	view	with	respect	to	speaking	in	tongues	today	(see	p.	
189:	“I	told	her	I	doubted	that
there	were	any	genuine	tongues	from	God	today	in	the	New	Testament	sense”).	Therefore,	from	his	perspective,	he	is	not	making
Scripture	subject	to	experience,	but	sees	these	experiences	as	confirming	his	understanding	of	Scripture.	(I	have	discussed	the
cessationist	position	in	
chapter	52
.)
There	is	the	possibility	of	demonic	counterfeit	of	every	gift	
in	the	lives	of	unbelievers	
(see	Matt.	7:22;	also	
chapter	17
,	on	false
miracles).	Therefore	the	fact	that	there	is	some	kind	of	“speaking	in	tongues”	in	pagan	religions	should	not	surprise	us	or	cause	us
to	think	that	all	speaking	in	tongues	is	false.	But	
in	the	lives	of	believers,	
especially	when	there	is	positive	fruit	in	their	lives	and
positive	fruit	from	their	gifts,	1	Cor.	12:3,	1	John	4:4,	and	Matt.	7:16–20	tell	us	that	these	are	not	counterfeit	gifts	but	real	gifts
from	God.	We	must	remember	that	Satan	and	demons	do	not	do	good;	they	do	evil;	and	they	do	not	bring	blessing;	they	bring
destruction.
(Neil	T.	Anderson,	in	
The	Bondage	Breaker	
[Eugene,	Oreg.:	Harvest	House,	1990],	pp.	159–60,	relates	a	story	of	a	man	who	was
apparently	a	Christian	and	who	had	a	counterfeit	gift	of	tongues.	But	Anderson	notes	that	the	gift	was	conferred	on	the	man	“by
false	teachers”	[p.	
159]	and	that	this	“gift”	brought	obviously	destructive	consequences	in	the	man’s	life.	These	factors,	and	not
just	the	words	of	a	demon	as	the	only	evidence,	gave	clear	indication	of	the	counterfeit	nature	of	that	supposed	“gift.”	Unlike
Dickason,	Anderson	affirms	that	he	is	not	opposed	to	speaking	in	tongues;	see	p.	
160.)
An	alternative	explanation	for	the	stories	given	by	Dickason	is	to	say	that	the	demons	who	
said	
they	were	“tongues	spirits,”	and
that	they	came	in	when	some	charismatics	laid	hands	on	the	Christian	in	question,	were	lying.	Satan	“is	a	liar	and	the	father	of
lies”	(John	8:44),	and	he	would	love	to	have	Christians	afraid	of	as	many	of	the	Holy	Spirit’s	gifts	as	possible.
57
The	word	“groan”	(
stenagmos
)	is	elsewhere	used	in	the	New	Testament	only	at	Acts	7:34,	of	the	groanings	of	Israel	under
oppression	in	Egypt.	But	the	related	verb	
stenazō	
is	used	several	times,	always	of	finite	creatures	groaning	under	the	burden	of
this	fallen	creation.	In	the	immediately	previous	context	
stenazō	
refers	to	our	groaning	because	our	redemption	is	incomplete
(Rom.	8:23;	a	related	compound	word	is	used	in	v.	
22	of	the	creation	itself).	The	verb	is	also	used	of	finite	creatures	groaning
under	the	burden	of	this	creation	in	Mark	7:34	(Jesus	as	a	man);	2	Cor.	5:2,	4	(believers	who	have	a	corruptible,	earthly	body);
Heb.	13:17	(church	leaders	who	may	be	tempted	to	groan	under	the	burden	of	church	leadership);	and	James	5:9	(a	warning	for
Christians	not	to	grumble	or	groan	against	one	another).	Though	the	verb	was	once	used	of	Jesus	who	groaned	while	under	the
limitations	of	this	human	existence,	it	does	not	seem	an	appropriate	term	to	use	of	the	activity	of	the	Holy	Spirit,	who	would	not
experience	a	similar	weakness	because	he	never	took	on	human	nature.
58
Though	the	word	is	not	elsewhere	used	in	the	New	Testament,	its	sense	is	also	transparent	from	the	
sun	
(“with”)	prefix	that	Paul
attaches	to	a	very	common	word	for	“help.”
59
An	alternative	view	is	found	in	the	helpful	discussion	by	Douglas	Moo,	
Romans	1–8,	
pp.	559–63,	who	(hesitantly)	understands
the	groans	to	be	not	ours	but	the	Holy	Spirit’s.
60
At	least	no	other	place	in	Scripture	calls	something	a	“word	of	wisdom”	or	“word	of	knowledge”	or	uses	those	phrases	in	any
other	way.
61
Even	if	faith	and	tongues	are	considered	nonmiraculous,	then	we	have	a	list	that	is	a	mixture	of	miraculous	and	nonmiraculous
gifts,	and	then	there	is	no	reason	why	word	of	wisdom	and	word	of	knowledge	could	not	be	considered	non-miraculous	as	well,
especially	on	the	basis	of	the	fact	that	the	words	used	to	describe	them	do	not	ordinarily	denote	miraculous	events.
62
In	fact,	everything	that	modern	Pentecostal	and	charismatic	Christians	call	“words	of	knowledge”	and	“words	of	wisdom”
would	fit	exactly	into	the	definition	of	prophecy	as	given	by	Paul,	and	should	in	fact	be	put	under	the	general	umbrella	of
prophecy.	This	would	have	the	distinct	advantage	of	making	the	use	of	this	gift	subject	to	Paul’s	rules	for	understanding	and
regulating	prophecy	in	the	church.
Will	any	harm	come	from	continuing	the	fairly	common	practice	of	thinking	of	words	of	wisdom	and	words	of	knowledge	as
miraculous	gifts	that	depend	on	a	special	revelation	from	God?	One	immediate	danger	might	be	that,	whereas	what	is	actually
happening	would	be	called	“prophecy”	by	Paul,	in	some	cases	it	is	now	being	called	something	different,	and	that	tends	to
distance	it	from	the	regulations	for	prophecy	that	Paul	gives	in	the	New	Testament.	Whether	that	would	lead	to	misuse	of	the	gift
at	some	point	in	the	future	is	impossible	to	predict.	But	it	does	seem	to	be	rather	anomalous	to	have	a	miraculous	gift	that	is	quite
widely	used	and	that	is	only	mentioned	but	never	discussed	or	regulated	at	all	in	the	New	Testament.
63
For	further	discussion	of	these	gifts,	see	Wayne	Grudem,	“What	is	the	Real	Meaning	of	a	‘Word	of	Wisdom’	and	a	‘Word	of
Knowledge’?”	in	
Ministries	Today	
(Jan.–Feb.	1993),	pp.	60–65.
64
For	a	very	extensive	linguistic	and	grammatical	analysis	of	this	phrase,	see	Wayne	Grudem,	“A	Response	to	Gerhard
Dautzenberg	on	1	Cor.	12:10,”	in	
Biblische	Zeitschrift,	
N.F.,	22:2	(1978),	pp.	253–70.
65
Of	course,	no	gift	is	perfect	in	any	Christian	in	this	age	(1	Cor.	13:9–10),	and	we	should	not	expect	that	this	gift	would	be
perfect,	or	that	those	who	have	it	would	never	make	mistakes.	See	
chapter	52
,	on	the	fact	that	spiritual	gifts	vary	in	strength.
OceanofPDF.com
Part	7
The	Doctrine	of	the	Future
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	54
The	Return	of	Christ:	When	and	How?
When	and	how	will	Christ	return?	Could	he	come	back	at	any
hour?
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
As	we	begin	the	final	unit	of	this	book,	we	turn	to	consider	events
that	will	happen	in	the	future.	The	study	of	future	events	is	often
called	
“eschatology,”	
from	the	Greek	word	
eschatos,	
which	means
“last.”	The	study	of	eschatology,	then,	is	the	study	of	“the	last
things.”
Unbelievers	can	make	reasonable	predictions	about	future	events
based	on	patterns	of	past	occurrences,	but	in	the	nature	of	human
experience	it	is	clear	that	human	beings	of	themselves	cannot	
know
the	future.	Therefore	unbelievers	can	have	no	certain	knowledge	of
any	future	event.	But	Christians	who	believe	the	Bible	are	in	a
different	situation.	Although	we	cannot	know	everything	about	the
future,	God	knows	everything	about	the	future	and	he	has	in
Scripture	told	us	about	the	major	events	yet	to	come	in	the	history
of	the	universe.	About	these	events	occurring	we	can	have	absolute
confidence	because	God	is	never	wrong	and	never	lies.
Regarding	our	own	personal	future	as	individuals,	we	have	already
discussed	the	teaching	of	Scripture	in	chapter	41	(on	death	and	the
intermediate	state)	and	chapter	42	(on	glorification).	The	study	of
these	future	events	that	will	happen	to	individuals	is	sometimes
called	
“personal	eschatology.”	
But	the	Bible	also	talks	about
certain	major	events	that	will	affect	the	entire	universe.	Specifically,
it	tells	us	about	the	second	coming	of	Christ,	the	millennium,	the
final	judgment,	eternal	punishment	for	unbelievers	and	eternal
reward	for	believers,	and	life	with	God	in	the	new	heaven	and	new
earth.	The	study	of	these	events	is	sometimes	called	
“general
eschatology.”	
In	this	chapter	we	will	study	the	question	of	the
return	of	Christ,	or	his	“second	coming.”	Subsequent	chapters	will
deal	with	the	remaining	topics	in	a	study	of	the	last	things.
There	have	been	many	debates—often	heated	ones—in	the	history
of	the	church	over	questions	regarding	the	future.	In	this	chapter	we
will	begin	with	aspects	of	Christ’s	second	coming	with	which	all
evangelicals	agree,	and	then	at	the	end	move	to	one	matter	of
disagreement:	whether	Christ	could	return	at	any	time.	Then	in	the
following	chapter	we	will	discuss	the	question	of	the	millennium,	a
topic	that	has	long	been	a	source	of	disagreement	among	Christians.
A.	There	Will	Be	a	Sudden,	Personal,	Visible,	
Bodily	Return	of	Christ
Jesus	often	spoke	about	his	return.	“You	also	must	be	ready;	for	the
Son	of	Man	is	coming	at	an	hour	you	do	not	expect”	(Matt.	24:44).
He	said,	“
I	will	come	again	
and	will	take	you	to	myself,	that	where
I	am	you	may	be	also”	(John	14:3).	Immediately	after	Jesus	had
ascended	into	heaven,	two	angels	said	to	the	disciples,	“This	Jesus,
who	was	taken	up	from	you	into	heaven,	
will	come	
in	the	same	way
as	you	saw	him	go	into	heaven”	(Acts	1:11).	Paul	taught,	
“The	Lord
himself	will	descend	from	heaven	
with	a	cry	of	command,	with	the
archangel’s	call,	and	with	the	sound	of	the	trumpet	of	God”	(1
Thess.	4:16).	The	author	of	Hebrews	wrote	that	Christ	“
will	appear
a	second	time,	
not	to	deal	with	sin	but	to	save	those	who	are	eagerly
waiting	for	him”	(Heb.	9:28).	James	wrote,	“the	coming
1
	of	the
Lord	is	at	hand”	(James	5:8).	Peter	said,	“The	day	of	the	Lord	will
come	like	a	thief”	(2	Peter	3:10).	John	wrote,	“when	he	appears	we
shall	be	like	him,	for	we	shall	see	him	as	he	is”	(1	John	3:2).	And
the	book	of	Revelation	has	frequent	references	to	Christ’s	return,
ending	with	Jesus’	promise,	“Surely	
I	am	coming	soon,”	
and	John’s
response,	“Amen.	Come,	Lord	Jesus!”	(Rev.	22:20).
This	theme,	then,	is	frequently	mentioned	throughout	the	New
Testament.	It	is	the	dominant	hope	of	the	New	Testament	church.
These	verses	predict	a	sudden	return	of	Christ	that	will	be	dramatic
and	visible	(“He	is	coming	with	the	clouds,	and	every	eye	will	see
him,”	Rev.	1:7).	The	passages	are	far	too	explicit	to	allow	the	idea
(once	popular	in	liberal	Protestant	circles)	that	Christ	himself	will
not	return,	but	simply	that	the	spirit	of	Christ,	meaning	an
acceptance	of	his	teaching	and	an	imitation	of	his	lifestyle	of	love,
would	increasingly	return	to	the	earth.	It	is	not	his	teachings	or	his
style	of	conduct,	but	
“the	Lord	himself”	
who	will	descend	from
heaven	(1	Thess.	4:16).	It	is	Jesus	himself	“who	was	taken	up	from
you	into	heaven”	who	“will	come	
in	the	same	way	
as	you	saw	him
go	into	heaven”	(Acts	1:11).	His	appearing	will	not	be	a	mere
spiritual	coming	to	dwell	within	people’s	hearts,	but	will	be	a
personal	
and	
bodily	
return	“in	the	same	way	as	you	saw	him	go	into
heaven.”
B.	We	Should	Eagerly	Long	for	Christ’s	Return
John’s	response	at	the	end	of	Revelation	should	characterize
Christians’	hearts	in	all	ages:	“Amen.	Come,	Lord	Jesus!”	(Rev.
22:20).	True	Christianity	trains	us	“to	live	sober,	upright,	and	godly
lives	in	this	world,	
awaiting	our	blessed	hope,	the	appearing	of	the
glory	of	our	great	God	and	Savior	Jesus	Christ”	
(Titus	2:12–13).
2
Paul	says,	“our	commonwealth	is	in	heaven,	and	from	it	we	
await	a
Savior,	
the	Lord	Jesus	Christ”	(Phil.	3:20).
3
	The	term	“Maranatha”
in	1	Corinthians	16:22	(NASB)	similarly	means,	“Our	Lord,
come!”	(1	Cor.	16:22	RSV).
Do	Christians	in	fact	eagerly	long	for	Christ’s	return?	The	more
Christians	are	caught	up	in	enjoying	the	good	things	of	this	life,	and
the	more	they	neglect	genuine	Christian	fellowship	and	their
personal	relationship	with	Christ,	the	less	they	will	long	for	his
return.	On	the	other	hand,	many	Christians	who	are	experiencing
suffering	or	persecution,	or	who	are	more	elderly	and	infirm,	and
those	whose	daily	walk	with	Christ	is	vital	and	deep,	will	have	a
more	intense	longing	for	his	return.	To	some	extent,	then,	the
degree	to	which	we	actually	long	for	Christ’s	return	is	a	measure	of
the	spiritual	condition	of	our	own	lives	at	the	moment.	It	also	gives
some	measure	of	the	degree	to	which	we	see	the	world	as	it	really
is,	as	God	sees	it,	in	bondage	to	sin	and	rebellion	against	God,	and
in	the	power	of	the	evil	one	(1	John	5:19).
But	does	this	mean	that	we	should	not	undertake	long-term
projects?	If	a	scientist	who	is	a	Christian	eagerly	longs	for	Christ’s
return,	then	should	he	or	she	begin	a	ten-year	research	project?	Or
should	a	Christian	begin	a	three-year	course	in	a	theological
seminary	or	a	Bible	college?	What	if	Christ	were	to	return	the	day
before	graduation	from	that	institution,	before	there	was	any	chance
to	give	a	significant	amount	of	one’s	time	to	actual	ministry?
Certainly	we	should	commit	ourselves	to	long-term	activities.	It	is
precisely	for	this	reason	that	Jesus	does	not	allow	us	to	know	the
actual	time	of	his	return	(see	below):	he	wants	us	to	be	engaged	in
obedience	to	him,	no	matter	what	our	walk	of	life,	up	until	the	very
moment	of	his	return.	To	“be	ready”	for	Christ’s	return	(Matt.
24:44)	is	to	be	faithfully	obeying	him	in	the	present,	actively
engaged	in	whatever	work	he	has	called	us	to.	In	the	nature	of	the
situation,	since	we	do	not	know	when	he	will	return,	on	that	day
there	will	no	doubt	be	some	missionaries	just	departing	for	the
mission	field,	who	will	never	reach	their	destination.	There	will	be
some	men	in	their	last	year	of	seminary	education	who	will	never
use	their	training	to	pastor	a	church.	There	will	be	some	researchers
handing	in	their	doctoral	dissertations	on	that	day,	the	fruit	of	years
of	research	that	will	never	be	published	and	never	have	an	influence
on	the	world.	But	to	all	of	those	people	who	are	Christians,	Jesus
will	say,	“Well	done,	good	and	faithful	servant;	you	have	been
faithful	over	a	little,	I	will	set	you	over	much;	enter	into	the	joy	of
your	master”	(Matt.	25:21).
C.	We	Do	Not	Know	When	Christ	Will	Return
Several	passages	indicate	that	we	do	not,	and	cannot,	know	the	time
when	Christ	will	return.	“The	Son	of	man	is	coming	
at	an	hour	you
do	not	expect”	
(Matt.	24:44).	“Watch	therefore,	for	
you	know
neither	the	day	nor	the	hour”	
(Matt.	25:13).	Moreover,	Jesus	said,
“But	of	that	day	or	that	hour	no	one	knows,	not	even	the	angels	in
heaven,	nor	the	Son,	but	only	the	Father.	Take	heed,	watch;	for	
you
do	not	know	
when	the	time	will	come”	(Mark	13:32–33).
It	is	simply	an	evasion	of	the	force	of	those	passages	to	say	that	we
cannot	know	the	day	or	the	hour,	but	that	we	can	know	the	month
or	the	year.	The	fact	remains	that	Jesus	is	coming	“at	an	hour	you
do	not	expect”	(Matt.	24:44),	and	“at	an	unexpected	hour”	(Luke
12:40).	(In	these	verses	the	word	“hour”	[
hōra
]	is	best	understood
in	a	more	general	sense,	to	refer	to	the	time	when	something	will
take	place,	not	necessarily	a	sixty-minute	period	of	time.)
4
	The
point	of	these	passages	is	that	Jesus	is	telling	us	that	we	
cannot
know	when	he	is	coming	back.	Since	he	will	come	at	an	unexpected
time,	we	should	be	ready	at	all	times	for	him	to	return.
The	practical	result	of	this	is	that	anyone	who	claims	to	know
specifically	when	Jesus	is	coming	back	is	automatically	to	be
considered	wrong.	The	Jehovah’s	Witnesses	have	made	many
predictions	of	specific	dates	for	Christ’s	return,	and	all	of	them	have
turned	out	to	be	wrong.
5
	But	others	in	the	history	of	the	church
have	made	such	predictions	as	well,	sometimes	claiming	new
insight	into	biblical	prophecies,	and	sometimes	claiming	to	have
received	personal	revelations	from	Jesus	himself	indicating	the	time
of	his	return.	It	is	unfortunate	that	many	people	have	been	deceived
by	these	claims,	because	if	people	are	convinced	that	Christ	will
return	(for	example)	within	a	month,	they	will	begin	to	withdraw
from	all	long-term	commitments.	They	will	take	their	children	out
of	school,	sell	their	houses,	quit	their	jobs,	and	give	up	work	on	any
long-term	projects	whether	in	the	church	or	elsewhere.	They	may
initially	have	an	increased	zeal	for	evangelism	and	prayer,	but	the
unreasonable	nature	of	their	behavior	will	offset	any	evangelistic
impact	they	may	have.	Moreover,	they	are	simply	
disobeying	
the
teaching	of	Scripture	that	the	date	of	Christ’s	return	cannot	be
known,	which	means	that	even	their	prayer	and	fellowship	with
God	will	be	hindered	as	well.	Anyone	who	claims	to	know	the	date
on	which	Christ	will	return—from	whatever	source—should	be
rejected	as	incorrect.
6
D.	All	Evangelicals	Agree	on	the	Final	Results	of	Christ’s	Return
No	matter	what	their	differences	on	the	details,	all	Christians	who
take	the	Bible	as	their	final	authority	agree	that	the	final	and
ultimate	result	of	Christ’s	return	will	be	the	judgment	of	unbelievers
and	the	final	reward	of	believers,	and	that	believers	will	live	with
Christ	in	a	new	heaven	and	a	new	earth	for	all	eternity.	God	the
Father,	Son,	and	Holy	Spirit	will	reign	and	will	be	worshiped	in	a
never-ending	kingdom	with	no	more	sin	or	sorrow	or	suffering.	We
will	discuss	these	details	more	fully	in	the	following	chapters.
E.	There	Is	Disagreement	Over	the	Details	of	Future	Events
Nevertheless,	Christians	differ	over	specific	details	leading	up	to
and	immediately	following	Christ’s	return.	Specifically,	they	differ
over	the	nature	of	the	millennium	and	the	relationship	of	Christ’s
return	to	the	millennium,	the	sequence	of	Christ’s	return	and	the
great	tribulation	period	that	will	come	to	the	earth,	and	the	question
of	the	salvation	of	the	Jewish	people	(and	the	relationship	between
Jews	who	are	saved	and	the	church).
Before	we	examine	some	of	those	questions	in	more	detail,	it	is
important	to	affirm	the	genuine	evangelical	standing	of	those	who
have	differing	positions	on	these	questions.	Evangelicals	who	hold
to	these	various	positions	all	agree	that	Scripture	is	inerrant,	and
they	have	a	commitment	to	believe	
whatever	
is	taught	by	Scripture.
Their	differences	concern	the	interpretation	of	various	passages
relating	to	these	events,	but	their	differences	on	these	matters
should	be	seen	as	matters	of	secondary	importance,	not	as
differences	over	primary	doctrinal	matters.
Nevertheless,	it	is	worth	our	time	to	study	these	questions	in	more
detail,	both	because	we	may	gain	further	insight	into	the	nature	of
the	events	that	God	has	planned	and	promised	for	us,	and	because
there	is	still	hope	that	greater	unity	will	come	about	in	the	church
when	we	agree	to	examine	these	issues	again	in	more	detail	and	to
engage	in	discussion	about	them.
F.	Could	Christ	Come	Back	at	Any	Time?
One	of	the	significant	areas	of	disagreement	is	over	the	question	of
whether	Christ	could	return	at	any	time.	On	the	one	hand,	there	are
many	passages	encouraging	us	to	be	ready	because	Christ	will
return	at	an	hour	we	do	not	expect.	On	the	other	hand,	there	are
several	passages	that	speak	of	certain	events	that	will	happen	before
Christ	returns.	There	have	been	different	ways	of	resolving	the
apparent	tension	between	these	two	sets	of	passages,	with	some
Christians	concluding	that	Christ	could	still	return	at	any	time,	and
others	concluding	that	he	could	not	return	for	at	least	a	generation,
since	it	would	take	that	long	to	fulfill	some	of	the	predicted	events
that	must	occur	before	his	return.
1.
	Verses	Predicting	a	Sudden	and	Unexpected	Coming	of	Christ.
	In	order
to	feel	the	cumulative	force	of	the	passages	that	predict	that	Christ	could
come	very	soon,	it	is	helpful	simply	to	list	them	here	in	order:
Watch	therefore,	
for	you	do	not	know	on	what	day	your	Lord	is	coming.
But	know	this,	that	if	the	householder	had	known	in	what	part	of	the
night	the	thief	was	coming,	he	would	have	watched	and	would	not	have
let	his	house	be	broken	into.	Therefore	
you	also	must	be	ready;	
for	the
Son	of	man	is	coming	
at	an	hour	you	do	not	expect.	
(Matt.	24:42–44;
cf.	vv.	36–39)
The	master	of	that	servant	
will	come	on	a	day	when	he	does	not	expect
him	
and	at	an	hour	he	does	not	know.	(Matt.	24:50)
Watch	therefore,	
for	you	know	neither	the	day	nor	the	hour.	(Matt.
25:13)
But	
of	that	day	or	that	hour	no	one	knows,	
not	even	the	angels	in
heaven,	nor	the	Son,	but	only	the	Father.	
Take	heed,	watch;	
for	you	do
not	know	when	the	time	will	come.	(Mark	13:32–22)
It	is	like	a	man	going	on	a	journey,	when	he	leaves	home	and	puts	his
servants	in	charge,	each	with	his	work,	and	commands	the	doorkeeper
to	be	on	the	watch.	
Watch	therefore—
for	
you	do	not	know	when	the
master	of	the	house	will	come,	
in	the	evening,	or	at	midnight,	or	at
cockcrow,	or	in	the	morning—lest	he	come	suddenly	and	find	you
asleep.	And	what	I	say	to	you	I	say	to	all:	
Watch.	
(Mark	13:34–37)
You	also	must	be	ready;	
for	the	Son	of	man	is	coming	at	an	
unexpected
hour.	
(Luke	12:40)
Our	Lord,	come!	
(1	Cor.	16:22)
For	our	citizenship	is	in	heaven,	from	which	also	
we	eagerly	wait	for	a
Savior,	
the	Lord	Jesus	Christ.	(Phil.	3:20	NASB)
For	you	yourselves	know	well	that	
the	day	of	the	Lord	will	come	like	a
thief	in	the	night.	
(1	Thess.	5:2)
Training	us	to	.	.	.	live	sober,	upright,	and	godly	lives	in	this	world,
awaiting	our	blessed	hope,	
the	appearing	of	the	glory	of	our	great	God
and	Savior	Jesus	Christ.	(Titus	2:12–13)
Encouraging	one	another,	and	all	the	more	
as	you	see	the	Day	drawing
near.	
(Heb.	10:25)
Be	patient,	therefore,	brethren,	until	the	coming	of	the	Lord.	.	.	.
Establish	your	hearts,	for	
the	coming	of	the	Lord	is	at	hand.	.	.	.	Behold,
the	Judge	is	standing	at	the	doors.	
(James	5:7–9)
The	end	of	all	things	is	at	hand.	
(1	Peter	4:7)
But	
the	day	of	the	Lord	will	come	like	a	thief,	
and	then	the	heavens	will
pass	away	with	a	loud	noise,	and	the	elements	will	be	dissolved	with
fire,	and	the	earth	and	all	the	works	that	are	upon	it	will	be	burned	up.
(2	Peter	3:10)
The	time	is	near.	
(Rev.	1:3)
Behold,	
I	am	coming	soon.	
(Rev.	22:7)
Behold,	
I	am	coming	soon,	
bringing	my	recompense,	to	repay	everyone
for	what	he	has	done.	(Rev.	22:12)
He	who	testifies	to	these	things	says,	
“Surely	I	am	coming	soon.”
Amen.	
Come,	Lord	Jesus!	
(Rev.	22:20)
What	shall	we	say	to	these	passages?	If	there	were	no	passages	in
the	New	Testament	about	signs	that	would	precede	Christ’s	return,
we	would	probably	conclude	from	the	passages	just	quoted	that
Jesus	could	come	at	any	moment.	In	this	sense,	we	can	say	that
Christ’s	return	is	
imminent.
7
	It	would	seem	to	blunt	the	force	of	the
commands	to	
be	ready	
and	to	
watch	
if	there	was	a	reason	to	think
that	Christ	would	not	come	soon.
Before	we	look	at	passages	on	signs	that	precede	Christ’s	coming,
another	problem	must	be	considered	at	this	point.	Were	Jesus	and
the	New	Testament	authors	wrong	in	their	expectation	that	he
would	return	soon?	Did	they	not	think	and	even	teach	that	the
second	coming	of	Christ	would	be	in	just	a	few	years?	In	fact,	a
very	prominent	view	among	liberal	New	Testament	scholars	has
been	that	Jesus	mistakenly	taught	that	he	would	return	soon.
But	none	of	the	texts	just	quoted	require	this	interpretation.	The
texts	that	say	to	be	ready	do	not	say	how	long	we	will	have	to	wait,
nor	do	the	texts	that	say	that	Jesus	is	coming	at	a	time	we	do	not
expect.	As	for	the	texts	that	say	Jesus	is	coming	“soon,”	we	must
realize	that	biblical	prophets	often	speak	in	terms	of	“prophetic
foreshortening,”	which	sees	future	events	but	does	not	see	the
intervening	time	before	those	events	occur.
George	Ladd	says:
The	prophets	were	little	interested	in	chronology,	and	the	future	was
always	viewed	as	imminent	.	.	.	the	Old	Testament	prophets	blended
the	near	and	the	distant	perspectives	so	as	to	form	a	single	canvas.
Biblical	prophecy	is	not	primarily	three-dimensional	but	two;	it	has
height	and	breadth	but	is	little	concerned	about	depth,	i.e.,	the
chronology	of	future	events	.	.	.	the	distant	is	viewed	through	the
transparency	of	the	immediate.	It	is	true	that	the	early	church	lived	in
expectancy	of	the	return	of	the	Lord,	and	it	is	the	nature	of	biblical
prophecy	to	make	it	possible	for	every	generation	to	live	in
expectancy	of	the	end.
8
Peter	also	reminds	us	that	the	Lord	has	a	different	perspective	on
time	than	we	do,	so	that	“soon”	with	him	may	not	be	what	we
expect:	“But	do	not	ignore	this	one	fact,	beloved,	that	with	the	Lord
one	day	is	as	a	thousand	years,	and	a	thousand	years	as	one	day.
The	Lord	is	not	slow	about	his	promise	as	some	count	slowness”	(2
Peter	3:8–9).
2.	Signs	That	Precede	Christ’s	Return.
	The	other	set	of	texts	to	be
considered	tells	of	several	signs	that	Scripture	says	will	precede	the	time	of
Christ’s	return.	In	fact,	Berkhof	says,	“According	to	Scripture	several
important	events	must	occur	before	the	return	of	the	Lord,	and	therefore	it
cannot	be	called	imminent.”
9
Here	it	will	be	helpful	to	list	those	passages	that	most	directly	refer
to	signs	that	must	occur	before	Christ’s	return.
a.	The	Preaching	of	the	Gospel	to	All	Nations:
And	
the	gospel	must	first	be	preached	to	all	nations.	
(Mark	13:10;	cf.
Matt.	24:14)
b.	The	Great	Tribulation:
And	when	you	hear	of	wars	and	rumors	of	wars,	do	not	be	alarmed;	this
must	take	place,	but	the	end	is	not	yet.	For	nation	will	rise	against
nation,	and	kingdom	against	kingdom;	there	will	be	
earthquakes	
in
various	places,	there	will	be	
famines;	this	is	but	the	beginning	of	the
birth-pangs.	
(Mark	13:7–8;	cf.	Matt.	24:15–22;	Luke	21:20–24)
For	in	those	days	
there	will	be	such	tribulation	as	has	not	been	from	the
beginning	of	the	creation	which	God	created	until	now,	and	never	will
be.	
And	
if	the	Lord	had	not	shortened	the	days,	no	human	being	would
be	saved;	
but	for	the	sake	of	the	elect,	whom	he	chose,	he	shortened	the
days.	(Mark	13:19–20)
c.	False	Prophets	Working	Signs	and	Wonders:
False	Christs	and	false	prophets	will	arise	and	show	signs	and
wonders,	to	lead	astray,	if	possible,	the	elect.	
(Mark	13:22;	cf.	Matt.
24:23–24)
d.	Signs	in	the	Heavens:
But	in	those	days,	
after	that	tribulation,	the	sun	will	be	darkened,	and
the	moon	will	not	give	its	light,	and	the	stars	will	be	falling	from
heaven,	and	the	powers	in	the	heavens	will	be	shaken.	
And	then	they
will	see	the	Son	of	man	coming	in	clouds	with	great	power	and	glory.
(Mark	13:24–25;	cf.	Matt.	24:29–30;	Luke	21:25–27)
e.	The	Coming	of	the	Man	of	Sin	and	the	Rebellion:
	Paul	writes	to	the
Thessalonians	that	Christ	will	not	come	unless	the	man	of	sin	is	first	revealed,
and	then	the	Lord	Jesus	will	destroy	him	at	his	coming.	This	“man	of	sin”	is
sometimes	identified	with	the	beast	in	Revelation	13,	and	is	sometimes	called
the	antichrist,	the	final	and	worst	of	the	series	of	“antichrists”	mentioned	in	1
John	2:18.	Paul	writes:
Now	concerning	the	coming	of	our	Lord	Jesus	Christ	.	.	.	
that	day	will
not	come,	unless	the	rebellion	comes	first,	and	the	man	of	lawlessness	is
revealed,	
the	son	of	perdition,	who	opposes	and	exalts	himself	against
every	so-called	god	or	object	of	worship,	
so	that	he	takes	his	seat	in	the
temple	of	God,	proclaiming	himself	to	be	God.	.	.	.	
And	you	know	what
is	restraining	him	now	so	that	he	may	be	revealed	in	his	time.	For	the
mystery	of	lawlessness	is	already	at	work;	only	he	who	now	restrains	it
will	do	so	until	he	is	out	of	the	way.	
And	then	the	lawless	one	will	be
revealed,	and	the	Lord	Jesus	will	slay	him	with	the	breath	of	his	mouth
and	destroy	him	by	his	appearing	and	his	coming.	
The	coming	of	the
lawless	one	by	the	activity	of	Satan	will	be	with	
all	power	and	with
pretended	signs	and	wonders,	and	with	all	wicked	deception	for	those
who	are	to	perish,	
because	they	refused	to	love	the	truth	and	so	be
saved.	(2	Thess.	2:1–10)
f.	The	Salvation	of	Israel:
	Paul	talks	about	the	fact	that	many	Jews	have	not
trusted	in	Christ,	but	he	says	that	sometime	in	the	future	a	large	number
would	be	saved:
Now	if	their	trespass	means	riches	for	the	world,	and	if	their	failure
means	riches	for	the	Gentiles,	how	much	more	will	their	
full	inclusion
mean!	(Rom.	11:12)
10
For	I	do	not	want	you,	brethren,	to	be	uninformed	of	this	mystery,	lest
you	be	wise	in	your	own	estimation,	that	a	partial	hardening	has
happened	to	Israel	until	the	fulness	of	the	Gentiles	has	come	in;	
and
thus	all	Israel	will	be	saved.	
(Rom.	11:25–26)
g.	Conclusions	From	These	Signs	That	Precede	Christ’s	Return:
	The
impact	of	these	passages	seems	so	clear	that,	as	was	mentioned	above,	many
Christians	have	felt	that	Christ	simply	cannot	return	at	any	moment.
11
	As	we
look	over	the	list	of	signs	given	above,	it	would	not	seem	to	take	much
argument	to	demonstrate	that	most	of	these	events,	or	perhaps	all	of	them,
have	not	yet	occurred.	Or	at	least	that	is	what	appears	to	be	the	case	on	a	first
reading	of	these	passages.
12
3.	Possible	Solutions.
	How	can	we	reconcile	the	passages	that	seem	to	warn
us	to	be	ready	because	Christ	could	suddenly	return,	with	passages	that
indicate	that	several	important	and	visible	events	must	take	place	before
Christ	can	return?	Several	solutions	have	been	proposed.
One	solution	is	to	say	that	
Christ	could	not	come	at	any	time.	
This
position	is	taken	by	Louis	Berkhof,	in	the	sentence	quoted	above.
Just	how	long	it	would	be	before	Christ	would	return	depends	on
each	person’s	estimate	of	how	long	it	will	take	some	of	the	signs	to
be	fulfilled,	such	as	the	preaching	of	the	gospel	to	all	nations,	the
coming	of	the	great	tribulation,	and	the	ingathering	of	the	full
number	of	the	Jews	who	will	be	saved.
The	difficulty	with	this	view	is	twofold.	First,	it	really	seems	to
nullify	the	force	of	the	warnings	of	Jesus	that	we	should	watch,	be
ready,	and	that	he	is	returning	at	an	hour	we	do	not	expect.	What
force	is	there	in	a	warning	to	be	ready	for	Christ	to	come	at	an
unexpected	time	when	we	know	that	this	coming	
cannot	
occur	for
many	years?	The	sense	of	urgent	expectancy	of	Christ’s	return	is
greatly	diminished	or	denied	altogether	in	this	position,	and	that
result	seems	quite	contrary	to	Jesus’	intention	in	giving	these
warnings.
Second,	this	position	seems	to	use	these	signs	in	a	way	quite
opposite	from	the	way	Jesus	intended	them	to	be	used.	The	signs
are	given	so	that,	when	we	see	them,	they	will	
intensify	our
expectation	
of	Christ’s	return.	Jesus	said,	“Now	
when	these	things
begin	to	take	place,	look	up	and	raise	your	heads,	because	your
redemption	is	drawing	near”	
(Luke	21:28).	And	the	warnings	are
also	given	to	keep	believers	from	going	astray	and	following	false
messiahs:	“Take	heed	that	no	one	leads	you	astray.	Many	will	come
in	my	name,	saying,	‘I	am	he!’	and	they	will	lead	many	astray.	.	.	.
And	then	if	any	one	says	to	you,	‘Look,	here	is	the	Christ!’	or
‘Look,	there	he	is!’	do	not	believe	it”	(Mark	13:5–6,	21).	So	the
signs	are	given	to	keep	Christians	from	being	surprised	by	these
remarkable	events,	to	assure	them	that	God	knows	them	all	in
advance,	and	to	keep	them	from	following	after	alleged	messiahs
who	do	not	come	in	the	dramatic,	visible,	world-conquering	way	in
which	Jesus	himself	will	come.	
But	the	signs	are	never	given	to
make	us	think,	“Jesus	couldn’t	come	for	a	few	years.”	
There	is	no
indication	that	Jesus	gave	these	signs	in	order	to	provide	Christians
with	a	reason	
not	to	be	ready	
for	his	return	or	in	order	to	encourage
them	
not	to	expect	
that	he	could	come	at	any	time!	To	use	the	signs
that	will	precede	Christ’s	return	in	this	way	(as	Berkhof	does,	for
example),	is	to	use	them	in	a	way	that	Jesus	never	intended.
Therefore	it	does	not	seem	convincing	to	say	that	Christ	could	not
come	at	any	time.
The	other	major	solution	to	this	problem	is	to	say	that	
Christ	indeed
could	come	at	any	time,	
and	to	reconcile	the	two	sets	of	passages	in
various	ways.	(1)	One	way	to	reconcile	them	is	to	say	that	
the	New
Testament	talks	about	two	distinct	returns	of	Christ,	
or	two	second
comings	of	Christ,
13
	that	is,	a	
secret	
coming	at	which	Christ	takes
Christians	out	of	the	world	(a	coming	“for	his	saints”),	and	then,
after	seven	years	of	tribulation	have	occurred	on	the	earth,	a	visible,
public,	
triumphant	coming	(a	coming	“with	his	saints”)	in	which
Christ	comes	to	reign	over	the	earth.	During	the	seven-year	interval
all	the	signs	that	have	not	yet	been	fulfilled	(the	great	tribulation,
the	false	prophets	with	signs	and	wonders,	the	antichrist,	the
salvation	of	Israel,	and	the	signs	in	the	heavens)	will	be	fulfilled,	so
that	there	is	no	tension	at	all	between	waiting	for	a	coming	that
could	occur	“at	any	moment”	and	realizing	that	a	later	coming	will
be	preceded	by	many	signs.
14
The	problem	with	this	solution	is	that	it	is	hard	to	derive	two
separate	comings	of	Christ	from	the	passages	that	predict	his	return.
However,	we	will	not	discuss	this	matter	here,	but	will	treat	it	in	the
next	chapter,	when	considering	the	pretribulational	premillennial
view	of	Christ’s	return.
15
	It	should	also	be	noted	that	this	solution	is
historically	quite	recent,	for	it	was	unknown	in	the	history	of	the
church	before	it	was	proposed	in	the	last	century	by	John	Nelson
Darby	(1800–1882).	This	should	alert	us	to	the	fact	that	this
solution	is	not	the	only	possible	one	to	the	tension	presented	by	the
passages	quoted	above.
(2)	Another	solution	is	to	say	that	
all	the	signs	have	been	fulfilled,
and	therefore	Christ	in	fact	could	return	at	any	moment.	
On	this
view,	one	could	look	for	possible	fulfillments	of	these	signs	in	the
events	of	the	early	church,	even	in	the	first	century.	In	some	sense,
it	might	be	said,	the	gospel	was	indeed	preached	to	all	nations,	false
prophets	arose	and	opposed	the	gospel,	there	was	great	tribulation
in	the	persecution	the	church	suffered	at	the	hands	of	some	of	the
Roman	emperors,	the	man	of	lawlessness	was	in	fact	the	emperor
Nero,	and	the	full	number	of	the	Jewish	people	who	are	to	be	saved
has	gradually	come	about	through	the	history	of	the	church,	since
Paul	even	gives	himself	as	one	example	of	the	beginning	of	this
ingathering	of	the	Jewish	people	(Rom.	11:1).	We	will	discuss	in
more	detail	in	the	following	section	the	view	that	the	signs
preceding	Christ’s	return	
might	
have	already	been	fulfilled,
16
	but
here	we	can	simply	note	that	many	people	have	not	found
convincing	any	view	saying	that	they	
have	
happened,	because	these
signs	seem	to	them	to	point	to	much	larger	events	than	those	that
occurred	in	the	first	century.
(3)	There	is	another	possible	way	of	resolving	these	two	sets	of
passages.	It	is	to	say	that	it	is	
unlikely	but	possible	that	the	signs
have	already	been	fulfilled,	
and	therefore	we	simply	cannot	know
with	certainty	at	any	point	in	history	whether	all	the	signs	have
been	fulfilled	or	not.	This	position	is	an	attractive	one	because	it
takes	seriously	the	primary	purpose	for	the	signs,	the	primary
purpose	for	the	warnings,	and	the	fact	that	we	are	not	to	know	when
Christ	will	return.	With	regard	to	the	signs,	their	primary	purpose	is
to	intensify	our	expectation	of	Christ’s	return.	Therefore	whenever
we	see	indications	of	things	that	resemble	these	signs,	our
expectation	of	Christ’s	return	will	be	aroused	and	intensified.	With
regard	to	the	warnings	to	be	ready,	advocates	of	this	position	would
say	that	Christ	
could	
return	at	any	time	(since	we	cannot	be	certain
that	the	signs	have	not	been	fulfilled),	and	so	we	must	be	ready,
even	though	it	is	
unlikely	
that	Christ	will	return	at	once	(because	it
seems	that	there	are	several	signs	yet	to	be	fulfilled).	Finally,	this
position	agrees	that	we	cannot	know	when	Christ	will	return,	and
that	he	is	coming	at	an	hour	we	do	not	expect.
But	is	it	possible	that	these	signs	have	been	fulfilled?	We	can
examine	them	one	at	a	time.	In	each	case	our	conclusion	will	be
that	it	is	
unlikely,	but	possible,	that	the	sign	has	been	fulfilled
already.
a.	The	Preaching	of	the	Gospel	to	All	Nations:
	Has	the	gospel	been
preached	to	all	nations?	Probably	not,	since	there	are	many	language	groups
and	tribes	that	have	still	never	heard	the	gospel.	It	is	unlikely,	therefore,	that
this	sign	has	been	fulfilled.	However,	Paul	does	speak	in	Colossians	about	the
worldwide	spread	of	the	gospel.	He	speaks	of	“the	gospel	which	has	come	to
you,	as	indeed	
in	the	whole	world	
it	is	bearing	fruit	and	growing”	(Col.	1:5–
6).	He	also	speaks	of	“the	gospel	which	you	heard,	
which	has	been	preached
to	every	creature	under	heaven,	
and	of	which	I,	Paul,	became	a	minister”
(Col.	1:23).	In	these	verses	he	certainly	does	not	mean	that	every	creature
alive	has	heard	the	proclamation	of	the	gospel,	but	that	the	proclamation	has
gone	forth	to	the	whole	world	and	that,	in	a	representative	sense	at	least,	the
gospel	has	been	preached	to	the	whole	world	or	to	all	nations.
17
	Therefore,
though,	it	is	unlikely	but	possible	that	this	sign	was	initially	fulfilled	in	the
first	century	and	has	been	fulfilled	in	a	greater	sense	many	times	since	then.
b.	Great	Tribulation:
	Once	again,	it	seems	likely	that	the	language	of
Scripture	indicates	a	period	of	suffering	coming	to	the	earth	that	is	far	greater
than	anything	that	has	yet	been	experienced.	But	it	must	be	realized	that	many
people	have	understood	Jesus’	warnings	about	great	tribulation	to	refer	to	the
Roman	siege	of	Jerusalem	in	the	Jewish	War	of	A.D.	66–70.
18
	The	suffering
during	that	war	was	indeed	terrible,	and	could	be	what	was	described	by	Jesus
in	predicting	this	tribulation.	In	fact,	since	the	first	century,	there	have	been
many	periods	of	violent	and	intense	persecution	of	Christians,	and	even	in	our
century	much	of	it	has	occurred	over	large	portions	of	the	globe,	with
Christians	being	horribly	persecuted	in	the	former	Soviet	Union,	in
communist	China,	and	in	Muslim	countries.	It	would	be	difficult	to	convince
some	Christians	in	this	century	who	have	undergone	decades	of	persecution
for	their	faith,	and	have	known	that	persecution	to	affect	thousands	of	other
Christians	throughout	large	segments	of	the	world,	that	such	a	great
tribulation	has	certainly	not	yet	occurred.	They	have	longed	and	prayed	for
years	for	Christ	to	come	and	rescue	them	from	the	tribulation	that	they	are
enduring.
Once	again,	though	we	may	think	that	Jesus’	words	indicate	the
likelihood	of	a	yet	greater	persecution	coming	in	the	future,	it	is
difficult	to	be	certain	of	this.	It	seems	appropriate	to	conclude	that	it
is	unlikely	but	possible	that	the	prediction	of	a	great	tribulation	has
already	been	fulfilled.
c.	False	Christs	and	False	Prophets:
	With	regard	to	the	false	christs	and
false	prophets	who	will	work	signs	and	wonders,	any	missionary	who	has
worked	among	people	where	witchcraft	and	demonic	activity	are	rampant	will
readily	testify	that	seemingly	miraculous	“signs	and	wonders”	have	been
worked	frequently	by	demonic	power	in	opposition	to	the	spread	of	the
gospel.	Certainly	demonic	miracles	and	false	signs	have	been	done	for
centuries,	at	least	since	the	time	that	the	magicians	in	Pharaoh’s	court
produced	false	signs	in	opposition	to	Moses’	miracles	(Ex.	7:11;	8:7;	cf.	the
activity	of	Simon	the	Sorcerer	in	Acts	8:9–11).	Whatever	the	specific	form	it
takes,	such	working	of	deceptive	miracles	is	almost	always	accompanied	by
false	religions,	leading	many	people	astray	(leaders	of	such	groups	could	be
called	false	messiahs	and	false	prophets).	It	seems	likely	that	Jesus’	words
predict	a	far	greater	manifestation	of	this	kind	of	activity	in	the	time	just	prior
to	his	return,	but	again,	it	is	difficult	to	be	certain	that	this	will	be	so.	It	is	best
to	conclude	that	it	is	unlikely	but	still	possible	that	this	sign	has	been	fulfilled
already.
d.	Powerful	Signs	in	the	Heavens:
	The	occurrence	of	powerful	signs	in	the
heavens	is	the	one	sign	that	almost	certainly	has	not	yet	occurred.	Of	course,
there	have	been	eclipses	of	the	sun	and	moon,	and	comets	have	appeared,
since	the	world	began.	But	Jesus	speaks	of	something	far	greater:	“
The	sun
will	be	darkened,	
and	
the	moon	will	not	give	its	light,	
and	
the	stars	will	fall
from	heaven,	
and	
the	powers	of	the	heavens	will	be	shaken”	
(Matt.	24:29).
Although	R.	T.	France	attempts	to	explain	this	as	symbolic	language	that
refers	to	the	destruction	of	Jerusalem	and	God’s	judgment	on	it,
19
	he	must
base	this	claim	on	the	assertion	that	Isaiah	13:10	(from	which	Jesus’	words	in
Matt.	24:29	seem	to	be	drawn)	is	also	merely	symbolic	language	to	refer	to
the	fall	of	Babylon,	whereas	it	is	more	likely	that	both	Isaiah	13:10	and
Matthew	24:29	speak	of	a	yet	future	literal	falling	of	the	stars	and	blackening
of	the	sun	and	moon,	something	that	would	be	a	suitable	prelude	to	the
shaking	of	the	earth	and	heaven	and	the	cosmic	destruction	that	will	come
after	the	return	of	Christ	(see	Heb.	1:10–12;	12:27;	2	Peter	3:10–11).
Moreover,	it	is	significant	that	this	description	of	cosmic	events	in	Matthew
24:29	is	followed	in	the	rest	of	the	sentence	with	the	description	of	“the	Son
of	man	
coming	on	the	clouds	of	heaven	
with	power	and	great	glory”	(v.	
30).
20
Given	these	facts,	it	seems	unlikely	that	the	descriptions	of	the	falling	of	the
stars	from	heaven	and	the	darkening	of	the	sun	and	moon	are	merely	symbolic
language.	It	is	better	to	regard	them	as	literal	signs	that	will	occur	just	before
Christ’s	return,	and	as	such,	they	fall	in	a	different	category	from	the	other
signs,	since	it	seems	certain	that	they	have	not	yet	occurred.	Nonetheless,	they
could	occur	very	quickly—within	the	space	of	a	few	minutes	or	at	most	an
hour	or	two—to	be	followed	immediately	by	Christ’s	return.	These	particular
signs	are	not	the	type	that	would	lead	us	to	deny	that	Christ	could	return	at
any	time.
e.	The	Appearance	of	the	Man	of	Lawlessness:
	Many	attempts	have	been
made	throughout	history	to	identify	the	man	of	lawlessness	(the	“antichrist”)
with	historical	figures	who	had	great	authority	and	brought	havoc	and
devastation	among	people	on	the	earth.	The	ancient	Roman	emperors	Nero
and	Domitian,	both	of	whom	severely	persecuted	Christians,	were	thought	by
many	to	be	the	antichrist.	(Many	Roman	emperors,	including	these	two,
claimed	deity	for	themselves	and	demanded	to	be	worshiped.)	In	more	recent
times	Adolf	Hitler	was	commonly	thought	to	be	the	antichrist,	as	was	Joseph
Stalin.	On	the	other	hand,	many	Protestants	since	the	Reformation,	especially
those	who	were	persecuted	by	the	Catholic	Church,	have	thought	that	one	or
another	of	the	popes	was	the	antichrist.
But	all	of	these	identifications	have	proved	false,
21
	and	it	is	likely
that	a	yet	worse	“man	of	lawlessness”	will	arise	on	the	world	scene
and	bring	unparalleled	suffering	and	persecution,	only	to	be
destroyed	by	Jesus	when	he	comes	again.	But	the	evil	perpetrated
by	many	of	these	other	rulers	has	been	so	great	that,	at	least	while
they	were	in	power,	it	would	have	been	difficult	to	be	certain	that
the	“man	of	lawlessness”	mentioned	in	2	Thessalonians	2	has	not
yet	appeared.
22
	Once	again,	it	is	unlikely	but	possible	that	this	sign
has	been	fulfilled.
f.	The	Salvation	of	Israel:
	With	regard	to	the	salvation	of	the	fullness	of
Israel,	again	it	must	be	said	that	Romans	9–11	seems	to	indicate	that	there
will	be	a	yet	future	massive	ingathering	of	the	Jewish	people	as	they	turn	to
accept	Jesus	as	their	Messiah.	But	it	is	not	certain	that	Romans	9–11	predicts
this,	and	many	have	argued	that	no	further	ingathering	of	the	Jewish	people
will	occur	beyond	the	kind	that	we	have	already	seen	through	the	history	of
the	church,	since	Paul	gives	himself	as	a	primary	example	of	this	ingathering
(Rom.	11:1–2).	Once	again,	it	is	unlikely	but	possible	that	this	sign	has
already	been	fulfilled.
g.	Conclusion:
	Except	for	the	spectacular	signs	in	the	heavens,	it	is	unlikely
but	possible	that	these	signs	have	already	been	fulfilled.	Moreover,	the	only
sign	that	seems	certainly	not	to	have	occurred,	the	darkening	of	the	sun	and
moon	and	the	falling	of	the	stars,	could	occur	within	the	space	of	a	few
minutes,	and	therefore	it	seems	appropriate	to	say	that	Christ	could	now
return	at	any	hour	of	the	day	or	night.	It	is	therefore	unlikely	but	certainly
possible	that	Christ	could	return	at	any	time.
But	does	this	position	do	justice	to	the	warnings	that	we	should	be
ready	and	that	Christ	is	coming	at	a	time	we	do	not	expect?	Is	it
possible	to	
be	ready	
for	something	that	we	think	
unlikely	
to	happen
in	the	near	future?	Certainly	it	is.	Everyone	who	wears	a	seatbelt
when	driving,	or	purchases	auto	insurance,	gets	ready	for	an	event
he	or	she	thinks	to	be	unlikely.
23
	In	a	similar	way	it	seems	possible
to	take	seriously	the	warnings	that	Jesus	could	come	when	we	are
not	expecting	him,	and	nonetheless	to	say	that	the	signs	preceding
his	coming	will	probably	yet	occur	in	the	future.
This	position	has	positive	spiritual	benefits	as	we	seek	to	live	the
Christian	life	in	the	midst	of	a	rapidly	changing	world.	In	the	ebb
and	flow	of	world	history,	we	see	from	time	to	time	events	that
could	be	
the	final	fulfillment	of	some	of	these	signs.	They	happen,
and	then	they	fade	away.	During	the	blackest	days	of	World	War	II,
it	seemed	very	likely	that	Hitler	was	the	antichrist.	During	times	of
persecution	against	the	church,	it	can	seem	more	likely	that
Christians	are	in	the	middle	of	the	great	tribulation.	When	we	hear
of	earthquakes	and	famines	and	wars,	it	makes	us	wonder	if	the
coming	of	Christ	might	not	be	near.	Then	these	events	fade	into	the
background	and	world	leaders	pass	off	the	scene,	and	the	tide	of
events	leading	to	the	end	of	the	age	seems	to	have	receded	for	a
time.	Then	once	again	a	new	wave	of	events	will	break	on	the
world	scene,	and	once	again	our	expectation	of	Christ’s	return	is
increased.	With	each	successive	“wave”	of	events,	
we	do	not	know
which	one	will	be	the	last.	And	this	is	good,	because	God	does	not
intend	us	to	know.	He	simply	wants	us	to	continue	to	long	for
Christ’s	return	and	to	expect	that	it	could	occur	at	any	time.	It	is
spiritually	unhealthy	for	us	to	say	that	we	know	that	these	signs
have	not	
occurred,	and	it	seems	to	stretch	the	bounds	of	credible
interpretation	to	say	that	we	know	that	these	signs	have	occurred.
But	it	seems	to	fit	exactly	in	the	middle	of	the	New	Testament
approach	toward	Christ’s	return	to	say	that	
we	do	not	know	
with
certainty	if	these	events	have	occurred.	Responsible	exegesis,	an
expectation	of	Christ’s	sudden	return,	and	a	measure	of	humility	in
our	understanding,	are	all	three	preserved	in	this	position.
Then	if	Christ	does	return	suddenly,	we	will	not	be	tempted	to
object,	saying	that	one	or	another	sign	has	not	yet	occurred.	We	will
simply	be	ready	to	welcome	him	when	he	appears.	And	if	there	is
great	suffering	yet	to	come,	and	if	we	begin	to	see	intense
opposition	to	the	gospel,	a	large	revival	among	the	Jewish	people,
remarkable	progress	in	the	preaching	of	the	gospel	through	the
world,	and	even	spectacular	signs	in	the	heavens,	then	we	will	not
be	dismayed	or	lose	heart,	because	we	will	remember	Jesus’	words,
“When	these	things	begin	to	take	place,	look	up	and	raise	your
heads,	because	your	redemption	is	drawing	near”	(Luke	21:28).
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
Before	reading	this	chapter,	did	you	think	that	Christ	could	return	at	any
hour?	How	did	that	affect	your	Christian	life?	Now	what	do	you	think?	If
your	viewpoint	has	changed,	what	effect	do	you	think	it	will	have	on
your	own	life?
2
.	
Why	do	you	think	Jesus	decided	to	leave	the	world	for	a	time	and	then
return,	rather	than	staying	on	earth	after	his	resurrection	and	preaching
the	gospel	throughout	the	world	himself?
3
.	
Do	you	now	eagerly	long	for	Christ’s	return?	Have	you	had	a	greater
longing	for	it	in	the	past?	If	you	do	not	have	a	very	strong	yearning	for
Christ’s	return,	what	factors	in	your	life	do	you	think	contribute	to	that
lack	of	longing?
4
.	
Have	you	ever	decided	not	to	undertake	a	long-term	project	because	you
thought	Christ’s	return	was	near?	Do	you	have	any	hesitancy	now	about
long-term	projects	because	of	that	reason?	If	so,	do	you	think	that
hesitancy	has	any	negative	consequences	on	your	life?
5
.	
Are	you	ready	for	Christ	to	return	today?	If	you	knew	he	were	going	to
return	within	24	hours,	what	situations	or	relationships	would	you	want
to	straighten	out	before	he	returned?	Do	you	think	that	the	command	to
“be	ready”	means	that	you	should	attempt	to	straighten	out	those	things
now,	even	if	you	think	it	unlikely	that	he	would	return	today?
SPECIAL	TERMS
eschatology
	
	
	
parousia
general	eschatology
	
	
	
personal	eschatology
imminent
	
	
	
second	coming	of	Christ
Maranatha
	
	
	
	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the
bibliography	to	chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be
found	in	
Appendix	4
.)
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92			Litton,	579–81
1930			Thomas,	87–88,	525
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1875–76			Pope,	3:387–401
1892–94			Miley,	2:440–47
1940			Wiley,	3:243–81
1960			Purkiser,	537–50
983			Carter,	2:113–16
3.			Baptist
1767			Gill,	2:230–43
1887			Boyce,	451–61
1907			Strong,	1003–15
1917			Mullins,	462–66
1983–85			Erickson,	1185–94,	1203–4
4.			Dispensational
1947			Chafer,	4:255–63;	5:280–314
1949			Thiessen,	337–50
1986			Ryrie,	273–74,	463
5.			Lutheran
1917–24			Pieper,	3:515–34
1934			Mueller,	619–25
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1871–73			Hodge,	3:790–836
1887–1921			Warfield,	
SSW,	
1:348–64
1889			Shedd,	2b:641–46;	3:471–528
1937–66			Murray,	
CW,	
1:	86–95;	
CW,	
2:387–410
1938			Berkhof,	695–707
1962			Buswell,	2:341–423
7.			Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988–92			Williams,	3:297–396
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955			Ott,	485–88
2.			Roman	Catholic:	Post-Vatican	II
1980			McBrien,	2:1101–6
Other	Works
Archer,	Gleason,	Paul	Feinberg,	Douglas	Moo,	and	Richard	Reiter.	
The
Rapture:	Pre-,	Mid-,	or	Post-tribulational?	
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,
1984.
Bauckham,	Richard	J.	“Apocalyptic.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	33–35.
Beechick,	Allen.	
The	Pre-Tribulation	Rapture.	
Denver:	Accent,	1980.
Berkouwer,	G.	C.	
The	Return	of	Christ.	
Trans.	by	James	Van	Oosterom.
Ed.	by	Marlin	J.	Van	Elderen.	Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1972.
Clouse,	F.	G.	“Rapture	of	the	Church.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	908–10.
Dumbrell,	William	J.	
The	Search	for	Order:	Biblical	Eschatology	in
Focus.	
Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1992.
Erickson,	Millard.	
Contemporary	Options	in	Eschatology.	
Grand	Rapids:
Baker,	1977.
Gundry,	R.	H.	
The	Church	and	the	Tribulation.	
Grand	Rapids:
Zondervan,	1973.
Hoekema,	Anthony	A.	
The	Bible	and	the	Future.	
Grand	Rapids:
Eerdmans,	1979,	pp.	109–238.
Ladd,	George	Eldon.	
The	Blessed	Hope.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1956.
Lightner,	Robert	P.	
The	Last	Days	Handbook:	A	Comprehensive	Guide	to
Understanding	the	Different	Views	of	Prophecy.	Who	Believes	What
About	Prophecy	and	Why.	
Nashville,	Tenn.:	Thomas	Nelson,	1990.
Rosenthal,	Marvin.	
The	Pre-Wrath	Rapture	of	the	Church.	
Nashville,
Tenn.:	Thomas	Nelson,	1990.
Travis,	S.	H.	“Eschatology.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	228–31.
Van	Gemeren,	Willem.	
The	Progress	of	Redemption.	
Grand	Rapids:
Zondervan,	1988.
Van	Kampen,	Robert.	
The	Sign.	
Wheaton,	Ill.:	Crossway,	1992.
Vos,	Geerhardus.	
The	Pauline	Eschatology.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,
1961.
Walvoord,	John	F.	
The	Blessed	Hope	and	the	Tribulation.	
Grand	Rapids:
Zondervan,	1976.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
1
	Thessalonians	4:15–18:	
For	this	we	declare	to	you	by	the	word	of	the	Lord,
that	we	who	are	alive,	who	are	left	until	the	coming	of	the	Lord,	shall	not
precede	those	who	have	fallen	asleep.	For	the	Lord	himself	will	descend	from
heaven	with	a	cry	of	command,	with	the	archangel’s	call,	and	with	the	sound
of	the	trumpet	of	God.	And	the	dead	in	Christ	will	rise	first;	then	we	who	are
alive,	who	are	left,	shall	be	caught	up	together	with	them	in	the	clouds	to	meet
the	Lord	in	the	air;	and	so	we	shall	always	be	with	the	Lord.	Therefore
comfort	one	another	with	these	words.
HYMN
“Lo!	He	Comes,	With	Clouds	Descending”
This	song	vividly	pictures	the	event	of	Christ’s	return,	with	millions
of	believers	coming	with	him	and	many	more	on	earth	welcoming
him	as	he	comes.	The	“clouds”	with	which	Christ	comes,
mentioned	in	the	first	line	of	the	hymn,	are	the	clouds	of	God’s
glory.	The	hymn	does	not	hesitate	(in	v.	
3)	to	portray	brilliantly	the
shaking	of	the	heavens	and	the	earth	and	the	fact	that	unbelievers
will	be	called	to	judgment.	It	ends	with	a	dramatic	stanza	directly
addressing	Jesus	himself,	asking	him	to	come	quickly	and	reign.
(Use	tune	known	as	“Sicilian	Mariners.”)
Lo!	He	comes,	with	clouds	descending,	once	for	favored	sinners	slain;
Thousand	thousand	saints	attending	swell	the	triumph	of	his	train:
Alleluia!	Alleluia!	God	appears	on	earth	to	reign.
Ev’ry	eye	shall	now	behold	him,	robed	in	dreadful	majesty;
Those	who	set	at	naught	and	sold	him,	pierced,	and	nailed	him	to	the
tree,
Deeply	wailing,	deeply	wailing,	shall	the	true	Messiah	see.
Ev’ry	island,	sea,	and	mountain,	heav’n	and	earth,	shall	flee	away;
All	who	hate	him	must,	confounded,	hear	the	trump	proclaim	the
Day;
Come	to	judgment!	Come	to	judgment!	Come	to	judgment,	come
away!
Now	redemption,	long	expected,	see	in	solemn	pomp	appear!
All	his	saints,	by	man	rejected,	now	shall	meet	him	in	the	air:
Alleluia!	Alleluia!	See	the	Day	of	God	appear!
Yea,	amen!	Let	all	adore	thee,	high	on	thine	eternal	throne;
Savior,	take	the	pow’r	and	glory,	claim	the	kingdom	for	thine	own:
O	come	quickly;	O	come	quickly;	alleluia!	Come,	Lord,	come.
AUTHORS:	CHARLES	WESLEY,	1758	(STANZAS	1,	2,	5)	
AND	JOHN	CENNICK,	1752	(STANZAS	3,	4)
Alternative	hymn:	“Rejoice,	All	Ye	Believers”
NOTES
1
The	term	
parousia	
is	used	in	theology	to	mean	“second	coming”	(of	Christ).	This	term	comes	from	the	Greek	word	for	“coming”
(
parousia
)	which	is	used	to	refer	to	Christ’s	second	coming	in	James	5:8	and	several	other	New	Testament	passages.	Because
parousia	
is	not	a	commonly	used	term	in	ordinary	English,	I	have	not	used	it	in	this	book.
2
The	word	translated	“awaiting”	here	(
prosdechomai
)	has	a	nuance	of	earnest	or	eager	expectation:	it	is	used	of	Joseph	of
Arimathea,	who	was	“looking	for	the	kingdom	of	God”	(Mark	15:43;	Luke	23:51)	and	of	righteous	Simeon	who	was	“looking	for
the	consolation	of	Israel”	(Luke	2:25).
3
The	word	here	translated	“await”	is	
apekdechomai,	
“await	eagerly”	(note	its	use	in	this	sense	in	Rom.	8:19,	23;	1	Cor.	1:7;	Gal.
5:5).
4
BAGD,	p.	
896,	3.
5
Their	attempt	to	save	face	by	claiming	that	Jesus	actually	did	return	on	October	1,	1914,	in	an	invisible	way,	is	incorrect	because
it	denies	the	visible,	bodily	nature	of	Christ’s	return	that	is	so	clearly	specified	in	several	passages	quoted	above.
6
Even	in	the	“enlightened”	twentieth	century,	such	alarms	can	be	persuasive	to	many	people.	In	the	summer	of	1988	a	former
rocket	scientist	with	impressive	academic	credentials	circulated	a	booklet	claiming	that	Jesus	would	return	on	September	12,
1988,	and	tens	of	thousands	of	copies	of	the	book	found	their	way	around	the	United	States	and	to	various	parts	of	the	world.	I
was	surprised	to	find	that	some	otherwise	sober	Christian	friends	had	read	it	and	were	alarmed,	and	to	hear	that	some	Christians	in
our	community	had	pulled	their	children	out	of	school	in	order	to	be	together	as	a	family	when	Christ	came	back.	When	the
prediction	failed,	the	author,	Edgar	Whisenant,	revised	his	prediction,	saying	his	calculations	were	one	year	off	and	Christ	would
return	instead	on	September	1,	1989	(or	one	day	earlier	or	later),	or,	if	not	then,	on	Rosh	Hashanah	1990	or	1991	or	1992,	or,	at
the	latest,	September	15–17,	1993.	Of	course,	those	predictions	also	failed.	But	many	lives	were	disrupted	and	many	people	had
false	expectations	aroused	and	then	dashed	by	the	publication	of	this	booklet	and	its	sequel.	See	Edgar	Whisenant,	
88	Reasons
Why	the	Rapture	Will	Be	in	1988	
(Nashville,	Tenn.:	World	Bible	Society,	1988),	and	Edgar	Whisenant	and	Greg	Brewer,	
The
Final	Shout:	Rapture	Report	1989	
(Nashville,	Tenn.:	World	Bible	Society,	1989).
7
In	this	chapter,	it	must	be	made	clear	that	I	am	
not	
using	
imminent	
as	a	technical	term	for	a	pre-tribulational	rapture	position
(explained	below),	but	simply	to	mean	that	Christ	could	return	at	any	day,	or	even	any	hour.
Furthermore,	I	am	not	using	the	word	
imminent	
to	mean	that	Christ	
certainly	will	
come	soon	(for	then	the	verses	teaching
imminence	would	have	been	untrue	when	they	were	written).	I	am	using	the	word	
imminent	
to	mean	that	Christ	
could	
come	and
might	
come	at	any	time,	and	that	we	are	to	be	prepared	for	him	to	come	at	any	day.	(Others	define	
imminent	
more	broadly,	taking
it	to	mean	that	Christ	could	come	in	any	generation.	I	am	not	using	the	term	in	that	way	in	this	chapter.)
8
George	Eldon	Ladd,	
A	Commentary	on	the	Revelation	of	John	
(Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1972),	p.	
22.
9
Berkhof,	
Systematic	Theology,	
p.	696.	He	lists	several	events,	such	as	the	preaching	of	the	gospel	to	all	nations,	the	conversion	of
the	fullness	of	Israel,	the	great	tribulation,	the	revelation	of	the	antichrist,	and	a	remarkable	conjunction	of	many	ominous	signs
and	wonders	(wars,	famines,	earthquakes,	false	prophets	doing	miracles,	and	fearful	signs	in	the	sun,	moon,	and	stars),	all	of
which	he	discusses	on	pp.	697–703.
10
The	Greek	word	translated	“full	inclusion”	here	is	
plērōma,	
“fullness.”	This	future	full	inclusion	of	Israel	among	God’s	people
is	sometimes	also	called	the	“fullness”	of	Israel.
11
Louis	Berkhof	also	mentions	Matt.	25:19,	in	which	the	master	returned	“after	a	long	time,”	and	Matt.	25:5,	which	speaks	of	the
delay	of	the	bridegroom’s	return	(
Systematic	Theology,	
p.	697).	But	both	passages	are	vague	as	to	the	exact	length	of	time,	and
both	would	be	consistent	even	with	a	delay	of	ten	or	twenty	years	after	Jesus	returned	to	heaven.
12
I	have	not	listed	“wars	and	rumors	of	wars”	and	“famines	and	earthquakes	in	various	places”	(Matt.	24:6–7)	as	signs	that	must
precede	Christ’s	return,	because	they	have	been	present	throughout	history,	and	because	they	are	not	given	by	Jesus	as	signs	that
immediately	precede	his	return,	but	as	events	that	come	before	those	signs,	as	“the	beginning	of	the	birth-pangs”	(Matt.	24:8).
Nevertheless,	an	intensification	of	these	things	may	well	indicate	the	beginning	of	the	last	days,	with	other	signs	soon	to	follow.
13
Those	who	hold	to	this	view	object	to	the	characterizing	of	it	as	two	second	comings	and	prefer	to	speak	of	two	aspects	of	the
same	second	coming,	but	since	these	two	comings	are	separated	by	an	interval	of	at	least	seven	years,	it	does	not	seem	inaccurate
to	characterize	the	view	as	holding	to	two	second	comings.
14
This	view	is	the	pre-tribulational	view,	often	referred	to	as	the	pre-tribulational	rapture	view,	since	those	who	hold	this	view
often	refer	to	Christ’s	first,	secret	return	to	take	Christians	out	of	the	world	as	the	
“rapture”	
(from	Lat.	
rapio,	
“to	seize,	snatch,
carry	away”).	This	view	is	discussed	in	
chapter	55
.
15
See	
chapter	55
,	for	an	analysis	of	the	pretribulational	premillennial	view	of	Christ’s	return.
16
See	the	end	of	
chapter	54
	for	a	discussion	of	the	view	that	it	is	unlikely	but	possible	that	all	the	signs	preceding	Christ’s	return
have	already	been	fulfilled.
17
R.	T.	France,	
The	Gospel	According	to	Matthew,	TNTC	
(Leicester:	Inter-Varsity	Press,	Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1985),	p.	
339,
says	of	Jesus’	statement	that	“this	gospel	of	the	kingdom	will	be	preached	throughout	the	whole	world,	as	a	testimony	to	all
nations”	(Matt.	24:12),	the	following:	“The	
world	
is	
oikoumenē,	
lit.	‘the	inhabited	area’,	a	standard	term	originally	for	the	Greek
world	(as	opposed	to	barbarians),	then	for	the	Roman	Empire,	and	subsequently	for	the	whole	of	the	then	known	world;	it	is	thus
not	so	much	a	geographical	term	that	must	include	every	area	and	community	now	known	to	be	on	earth,	but	rather	an	indication
of	the	universal	offer	of	the	gospel	
to	all	nations,	
i.e.,	outside	the	confines	of	the	Jewish	community.	.	.	In	one	sense	Paul	could
claim	long	before	A.D.	70	to	have	‘fully	preached	the	gospel’	in	a	large	area	of	Asia	and	Europe	(Rom.	15:19)	and	at	many	times
since	then	similar	claims	could	have	been	made	with	reference	to	an	area	far	wider	than	the	
oikoumenē
	known	in	Jesus’	time.”
18
See	description	of	these	events	in	France,	
Matthew,	
pp.	340–41,	with	reference	to	Josephus,	
Jewish	War	
5.512–18.
19
France,	
Matthew,	
pp.	343–44.
20
The	difficulty	in	France’s	position	is	seen	in	the	fact	that	he	must	take	this	seemingly	very	clear	prediction	of	Christ’s	return	to
earth	as	a	prediction	of	the	destruction	of	the	Jewish	temple	in	A.D.	70.	He	says	that	Matt.	24:30	speaks	of	“coming	to	God	to
receive	vindication	and	authority,”	and	therefore	indicates	not	Christ’s	return	in	the	flesh,	but	the	vindication	of	his	authority	“over
the	Jewish	establishment	which	has	rejected	him”	when	the	temple	is	destroyed	in	A.D.	70	(ibid.,	p.	
344).
21
However,	John	says,	“as	you	have	heard	that	antichrist	is	coming,	so	now	many	antichrists	have	come”	(1	John	2:18),	and	he
speaks	of	“the	spirit	of	antichrist,”	which,	he	says,	“is	in	the	world	already”	(1	John	4:3).	Therefore,	even	if	these	previous
persecutors	of	the	church	were	not	
the	
antichrist,	many	of	them	may	have	been	precursors	of	the	final	antichrist.
22
It	might	be	argued	that	Paul	did	not	want	the	Thessalonian	church	to	expect	that	Christ	could	return	at	any	time,	since	he	writes
them	“not	to	be	quickly	shaken	in	mind	or	excited,	either	by	spirit	or	by	word,	or	by	letter	purporting	to	be	from	us,	to	the	effect
that	the	day	of	the	Lord	has	come”	(2	Thess.	2:2).	He	then	goes	on	to	say,	“Let	no	one	deceive	you	in	any	way;	for	that	day	will
not	come,	unless	the	rebellion	comes	first,	and	the	man	of	lawlessness	is	revealed”	(2	Thess.	2:3).	Someone	might	ask	whether
Paul	is	not	reasoning	as	follows:	you	know	that	the	man	of	lawlessness	has	not	yet	appeared;	therefore,	you	know	that	Christ	has
not	yet	come.	And	Christ	will	not	come	until	this	man	of	lawlessness	appears	on	the	scene.
But	it	must	be	noted	that	Paul	does	not	tell	the	Thessalonians	that	Christ	could	not	come	at	anytime.	He	does	not	tell	them	that
they	should	fail	to	be	ready	or	fail	to	expect	Christ’s	return.	He	simply	tells	them	that	Christ’s	return	
has	not	already	occurred,
which	is	something	far	different.	And	the	reason	he	gives	is	not	only	the	fact	that	the	man	of	lawlessness	must	first	appear,	but
also	that	when	Christ	returns	he	will	defeat	this	man	of	lawlessness	and	destroy	him:	“And	then	the	lawless	one	will	be	revealed,
and	the	Lord	Jesus	will	slay	him	with	the	breath	of	his	mouth	and	destroy	him	by	his	appearing	and	coming”	
(2	Thess.	2:8).	It	is
not	just	that	they	have	not	seen	the	man	of	lawlessness—they	have	not	seen	him	appear	
and	be	destroyed	by	Jesus	at	his	coming.
The	conclusion	is	that	Christ	has	not	come,	because	he	has	not	come	destroying	this	man	of	lawlessness.	Yet	he	certainly	could
have	come	at	any	time,	even	in	the	context	of	2	Thessalonians,	and	immediately	destroyed	the	currently	reigning	Roman	emperor
(for	Roman	emperors	regularly	claimed	to	be	God	and	to	be	worthy	of	worship,	and	John	himself	said	that	“many	antichrists	have
come,”	1	John	2:18).
23
I	thank	God	that	I	have	driven	thirty	years	without	a	major	auto	accident,	and	I	pray	and	expect	that	I	will	not	have	one,	but	I
still	buckle	my	seatbelt	every	time	I	get	in	the	car.	I	prepare	for	an	event	that	I	think	to	be	unlikely,	but	nonetheless	possible.
Similarly,	I	
think	
that	many	of	the	signs	will	have	yet	greater	fulfillment,	and	that	it	is	unlikely	that	Jesus	will	return	within	the
next	few	days	or	weeks.	In	fact,	I	am	writing	this	book,	which	will	not	be	published	for	many	more	months,	on	the	assumption
that	Jesus	will	not	have	returned	by	then.	Nonetheless,	I	frequently	examine	my	heart	and	my	life	to	see	if	there	is	anything	of
which	I	would	be	ashamed	when	Jesus	returns,	because	I	want	to	be	ready	for	him	to	return	at	any	moment,	even	at	a	moment	I	do
not	expect.
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	55
The	Millennium
What	is	the	millennium?	When	does	it	occur?	Will	Christians	go
through	the	Great	Tribulation?
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
The	word	
millennium	
means	“one	thousand	years”	(from	Lat.
millennium,	
“thousand	years”).	The	term	comes	from	Revelation
20:4–5,	where	it	says	that	certain	people	“came	to	life,	and	reigned
with	Christ	
a	thousand	years.	
The	rest	of	the	dead	did	not	come	to
life	until	
the	thousand	years	
were	ended.”	Just	prior	to	this
statement,	we	read	that	an	angel	came	down	from	heaven	and
seized	the	devil	“and	bound	him	for	
a	thousand	years,	
and	threw
him	into	the	pit,	and	shut	it	and	sealed	it	over	him,	that	he	should
deceive	the	nations	no	more,	till	
the	thousand	years	
were	ended”
(Rev.	20:2–3).
Throughout	the	history	of	the	church	there	have	been	three	major
views	on	the	time	and	nature	of	this	“millennium.”
A.	Explanation	of	the	Three	Major	Views
1.
	Amillennialism.
	The	first	view	to	be	explained	here,	amillennialism,	is
really	the	simplest.	It	can	be	pictured	as	in	figure	55.1:
AMILLENNIALISM
Figure	55.1
According	to	this	position	the	passage	in	Revelation	20:1–10
describes	the	present	church	age.	This	is	an	age	in	which	Satan’s
influence	over	the	nations	has	been	greatly	reduced	so	that	the
gospel	can	be	preached	to	the	whole	world.	Those	who	are	said	to
be	reigning	with	Christ	for	the	thousand	years	are	Christians	who
have	died	and	are	already	reigning	with	Christ	in	heaven.	Christ’s
reign	in	the	millennium,	according	to	this	view,	is	not	a	bodily	reign
here	on	earth	but	rather	the	heavenly	reign	he	spoke	of	when	he
said,	“All	authority	in	heaven	and	on	earth	has	been	given	to	me”
(Matt.	28:18).
This	view	is	called	“amillennial”	because	it	maintains	that	there	is
no	future	millennium	yet	to	come.	Since	amillennialists	believe	that
Revelation	20	is	now	being	fulfilled	in	the	church	age,	they	hold
that	the	“millennium”	described	there	is	currently	happening.	The
exact	duration	of	the	church	age	cannot	be	known,	and	the
expression	“thousand	years”	is	simply	a	figure	of	speech	for	a	long
period	of	time	in	which	God’s	perfect	purposes	will	be
accomplished.
According	to	this	position,	the	present	church	age	will	continue
until	the	time	of	Christ’s	return	(see	figure	55.1).	When	Christ
returns,	there	will	be	a	resurrection	of	both	believers	and
unbelievers.	The	bodies	of	believers	will	rise	to	be	reunited	with
their	spirits	and	enter	into	full	enjoyment	of	heaven	forever.
Unbelievers	will	be	raised	to	face	the	final	judgment	and	eternal
condemnation.	Believers	will	also	stand	before	the	judgment	seat	of
Christ	(2	Cor.	5:10),	but	this	judgment	will	only	determine	degrees
of	reward	in	heaven,	for	only	unbelievers	will	be	condemned
eternally.	At	this	time	also	the	new	heavens	and	new	earth	will
begin.	Immediately	after	the	final	judgment,	the	eternal	state	will
commence	and	continue	forever.
This	scheme	is	quite	simple	because	all	of	the	end	time	events
happen	at	once,	immediately	after	Christ’s	return.	Some
amillennialists	say	that	Christ	could	return	at	any	time,	while	others
(such	as	Berkhof)	argue	that	certain	signs	have	yet	to	be	fulfilled.
2.	Postmillennialism.
	The	prefix	
post-	
means	“after.”	According	to	this	view,
Christ	will	return	
after	
the	millennium.	The	postmillennial	view	may	be
represented	as	in	figure	55.2.
According	to	this	view,	the	progress	of	the	gospel	and	the	growth	of
the	church	will	gradually	increase,	so	that	a	larger	and	larger
proportion	of	the	world’s	population	will	be	Christians.	As	a	result,
there	will	be	significant	Christian	influences	on	society,	society	will
more	and	more	function	according	to	God’s	standards,	and
gradually	a	“millennial	age”	of	peace	and	righteousness	will	occur
on	the	earth.	This	“millennium”	will	last	for	a	long	period	of	time
(not	necessarily	a	literal	one	thousand	years),	and	finally,	
at	the	end
of	this	period,	Christ	will	return	to	earth,	
believers	and	unbelievers
will	be	raised,	the	final	judgment	will	occur,	and	there	will	be	a	new
heaven	and	new	earth.	We	will	then	enter	into	the	eternal	state.
POSTMILLENNIALISM
Figure	55.2
The	primary	characteristic	of	postmillennialism	is	that	it	is	very
optimistic	about	the	power	of	the	gospel	to	change	lives	and	bring
about	much	good	in	the	world.	Belief	in	postmillennialism	tends	to
increase	in	times	when	the	church	is	experiencing	great	revival,
when	there	is	an	absence	of	war	and	international	conflict,	and
when	it	appears	that	great	progress	is	being	made	in	overcoming	the
evil	and	suffering	in	the	world.	But	postmillennialism	in	its	most
responsible	form	is	not	based	simply	on	the	observation	of	events	in
the	world	around	us,	but	on	arguments	from	various	Scripture
passages,	which	will	be	examined	below.
3.	Premillennialism.
a.	Classic	or	Historic	Premillennialism:
	The	prefix	“pre-”	means	“before,”
and	the	“premillennial”	position	says	that	Christ	will	come	back	
before	
the
millennium.
1
	This	viewpoint	has	a	long	history	from	the	earliest	centuries
onward.	It	may	be	represented	as	in	figure	55.3.
According	to	this	viewpoint,	the	present	church	age	will	continue
until,	as	it	nears	the	end,	a	time	of	great	tribulation	and	suffering
comes	on	the	earth	(T	in	the	figure	above	stands	for	tribulation).
2
After	that	time	of	tribulation	
at	the	end	of	the	church	age,	Christ
will	return	to	earth	to	establish	a	millennial	kingdom.	
When	he
comes	back,	believers	who	have	died	will	be	raised	from	the	dead,
their	bodies	will	be	reunited	with	their	spirits,	and	
these	believers
will	reign	with	Christ	on	earth	for	one	thousand	years.	
(Some
premillennialists	take	this	to	be	a	literal	one	thousand	years,	and
others	understand	it	to	be	a	symbolic	expression	for	a	long	period	of
time.)	During	this	time,	Christ	will	be	physically	present	on	the
earth	in	his	resurrected	body,	and	will	reign	as	King	over	the	entire
earth.	The	believers	who	have	been	raised	from	the	dead,	and	those
who	were	on	earth	when	Christ	returns,	will	receive	glorified
resurrection	bodies	that	will	never	die,	and	in	these	resurrection
bodies	they	will	live	on	the	earth	and	reign	with	Christ.	Of	the
unbelievers	who	remain	on	earth,	many	(but	not	all)	will	turn	to
Christ	and	be	saved.	Jesus	will	reign	in	perfect	righteousness	and
there	will	be	peace	throughout	the	earth.	Many	premillennialists
hold	that	the	earth	will	be	renewed	and	we	will	in	fact	see	the	new
heavens	and	new	earth	at	this	time	(but	it	is	not	essential	to
premillennialism	to	hold	to	this,	for	one	could	be	a	premillennialist
and	hold	that	the	new	heavens	and	new	earth	will	not	occur	until
after	the	final	judgment).	At	the	beginning	of	this	time	Satan	will	be
bound	and	cast	into	the	bottomless	pit	so	that	he	will	have	no
influence	on	the	earth	during	the	millennium	(Rev.	20:1–3).
CLASSIC	OR	HISTORIC	PREMILLENNIALISM
Figure	55.3
According	to	the	premillennial	viewpoint,	at	the	end	of	the
thousand	years	Satan	will	be	loosed	from	the	bottomless	pit	and
will	join	forces	with	many	unbelievers	who	have	submitted
outwardly	to	Christ’s	reign	but	have	inwardly	been	seething	in
rebellion	against	him.	Satan	will	gather	these	rebellious	people	for
battle	against	Christ,	but	they	will	be	decisively	defeated.	Christ
will	then	raise	from	the	dead	all	the	unbelievers	who	have	died
throughout	history,	and	they	will	stand	before	him	for	final
judgment.	After	the	final	judgment	has	occurred,	believers	will
enter	into	the	eternal	state.
It	seems	that	premillennialism	has	tended	to	increase	in	popularity
as	the	church	has	experienced	persecution,	and	as	suffering	and	evil
have	increased	in	the	earth.	But,	as	in	the	case	of	postmillennialism,
the	arguments	for	the	premillennial	position	are	not	based	on	an
observation	of	current	events,	but	on	specific	passages	of	Scripture,
especially	(but	not	exclusively)	Revelation	20:1–10.
b.	Pretribulational	Premillennialism	(or	Dispensational
Premillennialism):
	Another	variety	of	premillennialism	has	gained
widespread	popularity	in	the	nineteenth	and	twentieth	centuries,	particularly
in	the	United	Kingdom	and	the	United	States.	According	to	this	position,
Christ	will	return	not	only	before	the	millennium	(Christ’s	return	is
pre
millennial),	but	also	it	will	occur	
before	
the	great	tribulation	(Christ’s
return	is	
pre
tribulational).	This	position	is	similar	to	the	classical
premillennial	position	mentioned	above,	but	with	one	important	difference:	it
will	add	another	return	of	Christ	before	his	return	to	reign	on	earth	in	the
millennium.	This	return	is	thought	to	be	a	secret	return	of	Christ	to	take
believers	out	of	the	world.
3
	The	pretribulational	premillennial	view	may	be
represented	as	in	figure	55.4.
According	to	this	view,	the	church	age	will	continue	until,	
suddenly,
unexpectedly,	and	secretly,	Christ	will	return	part	way	to	earth,	and
then	will	call	believers	to	himself:	
“The	dead	in	Christ	will	rise
first;	then	we	who	are	alive,	who	are	left,	shall	be	caught	up
together	with	them	in	the	clouds	to	meet	the	Lord	in	the	air”	(1
Thess.	4:16–17).	
Christ	will	then	return	to	heaven	with	the
believers	who	have	been	removed	from	the	earth.	When	that
happens,	there	will	be	a	great	tribulation	on	the	earth	
for	a	period
of	seven	years.
4
During	this	seven-year	period	of	tribulation,	many	of	the	signs	that
were	predicted	to	precede	Christ’s	return	will	be	fulfilled.
5
	The
great	ingathering	of	the	fullness	of	the	Jewish	people	will	occur,	as
they	trust	Christ	as	their	Messiah.	In	the	midst	of	great	suffering
there	will	also	be	much	effective	evangelism,	especially	carried	out
by	the	new	Jewish	Christians.	
At	the	end	of	the	tribulation,	Christ
will	then	come	back	with	his	saints	to	reign	on	the	earth	for	one
thousand	years.	
After	this	millennial	period	there	will	be	a
rebellion,	resulting	in	the	final	defeat	of	Satan	and	his	forces,	and
then	will	come	the	resurrection	of	unbelievers,	the	last	judgment,
and	the	beginning	of	the	eternal	state.
PRETRIBULATIONAL	PREMILLENNIALISM
Figure	55.4
One	further	characteristic	of	pretribulational	premillennialism
should	be	mentioned:	This	view	is	found	almost	exclusively	among
dispensationalists	who	wish	to	maintain	a	clear	distinction	between
the	church	and	Israel.	This	pretribulational	viewpoint	allows	the
distinction	to	be	maintained,	since	the	church	is	taken	out	of	the
world	before	the	widespread	conversion	of	the	Jewish	people.
These	Jewish	people	therefore	remain	a	distinct	group	from	the
church.	Another	characteristic	of	pretribulational	premillennialism
is	its	insistence	on	interpreting	biblical	prophecies	“literally	where
possible.”	This	especially	applies	to	prophecies	in	the	Old
Testament	concerning	Israel.	Those	who	hold	this	view	argue	that
those	prophecies	of	God’s	future	blessing	to	Israel	will	yet	be
fulfilled	among	the	Jewish	people	themselves;	they	are	not	to	be
“spiritualized”	by	finding	their	fulfillment	in	the	church.	Finally,
one	attractive	feature	about	pretribulational	premillennialism	is	that
it	allows	people	to	insist	that	Christ’s	return	could	occur	“at	any
moment”	and	therefore	does	justice	to	the	full	force	of	the	passages
that	encourage	us	to	be	ready	for	Christ’s	return,	while	it	still	allows
for	a	very	literal	fulfillment	of	the	signs	preceding	Christ’s	return,
since	it	says	these	will	come	to	pass	in	the	tribulation.
Before	examining	the	arguments	for	these	three	(or	four)	positions,
it	is	important	to	realize	that	the	interpretation	of	the	details	of
prophetic	passages	regarding	future	events	is	often	a	complex	and
difficult	task	involving	many	variable	factors.	Therefore	the	degree
of	certainty	that	attaches	to	our	conclusions	in	this	area	will	be	less
than	with	many	other	doctrines.	Even	though	I	will	argue	for	one
position	(classical	premillennialism),	I	also	think	it	important	for
evangelicals	to	recognize	that	this	area	of	study	is	complex	and	to
extend	a	large	measure	of	grace	to	others	who	hold	different	views
regarding	the	millennium	and	the	tribulation	period.
B.	A	Consideration	of	the	Arguments	for	Amillennialism
In	favor	of	the	amillennial	view,	the	following	arguments	are
advanced:
1.	When	we	look	through	the	whole	of	the	Bible,	amillennialists
will	say,	
only	one	passage	
(Rev.	20:1–6)	appears	to	teach	a	future
earthly	millennial	rule	of	Christ,	and	that	passage	is	itself	obscure.
It	is	unwise	to	base	such	a	major	doctrine	on	one	passage	of
uncertain	and	widely	disputed	interpretation.
But	how	do	amillennialists	understand	Revelation	20:1–6?	The
amillennial	interpretation	sees	this	passage	as	referring	to	the
present	church	age.	The	passage	reads	as	follows:
Then	I	saw	an	angel	coming	down	from	heaven,	holding	in	his	hand	the
key	of	the	bottomless	pit	and	a	great	chain.	And	he	seized	the	dragon,
that	ancient	serpent,	who	is	the	Devil	and	Satan,	and	
bound	him	for	a
thousand	years,	
and	threw	him	into	the	pit,	and	shut	it	and	sealed	it
over	him,	that	he	should	deceive	the	nations	no	more,	till	the	thousand
years	were	ended.	After	that	he	must	be	loosed	for	a	little	while.
Then	I	saw	thrones,	and	seated	on	them	were	those	to	whom	judgment
was	committed.	Also	I	saw	the	souls	of	those	who	had	been	beheaded
for	their	testimony	to	Jesus	and	for	the	word	of	God,	and	who	had	not
worshiped	the	beast	or	its	image	and	had	not	received	its	mark	on
their	foreheads	or	their	hands.	
They	came	to	life,	and	reigned	with
Christ	a	thousand	years.	
The	rest	of	the	dead	did	not	
come	to	life	
until
the	thousand	years	were	ended.	This	is	the	first	resurrection.	Blessed
and	holy	is	he	who	shares	in	the	first	resurrection!	Over	such	the
second	death	has	no	power,	but	they	shall	be	priests	of	God	and	of
Christ,	and	
they	shall	reign	with	him	a	thousand	years.
According	to	the	amillennial	interpretation
6
	the	binding	of	Satan	in
verses	1–2	is	the	binding	that	occurred	during	Jesus’	earthly
ministry.	He	spoke	of	binding	the	strong	man	in	order	that	he	may
plunder	his	house	(Matt.	12:29)	and	said	that	the	Spirit	of	God	was
at	that	time	present	in	power	to	triumph	over	demonic	forces:	“If	it
is	by	the	Spirit	of	God	that	I	cast	out	demons,	then	the	kingdom	of
God	has	come	upon	you”	(Matt.	12:28).	Similarly,	with	respect	to
the	breaking	of	Satan’s	power,	Jesus	said	during	his	ministry,	“I	saw
Satan	fall	like	lightning	from	heaven”	(Luke	10:18).
The	amillennialist	argues	that	this	binding	of	Satan	in	Revelation
20:1–3	is	for	a	specific	purpose:	
“that	he	should	deceive	the	nations
no	more”	
(v.	3).	This	is	exactly	what	happened	when	Jesus	came
and	the	gospel	began	to	be	proclaimed	not	simply	to	Jews	but,	after
Pentecost,	to	all	the	nations	of	the	world.	In	fact,	the	worldwide
missionary	activity	of	the	church,	and	the	presence	of	the	church	in
most	or	all	of	the	nations	of	the	world,	shows	that	the	power	that
Satan	had	in	the	Old	Testament,	to	“deceive	the	nations”	and	keep
them	in	darkness,	has	been	broken.
On	the	amillennialist	view	the	scene	described	in	verse	4	occurs	in
heaven:	John	said,	“I	saw	the	
souls	
of	those	who	had	been	beheaded
for	their	testimony	to	Jesus.	.	.	.	They	came	to	life,	and	reigned	with
Christ	a	thousand	years”	(v.	
4).	Since	John	sees	“souls”	and	not
physical	bodies,	it	is	argued,	this	scene	must	be	occurring	in
heaven.	When	the	text	says	that	“They	came	to	life”	it	does	not
mean	that	they	received	a	bodily	resurrection.	It	possibly	means
simply	that	“they	lived,”	since	the	aorist	verb	
ezēsan	
can	readily	be
interpreted	to	be	a	statement	of	an	event	that	occurred	over	a	long
period	of	time.	(The	verb	for	“they	reigned”	is	also	an	aorist
indicative	and	refers	to	an	occurrence	over	a	thousand	years,	so	the
verb	“they	lived”	should	have	a	similar	meaning.)	On	the	other
hand,	some	amillennial	interpreters	will	take	the	verb	
ezēsan	
to
mean	“they	came	to	life”	in	the	sense	of	coming	into	heavenly
existence	in	the	presence	of	Christ	and	beginning	to	reign	with	him
from	heaven.
According	to	this	view,	the	phrase	“first	resurrection”	(v.	
5)	refers
to	going	to	heaven	to	be	with	the	Lord.	This	is	not	a	bodily
resurrection	but	a	coming	into	the	presence	of	God	in	heaven.	In	a
similar	way,	when	verse	5	says,	“The	rest	of	the	dead	did	not	
come
to	life	
until	the	thousand	years	were	ended,	“this	is	understood	to
mean	they	did	not	come	into	God’s	presence	for	judgment	until	the
end	of	the	thousand	years.	So	in	both	verses	4	and	5,	the	phrase
“come	to	life”	means	“come	into	the	presence	of	God.”	(Another
amillennial	view	of	“first	resurrection”	is	that	it	refers	to	the
resurrection	of	Christ,	and	to	believers’	participation	in	Christ’s
resurrection	through	union	with	Christ.)
2.	A	second	argument	often	proposed	in	favor	of	amillennialism	is
the	fact	that	Scripture	teaches	only	
one	resurrection,	
when	both
believers	and	unbelievers	will	be	raised,	not	two	resurrections	(a
resurrection	of	believers	before	the	millennium	begins,	and	a
resurrection	of	unbelievers	to	judgment	after	the	end	of	the
millennium).	This	is	an	important	argument,	because	the
premillennial	view	requires	two	separate	resurrections,	separated	by
a	thousand	years.
Evidence	in	favor	of	only	one	resurrection	is	found	in	at	least	three
passages.	Jesus	says,	“
The	hour	is	coming	when	all	who	are	in	the
tombs	will	hear	his	voice	and	come	forth,	
those	who	have	done
good,	to	the	resurrection	of	life,	and	those	who	have	done	evil,	to
the	resurrection	of	judgment”	(John	5:28–29).	Here	Jesus	speaks	of
a	single	“hour”	when	both	believing	and	unbelieving	dead	will
come	forth	from	the	tombs.	Similarly,	when	Paul	is	on	trial	before
Felix	he	explains	that	he	has	a	hope	in	God	that	his	Jewish
opponents	also	accept	“that	
there	will	be	a	resurrection	of	both	the
just	and	the	unjust”	
(Acts	24:15).	Once	again,	he	speaks	of	a	single
resurrection	of	both	believers	and	unbelievers.	Finally,	we	read	in
Daniel:	“And	many	of	those	who	sleep	in	the	dust	of	the	earth	shall
awake,	some	to	everlasting	life,	and	some	to	shame	and	everlasting
contempt”	(Dan.	12:2).
3.	
The	idea	of	glorified	believers	and	sinners	living	on	earth
together	is	too	difficult	to	accept.	
Berkhof	says,	“It	is	impossible	to
understand	how	a	part	of	the	old	earth	and	of	sinful	humanity	can
exist	alongside	a	part	of	the	new	earth	and	of	a	humanity	that	is
glorified.	How	can	perfect	saints	in	glorified	bodies	have
communion	with	sinners	in	the	flesh?	How	can	glorified	sinners
live	in	this	sin-laden	atmosphere	and	amid	scenes	of	death	and
decay?”
7
4.	
If	Christ	comes	in	glory	to	reign	on	the	earth,	then	how	could
people	still	persist	in	sin?	
Once	Jesus	is	actually	present	in	his
resurrection	body	and	reigning	as	King	over	the	earth,	does	it	not
seem	highly	unlikely	that	people	would	still	reject	him,	and	that	evil
and	rebellion	would	grow	on	the	earth	until	eventually	Satan	could
gather	the	nations	for	battle	against	Christ?
8
5.	There	seems	to	be	no	convincing	
purpose	
for	such	a	millennium.
Once	the	church	age	has	ended	and	Christ	has	returned,	then	what
is	the	reason	for	delaying	the	start	of	the	eternal	state?
6.	In	conclusion,	amillennialists	say	that	Scripture	seems	to	indicate
that	
all	the	major	events	yet	to	come	
before	the	eternal	state	will
occur	at	once.	Christ	will	return,	there	will	be	one	resurrection	of
believers	and	unbelievers,	the	final	judgment	will	take	place,	and	a
new	heaven	and	new	earth	will	be	established.	Then	we	will	enter
immediately	into	the	eternal	state,	with	no	future	millennium.
9
At	this	point	we	can	respond	briefly	to	these	amillennialist
arguments,	though	on	some	points	a	fuller	answer	will	be	developed
in	the	arguments	for	premillennialism.
1.	In	response	to	the	objection	that	only	one	passage	teaches	a
future	earthly	millennium,	several	comments	can	be	made:
a.	The	Bible	only	needs	to	say	something	once	in	order	for	it	to	be
true	and	something	that	we	must	believe.	The	story	of	the	confusion
of	languages	at	the	tower	of	Babel,	for	example,	is	only	taught	in
Genesis	11:1–9,	yet	we	believe	it	to	be	true	because	Scripture
teaches	it.	Similarly,	even	if	only	one	passage	taught	a	future
millennial	reign	of	Christ,	we	still	should	believe	it.
Moreover,	it	is	not	surprising	that	this	doctrine	should	be	clearly
taught	in	the	book	of	Revelation.	There	was	somewhat	of	a	similar
situation	at	the	end	of	the	Old	Testament	era.	The	entire	Old
Testament	has	no	explicit	teaching	to	the	effect	that	the	Messiah
would	come	twice,	once	as	a	suffering	Messiah	who	would	die	and
rise	again,	earning	our	salvation,	and	then	later	as	a	conquering
King	to	rule	over	the	earth.	The	first	and	second	comings	of	Christ
may	be	hinted	at	in	the	Old	Testament	prophets,	but	they	are
nowhere	explicitly	taught,	because	God	did	not	deem	it	necessary
to	reveal	that	amount	of	detail	about	his	plan	of	redemption	before
it	happened.	Similarly,	in	several	of	the	Old	and	New	Testament
books	leading	up	to	the	time	of	the	writing	of	Revelation,	there	are
hints	
of	a	future	earthly	millennium	prior	to	the	eternal	state,	but	the
explicit	teaching	about	it	was	left	until	John	wrote	Revelation.
Since	Revelation	is	the	New	Testament	book	that	most	explicitly
teaches	about	things	yet	future,	it	is	appropriate	that	this	more
explicit	revelation	of	the	future	millennium	would	be	put	at	this
point	in	the	Bible.
b.	In	response	to	the	allegation	that	the	passage	that	teaches	a
millennium	is	obscure,	premillennialists	respond	that	they	do	not
find	it	obscure	at	all.	They	argue	that	one	advantage	of	the
premillennial	position	is	that	it	understands	Revelation	20:1–6	in	a
straightforward	sense:	the	text	says	that	Satan	will	be	bound	and
cast	into	the	bottomless	pit	for	a	thousand	years,	and	the
premillennialist	says	a	time	is	coming	when	Satan	will	be	bound
and	cast	into	a	bottomless	pit	for	a	thousand	years.	The	text	speaks
of	a	thousand-year	reign	of	Christ,	and	the	premillennialist	expects
a	future	thousand-year	reign	of	Christ	on	earth.	It	speaks	of	those
raised	in	the	“first	resurrection,”	and	the	premillennialist	says	that
there	will	be	a	first	resurrection	of	believers	who	are	“blessed	and
holy”	(Rev.	20:6)	and	a	second	resurrection	at	the	end	of	the
thousand	years	“for	the	rest	of	the	dead”	(v.	
5).	According	to
premillennialists,	“obscurity”	only	enters	the	passage	when	an
interpreter	tries	to	find	in	it	something	other	than	such	a
straightforward	interpretation.
c.	Finally,	many	premillennialists	argue	that	several	other	passages,
especially	in	the	Old	Testament,	require	us	to	believe	in	a	future
period	that	is	far	greater	than	the	present	age	but	that	still	falls	short
of	the	eternal	state	(see	Ps.	72:8–14;	Isa.	11:2–9;	65:20;	Zech.	14:6–
21;	1	Cor.	15:24;	Rev.	2:27;	12:5;	19:15).
10
	These	passages,	they
say,	portray	a	period	that	looks	very	much	like	the	millennium	as
they	understand	it.
d.	With	respect	to	the	interpretation	of	Revelation	20:1–6	as	given
by	amillennialists,	several	difficulties	arise.	Although	Matthew
12:28–29	and	Luke	10:18	do	speak	of	a	“binding”	of	Satan	during
Jesus’	earthly	ministry,	the	binding	of	Satan	described	in	Revelation
20	seems	to	be	much	more	extensive	than	that.	The	passage	does
not	simply	say	that	Satan	is	bound	at	this	time,	but	speaks	of	“the
bottomless	pit”	and	says	that	the	angel	that	came	down	from	heaven
“
threw	him	into	the	pit,	
and	
shut	it	
and	
sealed	it	over	him,	
that	he
should	deceive	the	nations	no	more,	till	the	thousand	years	were
ended”	(Rev.	20:2–3).	More	than	a	mere	binding	or	restriction	of
activity	is	in	view	here.	The	imagery	of	throwing	Satan	into	a	pit
and	shutting	it	and	sealing	it	over	him	gives	a	picture	of	total
removal	from	influence	on	the	earth.	To	say	that	Satan	is	now	in	a
bottomless	pit	that	is	shut	and	sealed	over	simply	does	not	fit	the
present	world	situation	during	the	church	age,	in	which	Satan’s
activity	is	still	very	strong,	in	which	he	“prowls	around	like	a
roaring	lion,	seeking	someone	to	devour”	(1	Peter	5:8),	in	which	he
can	fill	someone’s	heart	“to	lie	to	the	Holy	Spirit”	(Acts	5:3),	and	in
which	“what	pagans	sacrifice	they	offer	to	demons	and	not	to	God”
(1	Cor.	10:20).
Moreover,	even	after	the	binding	of	Satan	during	Jesus’	ministry,	it
remains	true	that	“the	god	of	this	world	has	blinded	the	minds	of
the	unbelievers,	to	keep	them	from	seeing	the	light	of	the	gospel	of
the	glory	of	Christ”	(2	Cor.	4:4).	This	is	why	Christians	still	must
contend	not	“against	flesh	and	blood,	but	against	the	principalities,
against	the	powers,	against	the	world	rulers	of	this	present	darkness,
against	the	spiritual	hosts	of	wickedness	in	the	heavenly	places”
(Eph.	6:12).	This	is	because	even	during	the	church	age,	though	the
gospel	is	able	to	come	with	triumph	and	break	down	the	forces	of
demonic	opposition	to	the	spread	of	the	kingdom	of	God,
nonetheless	Satan’s	influence	has	not	fully	been	removed	from	the
world:	“The	spirit	of	antichrist	.	.	.	is	in	the	world	already”	(1	John
4:3),	and,	in	fact,	“We	know	that	we	are	of	God,	and	
the	whole
world	is	in	the	power	of	the	evil	one”	
(1	John	5:19).	This	repeated
theme	in	the	New	Testament,	the	theme	of	Satan’s	continual	activity
on	earth	throughout	the	church	age,	makes	it	extremely	difficult	to
think	that	Satan	has	been	thrown	into	the	bottomless	pit,	and	it	has
been	shut	and	sealed	over	for	a	thousand	years.	That	imagery	can
only	speak	of	the	total	removal	of	Satan’s	active	influence	from	the
earth.
But	what	can	be	said	with	respect	to	the	fact	that	amillennialists	say
that	the	binding	and	imprisonment	of	Satan	in	Revelation	20	is	said
to	be	“that	he	should	
deceive	the	nations	no	more”	
(v.	3)?	Does	that
not	simply	mean	that	the	gospel	can	now	be	preached	effectively
among	the	nations?	While	the	phrase	might	mean	that,	it	seems
more	consistent	with	the	use	of	the	word	
deceived	
(Gk.	
planaō
),
especially	in	Revelation,	to	say	that	this	is	a	
deception	that	is	now
going	on	during	the	entire	church	age	
and	that	ends	only	when	the
millennium	begins.	Satan	is	called	the	one	“who	deceives	the	whole
world”	(Rev.	12:9	NASB),	and	the	sorcery	of	Babylon	is	said	to
have	“deceived”	“all	nations”	before	its	judgment	comes	(Rev.
18:23).
11
	Therefore	it	seems	more	appropriate	to	say	that	Satan	is
now	
still	deceiving	the	nations,	but	at	the	beginning	of	the
millennium	this	deceptive	influence	will	be	removed.	There	was	an
even	greater	deception	before	Christ	came,	but	there	is	still
significant	deception	that	remains	today.
The	fact	that	John	saw	“souls”	in	his	vision	does	not	require	that	the
scene	be	set	in	heaven.	Since	these	souls	are	persons	who	then
“came	to	life”	in	“the	first	resurrection”	we	should	see	these	as
people	
who	obtained	resurrection	bodies	and	who	began	to	reign	on
the	earth.	Moreover,	Revelation	20:1	indicates	that	the	scene	is
focused	on	events	on	the	earth,	for	it	says,	“Then	I	saw	an	angel
coming	down	from	heaven.”	
But	if	the	angel	came	down	from
heaven,	then	he	carries	out	his	activity	on	the	earth,	and	the	entire
scene	is	set	on	the	earth.
Some	amillennialists	argue	that	the	phrase	“came	to	life”	refers	to	a
coming	to	heavenly	existence	or	coming	into	the	presence	of	God.
But	it	must	be	asked,	Where	does	the	Greek	term	
zaō	
(“live”)	ever
take	that	meaning?	No	other	examples	of	that	word	in	the	New
Testament	take	the	sense,	“come	into	the	presence	of	God.”
Moreover,	amillennialist	interpretations	of	the	phrase	“first
resurrection”	are	unconvincing.	The	word	
resurrection	
(Gk.
anastasis
)	never	elsewhere	means	“going	to	heaven”	or	“going	into
the	presence	of	God,”	but	rather	signifies	a	bodily	resurrection.	This
is	the	sense	in	which	first-century	readers	would	have	understood
the	word.	The	other	amillennialist	view,	which	understands	“the
first	resurrection”	to	be	Christ’s	resurrection	(and	our	union	with
him)	does	not	seem	likely	because	those	who	“came	to	life”	are	the
ones	who	had	been	“beheaded	for	their	testimony	to	Jesus”	(v.	
4),
which	suggests	a	bodily	resurrection	after	death.
12
2.	Does	Scripture	teach	only	
one	
resurrection,	so	that	believers	and
unbelievers	will	be	raised	at	the	same	time?	It	is	hard	to	accept	this
when	we	realize	that	Revelation	20	explicitly	speaks	about	“the	
first
resurrection,”	thus	implying	that	there	will	be	a	second	resurrection
as	well.	Speaking	of	those	who	came	to	life	and	reigned	with	Christ
a	thousand	years,	we	read,	“This	is	the	first	resurrection.	Blessed
and	holy	is	he	who	shares	in	the	first	resurrection!	Over	such	the
second	death	has	no	power”	(vv.	5–6).	The	passage	distinguishes
those	who	share	in	this	first	resurrection	and	are	blessed	from
others	who	do	not	share	in	it.	They	are	“the	rest	of	the	dead”	and
the	implication	is	that	“the	second	death”	(that	is,	facing	final
judgment	and	being	condemned	to	eternal	punishment	away	from
the	presence	of	God)	does	have	power	over	them,	and	they	will
experience	it.	But	if	this	passage	clearly	teaches	a	first	resurrection,
and	the	fact	that	the	rest	of	the	dead	will	come	to	life	at	the	end	of	a
thousand	years,	then	there	is	clear	teaching	on	two	separate
resurrections	here	in	Revelation	20.
As	for	the	other	passages	that	amillennialists	claim	to	support	the
view	that	there	is	only	one	resurrection,	it	must	be	said	that	those
passages	do	not	exclude	the	idea	of	two	resurrections,	but	they
simply	do	not	specify	whether	or	not	the	resurrection	of	believers
and	unbelievers	will	be	separated	in	time.	In	fact,	Jesus’	statement
in	John	5	does	hint	at	the	possibility	of	two	resurrections.	He	says
that	those	who	are	in	the	tombs	will	come	forth,	“those	who	have
done	good,	
to	the	resurrection	of	life,	
and	those	who	have	done	evil,
to	the	resurrection	of	judgment”	
(John	5:28–29).	In	this	way	Jesus
in	fact	speaks	of	two	different	resurrections.
13
As	for	Daniel	12:2,	it	simply	says	that	those	who	sleep	in	the	dust
of	the	earth	shall	awake,	“some	to	everlasting	life,	and	some	to
shame	and	everlasting	contempt,”	but	it	does	not	specify	whether
this	will	happen	simultaneously	or	at	different	times.	It	simply	says
that	both	types	of	people	will	be	raised.	The	same	is	true	of	Acts
24:15,	where	Paul	says	there	will	be	“a	resurrection	of	both	the	just
and	the	unjust.”	This	affirms	that	both	types	of	people	will	be	raised
from	the	dead,	but	it	does	not	exclude	the	possibility	that	this	would
happen	at	different	times.	All	of	these	verses,	in	the	absence	of
Revelation	20:5–6,	might	or	might	not	be	speaking	of	a	single
future	time	of	resurrection.	But	with	the	explicit	teaching	of
Revelation	20:5–6	about	two	resurrections,	these	verses	must	be
understood	to	refer	to	the	future	certainty	of	a	resurrection	for	each
type	of	person,	without	specifying	that	those	resurrections	will	be
separated	in	time.
3.	The	idea	of	glorified	believers	and	sinners	living	on	earth
together	during	the	millennium	does	sound	strange	to	us	now,	but	it
is	certainly	not	impossible	for	God	to	bring	this	about.	We	must
realize	that	Jesus	lived	on	the	earth	with	a	glorified	body	for	forty
days	after	his	resurrection,	and	apparently	there	were	many	other
Old	Testament	saints	who	lived	with	glorified	bodies	on	earth
during	that	time	as	well	(Matt.	27:53).
14
	It	will	indeed	be	a	kind	of
world	situation	that	is	far	different	and	far	more	God-glorifying
than	the	world	is	now,	but	it	does	not	seem	that	we	are	justified	in
asserting	that	God	could	not	or	would	not	bring	about	such	a	state
of	affairs.	Certainly	he	
could	
do	it,	and	several	passages	seem	to
indicate	that	he	has	a	good	purpose	and	intention	of	doing	it	as	well.
4.	It	is	certainly	not	impossible	that	evil	and	secret	rebellion	could
persist	on	the	earth	in	spite	of	the	bodily	presence	of	Christ	reigning
as	King.	We	must	remember	that	Judas	lived	with	Jesus	on	the
closest	terms	for	three	years,	and	still	betrayed	him.	Moreover,
many	of	the	Pharisees	
saw	
Jesus’	miracles,	and	even	saw	him
raising	people	from	the	dead,	and	still	did	not	believe.	In	fact,	even
when	the	disciples	were	in	the	presence	of	the	glorified	Lord	Jesus,
we	read	that	“some	doubted”	(Matt.	28:17).	Such	persistent
unbelief	in	the	very	presence	of	Christ	is	hard	to	understand,	but	we
must	remember	that	Satan	himself	fell	from	an	exalted	position	in
the	presence	of	God	in	heaven.
When	the	amillennialists	object	that	people	could	not	persist	in	sin
in	the	presence	of	Christ’s	bodily	reign	on	the	earth,	their	position
simply	fails	to	realize	the	deep-seated	and	highly	irrational	nature
of	sin.	It	also	fails	fully	to	reckon	with	the	fact	that	even	“massive
proof”	and	“undeniable	evidence”	cannot	compel	genuine
conversion.	Genuine	repentance	and	faith	is	brought	about	by	the
enabling	and	persuasive	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in	people’s	hearts.
Such	is	the	irrational	nature	of	sin	that	those	who	are	“dead	in
trespasses	and	sins”	will	often	persist	in	rebellion	and	unbelief	even
in	the	face	of	overwhelming	evidence	to	the	contrary.
15
This	is	not	to	say	that	no	one	will	be	converted	to	Christ	during	the
millennium.	No	doubt	millions	of	people	will	become	Christians
during	that	time,	and	the	influence	of	the	reign	of	Christ	will
permeate	into	every	aspect	of	every	society	in	the	world.	Yet	at	the
same	time	it	is	not	at	all	difficult	to	understand	how	evil	and
rebellion	will	grow	simultaneously.
5.	God	may	have	several	purposes	in	mind	for	a	future	millennium,
not	all	of	which	may	now	be	clear	to	us.	But	certainly	such	a
millennium	would	show	
the	outworking	of	God’s	good	purposes	in
the	structures	of	society,	
especially	the	structures	of	the	family	and
civil	government.	During	the	church	age,	the	good	purposes	of	God
are	primarily	seen	in	individual	lives	and	the	blessings	that	come	to
those	who	believe	in	Christ.	To	some	extent	now	(and	to	a	greater
extent	in	times	of	revival)	this	affects	civil	government	and
educational	institutions	and	corporations,	and	to	a	larger	extent	it
affects	the	family.	But	in	none	of	these	structures	are	God’s	good
purposes	manifested	to	the	extent	they	could	be,	showing	God’s
great	wisdom	and	goodness	not	only	in	his	plans	for	individuals	but
also	for	societal	structures.	In	the	millennium	the	beauty	of	God’s
wisdom	will	show	forth	to	his	glory	from	all	of	these	societal
structures.
Moreover,	the	millennium	will	further	vindicate	God’s
righteousness.	The	fact	that	some	continue	in	sin	and	unbelief	will
show	that	“sin	rebellion	against	God	is	not	due	to	an	evil	society	or
to	a	bad	environment.	It	is	due	to	the	sinfulness	of	the	hearts	of
men.	Thus	the	justice	of	God	will	be	fully	vindicated	in	the	day	of
final	judgment.”
16
	With	Satan	bound	for	a	thousand	years,	the	fact
that	sin	can	persist	will	also	show	that	the	ultimate	blame	for	sin	is
not	demonic	influence	in	people’s	lives	but	deep-rooted	sinfulness
in	people’s	hearts.
Third,	the	entire	scope	of	the	Bible	reveals	to	us	that	it	is	God’s
good	pleasure	to	unfold	his	purposes	and	reveal	more	and	more	of
his	glory	gradually	over	time.	From	the	calling	of	Abraham	to	the
birth	of	Isaac,	the	sojourn	in	Egypt	and	the	exodus,	the
establishment	of	the	people	in	the	promised	land,	the	Davidic
kingdom	and	the	divided	monarchy,	the	exile	and	return	with	the
rebuilding	of	the	temple,	the	preservation	of	a	faithful	remnant,	and
finally	the	coming	of	Jesus	in	the	flesh,	God’s	purposes	were
increasingly	seen	to	be	glorious	and	wonderful.Even	in	Jesus’	life
the	progressive	revealing	of	his	glory	took	thirty-three	years,
culminating	in	the	last	three	years	of	his	life.	Then	in	Jesus’	death,
resurrection,	and	ascension	into	heaven,	the	completion	of	our
redemption	was	accomplished.	Yet	the	spread	of	the	church
throughout	all	nations	has	now	occupied	over	1,900	years,	and	we
do	not	know	how	long	it	is	to	continue.	All	this	is	to	say	that	God’s
way	is	not	to	bring	to	realization	all	of	his	good	purposes	at	once,
but	to	unfold	them	gradually	over	time.	This	is	so	even	in	the
individual	lives	of	Christians,	who	grow	daily	in	grace	and	in
fellowship	with	God	and	in	likeness	to	Christ.	Therefore	it	would
not	be	surprising	if,	before	the	eternal	state,	God	instituted	one	final
step	in	the	progressive	unfolding	of	the	history	of	redemption.	It
would	serve	to	increase	his	glory	as	men	and	angels	look	on	in
amazement	at	the	wonder	of	God’s	wisdom	and	plan.
6.	Finally,	a	major	objection	to	amillennialism	must	continue	to	be
the	fact	that	it	can	propose	no	really	satisfying	explanation	of
Revelation	20.
17
C.	A	Consideration	of	Arguments	for	Postmillennialism
The	arguments	in	favor	of	postmillennialism	are	as	follows:
1.	The	Great	Commission	leads	us	to	expect	that	the	gospel	will	go
forth	in	power	and	eventually	result	in	a	largely	Christian	world:
Jesus	explicitly	said,	
“All	authority	in	heaven	and	on	earth	
has
been	given	to	me.	Go	therefore	and	make	disciples	of	all	nations,
baptizing	them	in	the	name	of	the	Father	and	of	the	Son	and	of	the
Holy	Spirit,	teaching	them	to	observe	all	that	I	have	commanded
you;	and	lo,	I	am	with	you	always,	to	the	close	of	the	age”	(Matt.
28:18–20).	Since	Christ	has	all	authority	in	heaven	and	on	earth,
and	since	he	promises	to	be	with	us	in	the	fulfillment	of	this
commission,	we	would	expect	that	it	would	transpire	without
hindrance	and	eventually	triumph	in	the	whole	world.
2.	Parables	of	the	gradual	growth	of	the	kingdom	indicate	that	it
eventually	will	fill	the	earth	with	its	influence.	Here
postmillennialists	point	to	the	following:
Another	parable	he	put	before	them,	saying,	“The	kingdom	of	heaven
is	like	a	grain	of	mustard	seed	which	a	man	took	and	sowed	in	his
field;	it	is	the	smallest	of	all	seeds,	but	when	it	has	grown	it	is	the
greatest	of	shrubs	and	becomes	a	tree,	so	that	the	birds	of	the	air	come
and	make	nests	in	its	branches.”	(Matt.	13:31–32)
We	can	also	note	the	following	verse:	“He	told	them	another	parable.	‘The
kingdom	of	heaven	is	like	leaven	which	a	woman	took	and	hid	in	three
measures	of	flour,	till	it	was	all	leavened’	”(Matt.	13:33).	According	to
postmillennialists	both	of	these	parables	indicate	that	the	kingdom	will	grow
in	influence	until	it	permeates	and	in	some	measure	transforms	the	entire
world.
3.	Postmillennialists	will	also	argue	that	the	world	is	becoming
more	Christian.	The	church	is	growing	and	spreading	throughout
the	world,	and	even	when	it	is	persecuted	and	oppressed	it	grows
remarkably	by	the	power	of	God.
18
At	this	point	we	must	make	a	very	significant	distinction,	however.
The	“millennium”	that	postmillennialists	hold	to	is	
very	different
from	the	“millennium”	the	premillennialists	talk	about.	In	a	sense,
they	are	not	even	discussing	the	same	topic.	While	
pre
millennialists
talk	about	a	renewed	earth	with	Jesus	Christ	physically	present	and
reigning	as	King,	together	with	glorified	believers	in	resurrection
bodies,	
post
millennialists	are	simply	talking	about	an	earth	with
many,	many	Christians	influencing	society.	They	do	not	envisage	a
millennium	consisting	of	a	renewed	earth	or	glorified	saints	or
Christ	present	in	bodily	form	to	reign	(for	they	think	that	these
things	will	only	occur	after	Christ	returns	to	inaugurate	the	eternal
state).
19
	Therefore	the	entire	discussion	of	the	millennium	is	more
than	simply	a	discussion	of	the	sequence	of	events	surrounding	it.	It
also	involves	a	significant	difference	over	the	nature	of	this	period
of	time	itself.
In	fact,	though	I	am	not	aware	if	anyone	has	done	this,	it	would	not
be	impossible	for	someone	to	be	a	postmillennialist	and	a
premillennialist	at	the	same	time,	with	two	different	senses	of	the
term	
millennium.	
Someone	could	conceivably	be	a	postmillennialist
and	think	that	the	gospel	will	grow	in	influence	until	the	world	is
largely	Christian,	and	that	then	Christ	will	return	and	set	up	a	literal
earthly	reign,	raising	believers	from	the	dead	to	reign	with	him	in
glorified	bodies.	Or,	on	the	other	hand,	a	very	optimistic
premillennialist	could	conceivably	adopt	many	of	the
postmillennialist	teachings	about	the	increasingly	Christian	nature
of	this	present	age.
20
In	response	to	the	postmillennialist	arguments,	the	following	points
may	be	made:
1.	The	Great	Commission	does	indeed	speak	of	the	authority	that	is
given	into	Christ’s	hand,	but	that	does	not	necessarily	imply	that
Christ	will	use	that	authority	to	bring	about	the	conversion	of	the
majority	of	the	population	of	the	world.	To	say	that	Christ’s
authority	is	great	is	simply	another	way	of	saying	that	God’s	power
is	infinite,	which	no	one	will	deny.	But	the	question	is	the	extent	to
which	Christ	will	
use	
his	power	to	bring	about	the	numerical
growth	of	the	church.	We	may	
assume	
that	he	will	use	it	to	a	very
full	extent	and	will	bring	about	worldwide	Christianization,	but
such	an	assumption	is	merely	that—an	assumption.	It	is	not	based
on	any	specific	evidence	in	the	Great	Commission	or	in	other	texts
that	talk	about	Christ’s	authority	and	power	in	this	present	age.
21
2.	The	parables	of	the	mustard	seed	and	the	leaven	do	tell	us	that
the	kingdom	of	God	will	gradually	grow	from	something	very	small
to	something	very	large,	but	they	do	not	tell	us	the	
extent	
to	which
the	kingdom	will	grow.	For	example,	the	parable	of	the	mustard
seed	does	not	tell	us	that	the	tree	grew	so	that	it	spread	throughout
the	whole	earth.	And	the	parable	of	the	leaven	simply	talks	about
gradual	growth	that	permeates	society	(as	the	church	has	already
done),	but	it	says	nothing	about	the	degree	or	effect	that	that
influence	has	(it	does	not	tell	us,	for	example,	whether	in	the	end	5
percent	of	the	loaf	was	leaven	and	95	percent	bread	dough,	or	20
percent	leaven	and	80	percent	bread,	or	60	percent	leaven	and	40
percent	bread,	and	so	forth).	It	is	simply	pressing	the	parable
beyond	its	intended	purpose	to	attempt	to	make	it	say	more	than
that	the	kingdom	will	grow	gradually	and	eventually	have	an
influence	on	every	society	in	which	it	is	planted.
3.	In	response	to	the	argument	that	the	world	is	becoming	more
Christian,	it	must	be	said	that	the	world	is	also	becoming	more	evil.
No	student	of	history	or	modern	society	will	argue	that	mankind	has
made	much	progress	through	the	centuries	in	overcoming	the	depth
of	perversity	and	the	extent	of	immorality	that	remain	in	people’s
hearts.	Indeed,	modernization	in	western	societies	in	the	twentieth
century	has	often	been	accompanied	not	by	moral	improvement	but
by	an	unprecedented	level	of	drug	abuse,	marital	infidelity,
pornography,	homosexuality,	rebellion	against	authority,
superstition	(in	astrology	and	the	New	Age	movement),
materialism,	greed,	theft,	and	falsehood	in	speech.	Even	among
professing	Christians	there	is	repeated	evidence	of	dismaying
imperfection	in	the	Christian	life,	especially	in	the	realms	of
personal	morality	and	depth	of	intimacy	with	God.	In	places	where
Bible-believing	Christians	comprise	large	segments	of	the
population,	still	nothing	like	an	earthly	millennial	kingdom
occurs.
22
	It	is	true	that	the	growth	of	the	church	as	a	percentage	of
world	population	has	been	remarkable	in	recent	decades,
23
	and	we
should	be	greatly	encouraged	by	this.	It	is	possible	that	we	will
someday	see	a	far	greater	influence	of	genuine	Christianity	upon
many	societies,	and	if	that	occurred,	it	would	make	the
postmillennial	position	seem	more	plausible.	But	such	events	could
also	be	understood	within	a	premillennial	or	amillennial
framework,	so	the	final	decision	regarding	these	competing
positions	must	still	be	made	by	interpreting	the	relevant	biblical
texts.
4.	Finally,	we	should	note	that	there	are	several	New	Testament
passages	that	seem	to	give	explicit	denial	to	the	postmillennial
position.	Jesus	said,	“Enter	by	the	narrow	gate;	for	the	gate	is	wide
and	the	way	is	easy,	that	leads	to	destruction,	and	those	who	enter
by	it	are	many.	For	the	gate	is	narrow	and	the	way	is	hard,	that
leads	to	life,	and	
those	who	find	it	are	few”	
(Matt.	7:13–14).	Rather
than	teaching	that	a	majority	of	the	world	will	become	Christians,
Jesus	seems	here	to	be	saying	that	those	who	are	saved	will	be
“few”	in	contrast	to	the	“many”	who	travel	toward	eternal
destruction.	Similarly,	Jesus	asks,	
“When	the	Son	of	man	comes,
will	he	find	faith	on	earth?”	
(Luke	18:8),	a	question	that	suggests
that	the	earth	will	not	be	filled	with	those	who	believe,	but	will	be
dominated	rather	by	those	who	do	not	have	faith.
Contrary	to	the	view	that	the	world	will	get	better	and	better	as	the
influence	of	the	church	grows,	Paul	predicts	that	before	Christ
returns	“the	
rebellion”	
will	come	and	“the	
man	of	lawlessness”	
will
be	revealed,	“the	son	of	perdition”	who	“takes	his	seat	in	the	temple
of	God,	proclaiming	himself	to	be	God”	(2	Thess.	2:3–4).
24
When	writing	to	Timothy	about	the	last	days,	Paul	says,
In	the	last	days	
there	will	come	times	of	stress.	For	men	will	be	lovers
of	self,	lovers	of	money,	proud,	arrogant,	abusive,	disobedient	to	their
parents,	ungrateful,	unholy,	inhuman,	implacable,	slanderers,
profligates,	fierce,	haters	of	good,	treacherous,	reckless,	swollen	with
conceit,	lovers	of	pleasure	rather	than	lovers	of	God,	holding	the	form
of	religion	but	denying	the	power	of	it.	(2	Tim.	3:1–5)
He	says	further:
All	who	desire	to	live	a	godly	life	in	Christ	Jesus	will	be	persecuted,
while	evil	men	and	impostors	will	go	on	from	bad	to	worse,	deceivers
and	deceived	.	.	.	
the	time	is	coming	when	people	will	not	endure
sound	teaching,	but	having	itching	ears	they	will	accumulate	for
themselves	teachers	to	suit	their	own	likings,	and	will	turn	away	from
listening	to	the	truth	and	wander	into	myths.	(2	Tim.	3:12–13;	4:3–4)
Finally,	and	perhaps	most	conclusively,	Matthew	24:15–31	speaks
of	a	great	tribulation	that	will	precede	the	time	of	Christ’s	return:
For	
then	there	will	be	great	tribulation,	such	as	has	not	been	from	the
beginning	of	the	world	until	now,	no,	and	never	will	be.	And	if	those
days	had	not	been	shortened,	no	human	being	would	be	saved;	
but	for
the	sake	of	the	elect	those	days	will	be	shortened.	.	.	.	
Immediately
after	the	tribulation	of	those	days	the	sun	will	be	darkened,	and	the
moon	will	not	give	its	light,	and	the	stars	will	fall	from	heaven,	and
the	powers	of	the	heavens	will	be	shaken;	then	will	appear	the	sign	of
the	Son	of	man	in	heaven,	and	then	all	the	tribes	of	the	earth	will
mourn,	and	they	will	see	the	Son	of	man	coming	on	the	clouds	of
heaven	with	power	and	great	glory.	
(Matt.	24:21–30)
This	passage	pictures	not	a	Christianized	world	but	a	world	of	great
suffering	and	evil,	a	great	tribulation	that	exceeds	all	previous
periods	of	suffering	on	the	earth.	It	does	not	say	that	the	great
majority	of	the	world	will	welcome	Christ	when	he	comes,	but
rather	that	when	the	sign	of	the	Son	of	man	appears	in	heaven,
“then	all	the	tribes	of	the	earth	will	mourn”	(Matt.	24:30).
Since	Matthew	24	is	such	a	difficult	passage	from	the
postmillennialist	perspective,	there	have	been	several	attempts	to
explain	it	not	as	a	prediction	of	events	that	will	occur	just	prior	to
Christ’s	second	coming,	but	rather	as	something	that	was	mainly
fulfilled	in	the	destruction	of	Jerusalem	in	A.D.	70.
To	sustain	this	interpretation,	postmillennialists	make	most	of	the
elements	of	Matthew	24:29–31	symbolic:
25
	the	sun	and	moon	being
darkened,	the	stars	falling	from	heaven,	and	the	powers	of	the
heavens	being	shaken	are	not	to	be	understood	as	literal	events,	but
as	imagery	for	God’s	coming	in	judgment.	Similar	imagery	for
judgment	is	said	to	be	found	in	Ezekiel	32:7;	Joel	2:10;	and	Amos
8:9—but	these	passages	simply	speak	of	judgments	of	darkness,
and	do	not	mention	the	stars	falling	from	heaven	or	the	powers	of
the	heavens	being	shaken.	R.	T.	France	also	mentions	Isaiah	13:10
and	34:4,	which	do	talk	about	the	sun	and	moon	being	darkened
and	the	host	of	heaven	falling,	but	it	is	far	from	certain	that	France
is	correct	in	claiming	that	those	passages	are	merely	symbolic—
they	are	set	in	contexts	in	which	they	could	easily	be	understood	as
literal	predictions	of	the	cosmic	changes	preceding	the	final
judgment.	So	it	is	far	from	obvious	that	these	passages	are	merely
apocalyptic	imagery	for	judgment	on	Jerusalem.
26
Moreover,	the	interpretation	that	sees	these	as	merely	symbolic
statements	grows	more	difficult	as	the	statement	of	Jesus	continues,
for	he	does	not	only	talk	about	signs	in	the	sun,	moon,	and	stars,	but
he	says	immediately	after	that,	“
then	
will	appear	the	sign	of	the	Son
of	man	in	heaven	.	.	.	and	
they	will	see	the	Son	of	man	coming	on
the	clouds	of	heaven	with	power	and	great	glory”	
(Matt.	24:30).
Consistent	with	his	previous	symbolic	interpretation	of	this
passage,	France	says	that	“all	the	tribes	of	the	earth”	refers	merely
to	the	Jews,	that	is,	“all	the	tribes	(families)	of	the	land,”
27
	that	is,
the	land	of	Israel.	And	he	says	that	the	reference	to	the	Son	of	man
coming	on	the	clouds	of	heaven	with	power	and	great	glory	does
not	refer	to	Christ’s	return	but	to	his	coming	
to	the	Father	in	heaven
“to	receive	vindication	and	authority.”
28
	France	quotes	with
approval	the	statement	of	G.	B.	Caird,	who	says	that	“the	coming	of
the	Son	of	Man	in	the	clouds	of	heaven	was	never	conceived	as	a
primitive	form	of	space	travel,	but	as	a	symbol	for	a	mighty
reversal	of	fortunes	within	history	and	at	the	national	level.”
29
	Then
the	sending	out	of	Christ’s	angels	with	a	loud	trumpet	call	to	gather
his	elect	from	one	end	of	heaven	to	the	other	is	understood	to	refer
to	messengers	who	preach	the	gospel	throughout	the	earth.	The
gathering	of	the	elect	then	is	gathering	them	into	the	church	by	the
preaching	of	the	gospel.
However,	on	this	interpretation	France	cannot	satisfactorily	account
for	the	fact	that	Jesus	says	that	all	the	tribes	of	the	earth	“
will	see
the	Son	of	man	coming	on	the	clouds	of	heaven	with	power	and
great	glory”	(Matt.	24:30).	This	is	not	an	invisible	heavenly
transaction	in	which	Christ	receives	authority	from	God	the	Father,
but	it	is	his	return	with	power	and	great	glory	which	is	here
predicted.	Those	who	preach	the	gospel	are	never	elsewhere	called
angels	who	give	a	loud	trumpet	call,	and	the	preaching	of	the
gospel	is	not	elsewhere	called	the	gathering	of	“his	elect	from	the
four	winds,	from	one	end	of	heaven	to	the	other”	(Matt.	24:31).
Moreover,	when	Jesus	elsewhere	speaks	of	his	coming	on	the
clouds,	he	speaks	not	of	a	coming	
to	God	the	Father	
in	heaven,	but
a	coming	
to	people	on	earth:	
“Behold,	he	is	coming	with	the
clouds,	and	every	eye	will	see	him,	every	one	who	pierced	him;	and
all	tribes	of	the	earth	will	wail	on	account	of	him”	(Rev.	1:7).	And
when	Christ	returns,	Paul	says	that	we	who	are	alive	“shall	be
caught	up	together	with	them	
in	the	clouds	
to	meet	the	Lord	in	the
air”	(1	Thess.	4:17).	When	Christ	comes	on	the	clouds	of	glory	with
great	power	and	authority,	he	comes	to	reign	over	the	earth,	and	this
is	the	sense	of	Matthew	24:30–31.	(France	does	not	comment	on
the	fact	that	Jesus	says	the	tribes	of	the	earth	who	mourn	“
will	see
the	Son	of	man	coming	on	the	clouds	of	heaven”	[v.	
30].	The	fact
that	these	tribes	will	see	Jesus	coming	makes	it	difficult	to
understand	any	symbolic	or	invisible	heavenly	interpretation	here.)
Moreover,	the	piling	up	of	factors	that	we	know	from	other	texts	to
be	connected	with	Christ’s	return	(cosmic	signs,	Christ’s	coming
with	power,	the	loud	trumpet	call,	the	angels	gathering	the	elect)
provides	a	cumulative	case	for	believing	that	Christ’s	
second
coming,	not	just	a	symbolic	representation	of	his	receiving
authority,	is	in	view	here.	And	if	Matthew	24	talks	about	Christ’s
second	coming,	then	it	talks	about	his	coming	just	
after	
a	period	of
great	tribulation,	not	after	a	millennium	of	peace	and	righteousness
has	been	established	on	the	earth.
30
Finally,	all	of	the	passages	indicating	that	Christ	could	return	soon
and	that	we	must	be	ready	for	him	to	return	at	any	time
31
	must	be
considered	a	significant	argument	against	postmillennialism	as
well.	For	if	Christ	could	return	at	any	time,	and	we	are	to	be	ready
for	his	return,	then	the	long	period	required	for	the	establishment	of
the	millennium	on	earth	before	Christ	returns	simply	cannot	be
thought	a	persuasive	theory.
D.	A	Consideration	of	the	Arguments	for
Premillennialism
The	position	advocated	in	this	book	is	historic	premillennialism.
The	arguments	against	the	premillennial	position	have	essentially
been	presented	in	the	arguments	for	amillennialism	and
postmillennialism,	and	will	therefore	not	be	repeated	again	herein	a
separate	section,	but	incidental	objections	to	these	arguments	will
be	considered	along	the	way.
1.	Several	Old	Testament	passages	seem	to	fit	neither	in	the	present
age	nor	in	the	eternal	state.	These	passages	indicate	some	future
stage	in	the	history	of	redemption	which	is	far	greater	than	the
present	church	age	but	which	still	does	not	see	the	removal	of	all
sin	and	rebellion	and	death	from	the	earth.
Speaking	of	Jerusalem	at	some	time	in	the	future,	Isaiah	says:
No	more	shall	there	be	in	it
an	infant	that	lives	but	a	few	days,
or	an	old	man	who	does	not	fill	out	his	days,
for	the	child	shall	die	a	hundred	years	old,
and	the	sinner	a	hundred	years	old	shall	be	accursed.	(Isa.	65:20)
Here	we	read	that	there	will	be	no	more	infants	who	die	in	infancy,	and	no
more	old	men	who	die	prematurely,	something	far	different	from	this	present
age.	But	death	and	sin	will	still	be	present,	for	the	child	who	is	one	hundred
years	old	shall	die,	and	the	sinner	who	is	one	hundred	years	old	“shall	be
accursed.”	The	larger	context	of	this	passage	may	mingle	elements	of	the
millennium	and	the	eternal	state	(cf.	vv.	17,	25),	but	it	is	in	the	nature	of	Old
Testament	prophecy	not	to	distinguish	among	events	in	the	future,	just	as
these	prophecies	do	not	distinguish	between	the	first	and	second	comings	of
Christ.	Therefore	in	the	larger	context	there	may	be	mixed	elements,	but	the
point	remains	that	this	single	element	(the	infants	and	old	men	who	live	long,
the	child	dying	one	hundred	years	old,	and	the	sinner	being	accursed)
indicates	a	specific	time	in	the	future	that	is	different	from	the	present	age.
Isaiah	seems	to	predict	a	millennial	kingdom	in	another	place	when
he	says:
The	wolf	shall	dwell	with	the	lamb,
and	the	leopard	shall	lie	down	with	the	kid,
and	the	calf	and	the	lion	and	the	fatling	together,
and	a	little	child	shall	lead	them.
The	cow	and	the	bear	shall	feed;
their	young	shall	lie	down	together;
and	the	lion	shall	eat	straw	like	the	ox.
The	sucking	child	shall	play	over	the	hole	of	the	asp,
and	the	weaned	child	shall	put	his	hand	on	the	adder’s	den.
They	shall	not	hurt	or	destroy
in	all	my	holy	mountain;
for	the	earth	shall	be	full	of	the	knowledge	of	the	L
ORD
as	the	waters	cover	the	sea.	(Isa.	11:6–9)
This	passage	clearly	speaks	of	a	momentous	renewal	of	nature	that	takes	us
far	beyond	the	present	age,	a	time	in	which	“the	earth	shall	be	full	of	the
knowledge	of	the	L
ORD
	as	the	waters	cover	the	sea”	(v.	
9).	Yet	in	the	very
next	verse	Isaiah	says:
In	that	day	
the	root	of	Jesse	shall	stand	as	an	ensign	to	the	peoples;	
him
shall	the	nations	seek,	
and	his	dwellings	shall	be	glorious.
In	that	day	
the	Lord	will	extend	his	hand	yet	a	second	time	to	recover
the	remnant	which	is	left	of	his	people,	from	Assyria,	from	Egypt,	from
Pathros,	from	Ethiopia.	(Isa.	11:10–11)
Here	some	are	still	seeking	the	Messiah	and	apparently	coming	to	salvation,
and	here	also	the	Lord	is	still	gathering	the	remnant	of	his	people	from
various	nations	of	the	earth.	It	does	not	seem,	therefore,	that	the	eternal	state
has	begun,	yet	the	reversal	of	nature	far	exceeds	anything	that	will	happen	in
this	present	age.	Does	this	not	indicate	a	future	millennial	kingdom?
Psalm	72	seems	to	go	beyond	a	description	of	Solomon’s	reign	and
to	predict	the	glories	of	the	reign	of	the	Messiah:
He	will	rule	from	sea	to	sea
and	from	the	River	to	the	ends	of	the	earth.
The	desert	tribes	will	bow	before	him
and	his	enemies	will	lick	the	dust.
The	kings	of	Tarshish	and	of	distant	shores
will	bring	tribute	to	him;
the	kings	of	Sheba	and	Seba
will	present	him	gifts.
All	kings	will	bow	down	to	him
and	all	nations	will	serve	him.
For	he	will	deliver	the	needy	who	cry	out,
the	afflicted	who	have	no-one	to	help.
He	will	take	pity	on	the	weak	and	the	needy
and	save	the	needy	from	death.
He	will	rescue	them	from	oppression	and	violence,
for	precious	is	their	blood	in	his	sight.	(Ps.	72:8–14	NIV)
32
This	passage	certainly	speaks	of	a	messianic	rule	far	more	extensive	than	that
experienced	by	David	or	Solomon,	because	this	Messiah’s	kingdom	extends
“to	the	ends	of	the	earth”	and	“all	nations	will	serve	him”	(vv.	8,	11	NIV;	note
that	the	psalm	also	says:	“He	will	endure	as	long	as	the	sun,	as	long	as	the
moon,	through	all	generations”	in	v.	
5	NIV).	This	will	be	a	reign	in
righteousness,	in	justice—but	it	certainly	will	not	be	the	eternal	state.	There
are	still	“the	needy	who	cry	out”	and	“the	afflicted	who	have	no	one	to	help”;
there	are	still	people	who	need	to	be	rescued	“from	oppression	and	violence”
(vv.	12–14).	There	will	still	be	enemies	who	“will	lick	the	dust”	under	the
reign	of	this	righteous	King	(v.	
9).	All	of	this	speaks	of	an	age	far	different
from	the	present	age	but	short	of	the	eternal	state	in	which	there	is	no	more
sin	or	suffering.
Zechariah	also	prophesies	a	coming	age	in	which	there	is	great
transformation	in	the	earth,	in	which	the	Lord	is	King	over	all	the
earth,	and	in	which	there	is	still	rebellion	and	sin,	suffering,	and
death:
Then	the	L
ORD
	your	God	will	come,	and	all	the	holy	ones	with	him.	On
that	day	there	shall	be	neither	cold	nor	frost.	And	there	shall	be
continuous	day	(it	is	known	to	the	L
ORD
),	not	day	and	not	night,	for	at
evening	time	there	shall	be	light.
On	that	day	living	waters	shall	flow	out	from	Jerusalem,	half	of	them	to
the	eastern	sea	and	half	of	them	to	the	western	sea;	it	shall	continue	in
summer	as	in	winter.
And	the	L
ORD
	will	become	king	over	all	the	earth;	on	that	day	the	L
ORD
will	be	one	and	his	name	one.
And	this	shall	be	the	plague	with	which	the	L
ORD
	will	smite	all	the
peoples	that	wage	war	against	Jerusalem:	their	flesh	shall	rot	while	they
are	still	on	their	feet,	their	eyes	shall	rot	in	their	sockets,	and	their
tongues	shall	rot	in	their	mouths.	And	the	wealth	of	all	the	nations
round	about	shall	be	collected,	gold,	silver,	and	garments	in	great
abundance.	.	.	.
Then	every	one	that	survives	of	all	the	nations	that	have	come	against
Jerusalem	shall	go	up	year	after	year	to	worship	the	King,	the	L
ORD
	of
hosts,	and	to	keep	the	feast	of	booths.	And	if	any	of	the	families	of	the
earth	do	not	go	up	to	Jerusalem	to	worship	the	King,	the	L
ORD
	of	hosts,
there	will	be	no	rain	upon	them.	(Zech.	14:5–17)
Here	again	the	description	does	not	fit	the	present	age,	for	the	Lord	is	King
over	all	the	earth	in	this	situation.	But	it	does	not	fit	the	eternal	state	either,
because	of	the	disobedience	and	rebellion	against	the	Lord	that	is	clearly
present.	One	might	object	that	this	is	a	typical	Old	Testament	prophecy	in
which	distinct	future	events	are	conflated	and	not	distinguished	in	the
prophet’s	vision,	though	they	may	be	separated	by	long	ages	when	they
actually	occur.	However,	it	is	difficult	to	make	such	a	distinction	in	this
passage	because	it	is	specifically	rebellion	against	the	Lord	who	is	King	over
all	the	earth	that	is	punished	by	these	plagues	and	lack	of	rain.
33
2.	There	are	also	New	Testament	passages	other	than	Revelation	20
that	suggest	a	future	millennium.	When	the	risen	Lord	Jesus	speaks
to	the	church	at	Thyatira,	he	says,	“
He	who	conquers	and	who
keeps	my	works	until	the	end,	I	will	give	him	power	over	the
nations,	
and	
he	shall	rule	them	with	a	rod	of	iron,	
as	when	earthen
pots	are	broken	in	pieces,	even	as	I	myself	have	received	power
from	my	Father”	(Rev.	2:26–27).	The	imagery	used	(ruling	with	a
rod	of	iron;	shattering	earthen	pots)	implies	a	rule	of	force	over
rebellious	people.	But	when	will	believers	who	conquer	over	evil
participate	in	this	rule?	The	idea	fits	well	into	a	future	millennial
kingdom	when	glorified	saints	rule	with	Christ	on	the	earth,	but
does	not	fit	well	at	any	time	in	the	present	age	or	in	the	eternal
state.	(The	idea	of	ruling	the	nations	“with	a	rod	of	iron”	is	also
found	in	Rev.	12:5–6	and	19:15.)
When	Paul	talks	about	the	resurrection,	he	says	that	each	person
will	receive	a	resurrection	body	in	his	own	order:	“Christ	the	first
fruits,	
then	
(
epeita
)	at	his	coming	those	who	belong	to	Christ.	
Then
(
eita
)	comes	the	end,	when	he	delivers	the	kingdom	to	God	the
Father	after	destroying	every	rule	and	every	authority	and	power.
For	he	must	reign	until	he	has	put	all	his	enemies	under	his	feet”	(1
Cor.	15:23–25).	The	two	words	translated	“then”	in	this	passage
(
epeita	
and	
eita
)	both	take	the	sense	“after	that,”	not	the	sense	“at
that	same	time.”	Therefore	the	passage	gives	some	support	to	the
idea	that,	just	as	there	is	an	interval	of	time	between	Christ’s
resurrection	and	his	second	coming	when	we	receive	a	resurrection
body	(v.	
23),	so	there	is	an	interval	of	time	between	Christ’s	second
coming	and	“the	end”	(v.	
24),	when	Christ	delivers	the	kingdom	to
God	after	having	reigned	for	a	time	and	put	all	his	enemies	under
his	feet.
34
3.	With	the	background	of	a	number	of	other	passages	that	hint	at	or
clearly	suggest	a	future	time	far	greater	than	the	present	age	but
short	of	the	eternal	state,	it	is	appropriate	then	to	look	at	Revelation
20	once	again.	Several	statements	here	are	best	understood	as
referring	to	a	future	earthly	reign	of	Christ	prior	to	the	future
judgment.
a.	The	binding	and	imprisonment	of	Satan	in	the	bottomless	pit	(vv.
2–3)	imply	a	far	greater	restriction	of	his	activity	than	anything	we
know	in	this	present	age	(see	discussion	above,	under
amillennialism).
b.	The	statement	that	those	who	were	faithful	“came	to	life”	(v.	4)	is
best	taken	as	referring	to	a	bodily	resurrection,	for	the	next	verse
says,	“This	is	the	first	resurrection.”	The	verb	
ezēsan,	
“came	to
life,”	is	the	same	verb	and	the	same	form	of	the	verb	used	in
Revelation	2:8,	where	Jesus	identifies	himself	as	the	one	“who	died
and	
came	to	life,”	
here	obviously	referring	to	his	resurrection.
35
c.	On	a	premillennial	interpretation,	the	reigning	with	Christ	(in
Rev.	20:4)	is	something	that	is	still	future,	not	something	that	is
occurring	now	(as	amillennialists	claim).	This	is	consistent	with	the
rest	of	the	New	Testament,	where	we	are	frequently	told	that
believers	will	reign	with	Christ	and	be	given	authority	by	him	to
reign	over	the	earth	(see	Luke	19:17,	19;	1	Cor.	6:3;	Rev.	2:26–27;
3:21).	But	nowhere	does	Scripture	say	that	believers	in	the
intermediate	state	(between	their	death	and	Christ’s	return)	are
reigning	with	Christ	or	sharing	in	rule	with	him.	In	fact,	Revelation
earlier	pictures	saints	in	heaven	before	Christ’s	return	
waiting	
under
the	altar	and	crying	out	to	the	Lord	to	begin	to	judge	evildoers	on
the	earth	(Rev.	6:9–10).	Nowhere	is	it	said	that	Christians	are
already	reigning	with	Christ.
Those	who	come	to	life	and	reign	with	Christ	in	Revelation	20
include	people	
“who	had	not	worshiped	the	beast	or	its	image	and
had	not	received	its	mark	on	their	foreheads	or	their	hands”	
(Rev.
20:4).	This	is	a	reference	to	those	who	did	not	yield	to	the
persecution	by	the	beast	spoken	of	in	Revelation	13:1–18.	But	if	the
severity	of	persecution	described	in	Revelation	13	leads	us	to
conclude	that	the	beast	
has	not	yet	come	
on	the	world	scene,	but	is
yet	future,	then	the	persecution	by	this	beast	is	still	future	as	well.
And	
if	this	persecution	is	still	future,	then	the	scene	in	Revelation
20	
where	those	“who	had	not	worshiped	the	beast	.	.	.	and	had	not
received	its	mark	on	their	foreheads	or	their	hands”	(Rev.	20:4)	
is
still	future	as	well.	
This	means	that	Revelation	20:1–6	does	not
describe	the	present	church	age	but	is	best	understood	to	refer	to	a
future	millennial	reign	of	Christ.
These	considerations	combine	to	make	a	case	in	favor	of
premillennialism.	If	we	are	convinced	of	this	position,	it	really	is	an
incidental	question	whether	the	thousand-year	period	is	thought	to
be	a	literal	thousand	years	or	simply	a	long	period	of	time	of
indeterminate	duration.	And	though	we	may	not	have	much	clarity
on	all	the	details	of	the	nature	of	the	millennium,	we	can	be
reasonably	certain	that	there	will	be	a	future	earthly	reign	of	Christ
that	will	be	markedly	different	from	this	present	age.
E.	The	Time	of	the	Great	Tribulation
For	those	who	are	persuaded	by	the	arguments	in	favor	of
premillennialism,	one	further	question	must	be	decided:	Will	Christ
return	before	or	after	the	“great	tribulation”?
The	expression	“great	tribulation”	itself	comes	from	Matthew	24:21
(and	parallels),	where	Jesus	says,	“For	then	there	will	be	
great
tribulation,	
such	as	has	not	been	from	the	beginning	of	the	world
until	now,	no,	and	never	will	be.”	Historic	premillennialism
believes	that	Christ	will	return	after	that	tribulation,	for	the	passage
continues,	“Immediately	after	the	tribulation	of	those	days	the	sun
will	be	darkened	.	.	.	then	will	appear	the	sign	of	the	Son	of	man	in
heaven,	and	then	all	the	tribes	of	the	earth	will	mourn,	and	they	will
see	the	Son	of	man	coming	on	the	clouds	of	heaven	with	power	and
great	glory”	(Matt.	24:29–30).	But,	as	explained	above,	in	the
nineteenth	and	twentieth	centuries	a	variety	of	premillennialism	that
holds	to	a	pretribulational	coming	of	Christ	became	popular.	This	is
often	called	a	“pretribulation	rapture”	view,	because	it	holds	that
when	Christ	first	returns	the	church	will	be	“raptured”	or	snatched
up	into	heaven	to	be	with	him.
The	arguments	for	such	a	pretribulation	rapture	are	as	follows:
36
1.	The	entire	period	of	the	tribulation	will	be	a	time	of	the
outpouring	of	God’s	wrath	on	all	the	earth.	Therefore	it	would	not
be	appropriate	for	Christians	to	be	on	the	earth	at	that	time.
2.	Jesus	promises	in	Revelation	3:10,	“
I	will	keep	you	from	the	hour
of	trial	which	is	coming	on	the	whole	world,	
to	try	those	who	dwell
upon	the	earth.”	This	passage	indicates	that	the	church	will	be	taken
out	of	the	world	before	that	hour	of	trial	comes.
3.	If	Christ	returns	
after	
the	tribulation	and	defeats	all	his	enemies,
then	where	will	the	unbelievers	come	from	who	are	necessary	to
populate	the	millennial	kingdom?	The	pretribulation	position,
however,	envisages	thousands	of	Jewish	believers	who	have
become	Christians	during	the	tribulation	and	who	will	go	into	the
millennial	kingdom	in	nonglorified	bodies.
4.	This	view	makes	it	possible	to	believe	that	Christ	could	come	at
any	moment	(his	coming	before	the	tribulation)	and	yet	that	many
signs	must	be	fulfilled	before	he	comes	(his	coming	after	the
tribulation,	when	the	signs	will	be	fulfilled).
Although	it	is	not	specifically	an	argument	in	favor	of	a
pretribulation	position,	it	must	also	be	noted	that	pretribulationists
then	view	the	teaching	about	the	tribulation	in	Matthew	24	and	the
warnings	and	encouragements	given	to	believers	in	that	situation	as
applying	to	Jewish	believers	during	the	tribulation,	and	not	to	the
church	generally.
37
In	response	to	these	arguments,	the	following	points	may	be	made:
1.	It	is	inconsistent	with	the	New	Testament	descriptions	of	the
tribulation	to	say	that	
all	
the	suffering	that	occurs	during	that	time
is	specifically	the	result	of	the	wrath	of	God.	Much	of	the	suffering
is	due	to	the	fact	that	“wickedness	is	multiplied”	(Matt.	24:12)	and
the	fact	that	persecution	of	the	church	and	opposition	from	Satan
greatly	increases	during	this	period.	Of	course	all	Christians
(whether	Gentile	or	Jewish	believers)	will	avoid	the	wrath	of	God
at	all	times,	but	this	does	not	mean	they	will	avoid	all	suffering,
even	in	times	of	intense	hardship.
2.	The	fact	that	Jesus	tells	faithful	believers	in	the	church	in
Philadelphia	(Rev.	3:10)	that	he	will	keep	them	from	the	hour	of
trial	that	is	coming	on	the	whole	world	is	not	strong	enough
evidence	to	say	that	the	entire	church	will	be	taken	out	of	the	world
before	the	tribulation.	First,	this	statement	is	made	to	one	specific
church	(Philadelphia)	and	should	not	be	applied	to	the	whole
church	at	some	future	point	in	history.	Moreover,	“the	hour	of	trial
which	is	coming	on	the	whole	world”	need	not	refer	to	the	time	of
the	great	tribulation,	but	more	likely	refers	to	a	time	of	great
suffering	and	persecution	that	would	come	upon	the	entire	Roman
Empire	or	the	entire	inhabited	world.	Finally,	the	promise	that	the
church	in	Philadelphia	will	be	
guarded	
does	not	imply	that	they	will
be	taken	out	of	the	world,	but	simply	that	they	will	be	kept	faithful
and	will	be	guarded	from	being	harmed	by	that	period	of	suffering
and	testing.
3.	It	is	no	argument	for	the	pretribulation	view	to	say	that	there
must	be	some	people	in	nonglorified	bodies	who	will	enter	the
millennium,	because	(on	a	posttribulational	view)	when	Christ
comes	at	the	end	of	the	tribulation	he	will	
defeat	
all	the	forces
arrayed	against	him,	but	that	does	not	mean	he	will	kill	or
annihilate	all	of	them.	Many	will	simply	surrender	without	trusting
Christ,	and	will	thus	enter	the	millennium	as	unbelievers.	And
during	the	entire	period	of	the	millennium	no	doubt	many	will	be
converted	to	Christ	and	become	believers	as	well.
4.	The	pretribulational	view	is	not	the	only	one	consistent	with	the
ideas	that	Christ	could	come	back	at	any	time	that	there	are	signs
that	precede	his	return.	The	position	presented	in	the	previous
chapter—that	is	unlikely	but	possible	that	the	signs	have	been
fulfilled—is	also	consistent	with	these	ideas.
38
But	it	must	be	said	that	behind	this	argument	of	pretribulationists	is
probably	a	more	fundamental	concern:	the	desire	to	preserve	a
distinction	between	
the	church	
(which	they	think	will	be	taken	up
into	heaven	to	be	with	Christ)	and	
Israel	
(which	they	think	will
constitute	the	people	of	God	on	earth	during	the	tribulation	and	then
during	the	millennial	kingdom).	But,	as	we	noted	in	an	earlier
chapter,
39
	the	New	Testament	does	not	support	a	distinction	of	this
kind	between	Israel	and	the	church.	Hence	it	does	not	imply	a	need
to	see	a	distinction	between	these	groups	at	the	time	of	the
tribulation	and	the	millennium.
There	is	a	variation	of	the	pretribulation	rapture	position	that	is
known	as	the	
midtribulation	rapture	
view.	It	is	defended	by
Gleason	Archer	in	his	essay,	“The	Case	for	the	Mid-Seventieth-
Week	Rapture	Position.”
40
	He	sees	the	tribulation	as	separated	into
two	halves.	The	first	three	and	a	half	years	are	characterized	by	the
wrath	of	man,	and	the	church	is	present	at	that	time.	The	second
three	and	a	half	years	are	characterized	by	the	wrath	of	God,	and
during	that	time	the	church	is	absent	from	the	earth.	The	primary
argument	from	Scripture	to	support	a	midtribulational	rapture	is	the
fact	that	in	Daniel	7:25,	9:27,	and	12:7	and	11,	as	well	as	in
Revelation	12:14,	the	seven	days	or	times	indicated	are	cut	in	half,
mentioning	the	interval	of	three	and	a	half	times	or	three	and	a	half
days	in	a	symbolic	week,	thus	indicating	a	period	of	three	and	a	half
years,	after	which	God’s	people	will	be	rescued	from	tribulation.
Another	argument	in	favor	of	this	position	is	that	it	gives	a
heightened	sense	of	expectancy	of	Christ’s	return,	since	three	and	a
half	years	is	a	shorter	period	of	time	than	seven	years.
However,	though	the	passages	in	Daniel	do	speak	of	an	
interruption
of	the	seventieth	week	which	Daniel	predicts	for	the	future,	they	do
not	give	any	clear	indication	that	mid-way	through	the	week
believers	will	be	removed	from	the	earth.
41
	It	is	also	hard	to	see	that
the	expectation	of	a	three-and-a-half-year	tribulation	provides	a
much	greater	sense	of	imminence	than	does	the	expectation	of	a
seven-year	tribulation.
Finally,	some	objections	to	the	
pre
tribulational	rapture	position	can
be	stated	in	the	form	of	arguments	in	favor	of	the	
post
tribulational
rapture	view	(the	historic	premillennial	view	that	Christ	will	return
after	a	period	of	tribulation	on	the	earth):
1.	The	New	Testament	nowhere	clearly	says	that	the	church	will	be
taken	out	of	the	world	before	the	tribulation.	If	this	significant	event
were	to	happen,	we	might	at	least	expect	that	explicit	teaching	to
that	effect	would	be	found	in	the	New	Testament.	Certainly	Jesus
tells	us	that	he	will	come	again	and	take	us	to	be	with	himself	(John
14:3),	and	Paul	tells	us	that	we	shall	be	caught	up	in	the	clouds	to
meet	the	Lord	in	the	air	(1	Thess.	4:17),	and	that	we	shall	be
changed	in	the	twinkling	of	an	eye	and	receive	resurrection	bodies
(1	Cor.	15:51–52),	but	each	of	these	passages	has	been	understood
by	believers	throughout	history	as	speaking	not	of	a	
secret	
rapture
of	the	church	before	the	tribulation,	but	of	a	very	visible	
public
rapture	(or	“taking	up”)	of	the	church	to	be	with	Christ	just	a	few
moments	prior	to	his	coming	to	earth	
with	them	
to	reign	during	the
millennial	kingdom	(or,	on	the	amillennial	view,	during	the	eternal
state).
42
Moreover,	it	is	very	difficult	to	understand	1	Thessalonians	4:17,
the	only	passage	that	explicitly	speaks	of	the	fact	that	the	church
will	be	“caught	up”	(or	“raptured”),	to	speak	of	the	idea	of	a	secret
coming.	It	says,	“The	Lord	himself	will	descend	from	heaven	
with
a	cry	of	command,	with	the	archangel’s	call,	and	with	the	sound	of
the	trumpet	of	God”	
(1	Thess.	4:16).	Of	these	words	Leon	Morris
rightly	says,	“It	may	be	that	from	this	he	intends	us	to	understand
that	the	rapture	will	take	place	secretly,	and	that	no	one	except	the
saints	themselves	will	know	what	is	going	on.	But	one	would
hardly	gather	this	from	his	words.	It	is	difficult	to	see	how	he	could
more	plainly	describe	something	that	is	open	and	public.”
43
The	doctrine	of	a	pretribulation	rapture	is	an	inference	from	several
passages,	all	of	which	are	disputed.	Moreover,	even	if	one	believes
this	doctrine	to	be	in	Scripture,	it	is	taught	with	such	little	clarity
that	it	was	not	discovered	until	the	nineteenth	century.	This	does	not
make	it	seem	likely.
2.	The	tribulation	is	quite	clearly	linked	with	the	Lord’s	return	in
some	passages.	First,	the	loud	trumpet	call	to	gather	the	elect	in
Matthew	24:31,	the	sound	of	the	trumpet	of	God	in	1	Thessalonians
4:16,	and	the	last	trumpet	at	which	our	bodies	are	changed	in	1
Corinthians	15:51–52,	all	seem	to	be	the	same	trumpet—the	last
trumpet	that	is	blown	just	before	the	millennium.	If	it	is	indeed	the
“last	trumpet”	(1	Cor.	15:52),	then	it	is	hard	to	see	how	another
loud	trumpet	call	(Matt.	24:31)	could	follow	it	seven	years	later.
In	addition,	Matthew	24	is	very	difficult	to	understand	as	referring
not	to	the	church	but	to	Jewish	people	who	would	be	saved	during
the	tribulation.	Jesus	is	addressing	
his	disciples	
(Matt.	24:1–4)	and
warning	them	of	persecution	and	suffering	to	come.	He	tells	them
of	the	great	tribulation	to	come,	and	then	says	that	“immediately
after	the	tribulation	of	those	days”	cosmic	signs	will	appear	and
“then	all	the	tribes	of	the	earth	will	mourn,	and	they	will	see	the
Son	of	man	coming	on	the	clouds	of	heaven	with	power	and	great
glory”	(Matt.	24:30).	But	is	it	likely	that	Jesus,	in	saying	all	these
things	
to	his	disciples,	
intended	his	words	to	apply	not	to	the	church
but	only	to	a	future	earthly	kingdom	of	Jewish	people	who	would
be	converted	during	the	tribulation?	How	could	the	disciples	have
known	that	he	had	such	a	meaning	in	mind?	Nor	does	it	seem	likely
that	the	disciples	are	here	as	representatives	of	a	future	Jewish
kingdom	and	not	as	representatives	of	the	church,	with	whose
founding	they	were	so	integrally	connected	as	to	be	its	foundation
(Eph.	2:20).
3.	Finally,	the	New	Testament	does	not	seem	to	justify	the	idea	of
two	separate	returns	of	Christ	(once	
for	
his	church	before	the
tribulation	and	then	seven	years	later	
with	
his	church	to	bring
judgment	on	unbelievers).	Once	again,	no	such	view	is	explicitly
taught	in	any	passage,	but	it	is	simply	an	inference	drawn	from
differences	between	various	passages	that	describe	Christ’s	return
from	different	perspectives.	But	it	is	not	at	all	difficult	to	see	these
passages	as	referring	to	a	single	event	occurring	at	one	time.
44
It	seems	best	to	conclude,	with	the	great	majority	of	the	church
throughout	history,	that	the	church	will	go	through	the	time	of
tribulation	predicted	by	Jesus.	We	would	probably	not	have	chosen
this	path	for	ourselves,	but	the	decision	was	not	ours	to	make.	And
if	God	wills	that	any	of	us	now	alive	remain	on	earth	until	the	time
of	this	great	tribulation,	then	we	should	heed	Peter’s	words,	“If	you
are	reproached	for	the	name	of	Christ,	you	are	blessed,	because	the
spirit	of	glory	and	of	God	rests	upon	you”	(1	Peter	4:14),	and,
“Christ	also	suffered	for	you,	leaving	you	an	example,	that	you
should	follow	in	his	steps”	(1	Peter	2:21).	This	idea	that	Christians
should	be	prepared	to	endure	suffering	is	also	seen	in	Paul’s	words
that	we	are	fellow	heirs	with	Christ,	“provided	we	suffer	with	him
in	order	that	we	may	also	be	glorified	with	him”	(Rom.	8:17).	And
we	may	remember	that	from	the	time	of	Noah	to	the	time	of	the
martyrdom	of	the	early	apostles,	it	has	frequently	been	God’s	way
to	bring	his	people	through	suffering	to	glory,	for	thus	he	did	even
with	his	own	Son.	“For	it	was	fitting	that	he,	for	whom	and	by
whom	all	things	exist,	in	bringing	many	sons	to	glory,	should	make
the	pioneer	of	their	salvation	perfect	through	suffering”	(Heb.	2:10).
It	is	from	the	Savior	who	himself	has	suffered	more	than	any	of	his
children	will	ever	suffer	that	we	have	the	admonition,	“Do	not	fear
what	you	are	about	to	suffer.	.	.	.	Be	faithful	unto	death,	and	I	will
give	you	the	crown	of	life”	(Rev.	2:10).
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
Before	reading	this	chapter,	did	you	have	any	conviction	about	whether
Christ’s	return	would	be	amillennial,	postmillennial,	or	premillennial?
And	whether	it	would	be	posttribulational	or	pretribulational?	If	so,	how
has	your	view	now	changed,	if	at	all?
2
.	
Explain	how	your	present	view	of	the	millennium	affects	your	Christian
life	today.	Similarly,	explain	how	your	view	of	the	tribulation	affects
your	present	Christian	life.
3
.	
What	do	you	think	it	will	feel	like	to	be	living	on	earth	with	a	glorified
body,	and	with	Jesus	Christ	as	King	over	the	whole	world?	Can	you
describe	in	any	detail	some	of	the	attitudes	and	emotional	responses	you
will	have	toward	various	situations	in	such	a	kingdom?	Do	you	really
look	forward	to	such	a	kingdom?	(Your	answers	will	differ	somewhat
depending	on	whether	you	expect	a	glorified	body	during	the	millennium
or	not	until	the	eternal	state.)
4
.	
What	might	be	both	the	positive	and	the	negative	results	of	a
pretribulation	rapture	position	in	the	everyday	lives	and	attitudes	of
Christians?	Similarly,	what	might	be	the	positive	and	negative	results	of
a	posttribulation	rapture	position?
SPECIAL	TERMS
amillennialism
	
	
posttribulational	premillennialism
dispensational	premillennialism
	
	
posttribulation	rapture
great	tribulation
	
	
premillennialism
historic	premillennialism
	
	
pretribulational	premillennialism
midtribulation	rapture
	
	
pretribulation	rapture
millennium
	
	
rapture
postmillennialism
	
	
	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	an	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	the	note	on	the
bibliography	to	chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be
found	in	
Appendix	4
.)
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92			Litton,	581–85
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1940			Wiley,	3:280–319
1983			Carter,	2:1118–27
3.			Baptist
1767			Gill,	2:268–302
1907			Strong,	1010–15
1917			Mullins,	466–72
1983–85			Erickson,	1205–24
4.			Dispensational
1947			Chafer,	4:264–78;	5:315–58
1949			Thiessen,	351–75,	391–95
1986			Ryrie,	439–52,	461–511
5.			Lutheran
1934			Mueller,	621–25
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1724–58			Edwards,	2:278–313
1871–73			Hodge,	3:861–68
1887–1921			Warfield,	
BD,	
643–64
1938			Berkhof,	695–707
1962			Buswell,	2:346–538
7.			Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988–92			Williams,	3:421–44
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
(no	explicit	treatment)
Other	Works
Adams,	Jay.	
The	Time	Is	at	Hand.	
Phillipsburg,	N.J.:	Presbyterian	and
Reformed,	1970.	(Amillennial.)
Allis,	O.	T.	
Prophecy	and	the	Church.	
Philadelphia:	Presbyterian	and
Reformed,	1945.	(Amillennial.)
Archer,	Gleason,	Paul	Feinberg,	Douglas	Moo,	and	Richard	Reiter.	
The
Rapture:	Pre-,	Mid-,	or	Post-tribulational?	
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,
1984.	(Contains	well-argued	essays	representing	the	three	different
positions.)
Bauckham,	R.	J.	“Millennium.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	428–30.
Beechick,	Allen.	
The	Pre-Tribulation	Rapture.	
Denver:	Accent,	1980.
Berkouwer,	G.	C.	
The	Return	of	Christ.	
Trans.	by	James	Van	Oosterom.
Ed.	by	Marlin	J.	Van	Elderen.	Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1972.
Boettner,	Lorraine.	
The	Millennium.	
Philadelphia:	Presbyterian	and
Reformed,	1957.	(Postmillennial.)
Clouse,	F.	G.	“Rapture	of	the	Church.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	908–10.
Clouse,	Robert	G.,	ed.	
The	Meaning	of	the	Millennium:	Four	Views.
Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,	1977.	(The	chapters	by	Ladd	and
Hoekema	are	excellent	statements	of	the	classical	premillennial	and
amillennial	positions.)
Davis,	John	Jefferson.	
Christ’s	Victorious	Kingdom.	
Grand	Rapids:
Baker,	1986.	(This	is	an	excellent	argument	for	the	postmillennial
position.)
Erickson,	Millard.	
Contemporary	Options	in	Eschatology.	
Grand	Rapids:
Baker,	1977.
Feinberg,	Charles	L.	
Millennialism:	The	Two	Major	Views.	
Chicago:
Moody	Press,	1980.	(Pretribulational	premillennial.)
Grier,	W.	J.	
The	Momentous	Event.	
London:	Banner	of	Truth,	1970.
Gundry,	R.	H.	
The	Church	and	the	Tribulation.	
Grand	Rapids:
Zondervan,	1973.	(Posttribulational	premillennial.)
Hendriksen,	William.	
More	Than	Conquerors:	An	Interpretation	of	the
Book	of	Revelation.	
London:	Tyndale	Press,	1962.	(Amillennial.)
Hoekema,	Anthony	A.	
The	Bible	and	the	Future.	
Grand	Rapids:
Eerdmans,	1979,	pp.	109–238.	(Amillennial.)
Kik,	J.	Marcellus.	
An	Eschatology	of	Victory.	
Nutley,	N.J.:	Presbyterian
and	Reformed,	1974.	(Postmillennial.)
Ladd,	George	Eldon.	
The	Blessed	Hope.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1956.
(Classic	or	posttribulational	premillennial.)
Lightner,	Robert	P.	
The	Last	Days	Handbook:	A	Comprehensive	Guide	to
Understanding	the	Different	Views	of	Prophecy.	Who	Believes	What
About	Prophecy	and	Why.	
Nashville,	Tenn.:	Thomas	Nelson,	1990.
McClain,	Alva	J.	
The	Greatness	of	the	Kingdom.	
Grand	Rapids:
Zondervan,	1959.	(Pretribulational	premillennial.)
Murray,	Iain.	
The	Puritan	Hope.	
London:	Banner	of	Truth,	1971.
(Postmillennial.)
Pentecost,	J.	Dwight.	
Things	to	Come.	
Findlay,	Ohio:	Dunham,	1958.
(Pretribulational	premillennial.)
Poythress,	Vern.	
Understanding	Dispensationalists.	
Grand	Rapids:
Zondervan,	1987.	(Amillennial.)
Travis,	S.	H.	“Eschatology.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	228–31.
Vos,	Geerhardus.	
The	Pauline	Eschatology.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,
1961.	(Amillennial.)
Walvoord,	John	F.	
The	Blessed	Hope	and	the	Tribulation.	
Grand	Rapids:
Zondervan,	1976.	(Pretribulational	premillennial.)
_____.	
The	Millennial	Kingdom.	
Findlay,	Ohio:	Dunham,	1959.
(Pretribulational	premillennial.)
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
Revelation	20:4–6:	
Then	I	saw	thrones,	and	seated	on	them	were	those	to
whom	judgment	was	committed.	Also	I	saw	the	souls	of	those	who	had	been
beheaded	for	their	testimony	to	Jesus	and	for	the	word	of	God,	and	who	had
not	worshiped	the	beast	or	its	image	and	had	not	received	its	mark	on	their
foreheads	or	their	hands.	They	came	to	life,	and	reigned	with	Christ	a
thousand	years.	The	rest	of	the	dead	did	not	come	to	life	until	the	thousand
years	were	ended.	This	is	the	first	resurrection.	Blessed	and	holy	is	he	who
shares	in	the	first	resurrection!	Over	such	the	second	death	has	no	power,	but
they	shall	be	priests	of	God	and	of	Christ,	and	they	shall	reign	with	him	a
thousand	years.
HYMN
“Jesus	Shall	Reign	Where’er	the	Sun”
This	hymn	by	Isaac	Watts	beautifully	describes	the	reign	of	Christ
over	the	whole	earth.	Whether	our	personal	convictions	on	the
millennium	lead	us	to	understand	this	hymn	as	referring	to	the
millennium	or	to	the	eternal	state,	in	either	case	it	gives	an	excellent
picture	of	the	kingdom	for	which	our	hearts	long	and	the	blessings
that	will	come	when	Jesus	is	King	over	the	earth.
Jesus	shall	reign	wherever	the	sun
Does	his	successive	journeys	run;
His	kingdom	stretch	from	shore	to	shore,
Til	moons	shall	wax	and	wane	no	more.
For	him	shall	endless	prayer	be	made,
And	praises	throng	to	crown	his	head;
His	name,	like	sweet	perfume,	shall	rise
With	every	morning	sacrifice.
People	and	realms	of	every	tongue
Dwell	on	his	love	with	sweetest	song;
And	infant	voices	shall	proclaim
Their	early	blessings	on	his	name.
Blessings	abound	where’er	he	reigns;
The	pris’ner	leaps	to	loose	his	chains,
The	weary	find	eternal	rest,
And	all	the	sons	of	want	are	blest.
Let	every	creature	rise	and	bring
Peculiar	honors	to	our	King,
Angels	descend	with	songs	again,
And	earth	repeat	the	loud	amen.
AUTHOR:	ISAAC	WATTS,	1719
NOTES
1
Another	name	sometimes	used	to	refer	to	premillennialism	is	
chiliasm,	
from	the	Greek	word	
chilioi,	
“a	thousand.”	This	term	is
more	often	found	in	older	literature	and	is	rarely	used	today.
2
An	alternative	type	of	premillennialism	holds	that	Christ	will	come	back	
before	
the	period	of	great	tribulation	begins	on	earth.
We	shall	examine	that	alternative	form	of	premillennialism	below.
3
Sometimes	this	secret	coming	of	Christ	for	believers	is	called	the	“rapture,”	from	the	Latin	word	
rapio,	
meaning	“seize,	snatch,
carry	away.”
4
Some	interpreters	hold	to	a	variation	of	this	view,	such	that	Christ	comes	back	in	the	middle	of	the	tribulation	and	rescues
believers.	After	that,	there	will	be	three-and-one-half	additional	years	of	tribulation	on	the	earth.	This	is	called	the	“midtribulation
rapture”	view.	For	further	discussion	of	this	view,	see	Gleason	Archer,	“The	Case	for	the	Mid-Seventieth-Week	Rapture	Position”
in	Gleason	Archer,	Paul	Feinberg,	Douglas	Moo,	and	Richard	Reiter,	
The	Rapture:	Pre-,	Mid-,	or	Post-Tribulational?	
(Grand
Rapids:	Zondervan,	1984),	pp.	113–45.
5
See	
chapter	54
,	for	a	discussion	of	the	signs	that	will	precede	Christ’s	return.
6
Here	I	am	largely	following	the	excellent	discussion	of	Anthony	A.	Hoekema,	“Amillennialism,”	in	
The	Meaning	of	the
Millennium:	Four	Views,	
ed.	Robert	G.	Clouse	(Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,	1977),	pp.	155–87.
7
Berkhof,	
Systematic	Theology,	
p.	715.
8
This	argument	is	especially	developed	in	Arthur	H.	Lewis,	
The	Dark	Side	of	the	Millennium	
(Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1980).
9
Since	they	believe	that	Rev.	20:1–6	applies	to	the	present	age,	amillennialists	sometimes	say,	“Premillennialists	are	
waiting	
for
the	millennium,	postmillennialists	are	
working	
for	it,	but	we	are	
enjoying	
it.”
It	should	be	noted	that	some	amillennialists	dislike	the	term	
amillennial	
because	it	implies	they	do	not	believe	in	any	millennium
at	all,	where	as	it	is	more	accurate	to	say	that	they	do	not	believe	in	a	
future	
millennium.	They	prefer	a	more	positive	term	such	as
“realized	millennialism,”	which	allows	them	more	easily	to	point	out	that	they	do	believe	in	the	millennial	reign	of	Christ	taught
in	Rev.	20:1–6;	however,	they	believe	the	passage	speaks	of	the	present	church	age.	(See	Jay	Adams,	
The	Time	Is	at	Hand
(Phillipsburg,	N.J.:	Presbyterian	and	Reformed,	1970],	pp.	7–11.)
10
See	above,	
section	D
,	for	a	discussion	of	these	passages.
11
Both	of	these	passages	use	the	same	term	
planaō.	
The	same	verb	is	used	in	Matthew	24:4,	5,	11,	24	to	speak	of	Jesus’	warnings
that	many	will	be	deceived	or	led	astray	by	false	Christs	and	false	prophets.
12
Other	reasons	to	reject	this	interpretation	are	(1)	“The	rest	of	the	dead”	are	said	to	“come	to	life”	after	the	thousand	years	are
ended	(v.	
5)—a	reference	to	the	bodily	resurrection	of	unbelievers—but	this	implies	that	the	phrase	“came	to	life”	refers	to	bodily
resurrection	in	both	cases,	not	just	to	spiritual	union	with	Christ	in	his	resurrection;	and	(2)	when	the	text	says,	“This	is	the	first
resurrection”	(v.	
5),	the	most	evident	antecedent	in	context	is	the	coming	to	life	of	believers	in	v.	
4,	but	no	mention	of	Christ’s
resurrection	occurs	in	the	context.
13
The	fact	that	Jesus	says	in	this	context,	“
The	hour	
is	coming	when	all	who	are	in	the	tombs	will	hear	his	voice”	does	not	require
that	both	resurrections	happen	at	the	same	time,	for	the	word	
hour	
elsewhere	in	John’s	gospel	can	refer	to	a	long	period	of	time;
just	three	verses	previously,	Jesus	said,	“Truly,	truly,	I	say	to	you,	
the	hour	
is	coming,	and	now	is,	when	the	dead	will	hear	the
voice	of	the	Son	of	God,	and	those	who	hear	will	live”	(John	5:25).	Here	the	“hour”	refers	to	the	entire	church	age	when	those
who	are	spiritually	dead	hear	Jesus’	voice	and	come	to	life.	John	can	also	use	the	word	
hour	
(Gk.	
hōra
)	to	speak	of	the	time	when
true	worshipers	worship	the	Father	in	spirit	and	in	truth	(John	4:21,	23),	or	when	intense	persecution	will	come	on	the	disciples
(John	16:2).	These	examples	also	speak	of	long	periods	of	time,	even	entire	ages.
A	similar	way	of	speaking	is	possible	in	English:	I	can	tell	a	class	of	sixty	students,	“Don’t	be	discouraged—
graduation	day	is
coming	
for	every	one	of	you.”	But	I	know	that	some	will	graduate	this	year,	some	will	graduate	next	year,	and	some	will	graduate
two	or	three	years	later.	I	can	still	speak	of	“graduation	day”	rather	than	“graduation	days”	because	it	is	clear	that	I	am	speaking
about	the	kind	of	day	it	is,	not	about	the	time	it	will	occur	or	whether	it	will	be	one	day	or	several	that	are	of	the	same	type.
14
See	
chapter	42
,	on	Matt.	27:52–53.
15
A	somewhat	similar	example	is	the	fact	that	many	people	today	refuse	to	believe	that	there	is	a	God	who	created	the	universe,
in	spite	of	the	incredible	complexity	of	every	living	being,	and	in	spite	of	what	is	for	all	practical	purposes	the	mathematical
impossibility	that	the	entire	universe	could	have	come	about	by	chance.
16
George	Ladd,	“Historic	Premillennialism,”	in	
The	Meaning	of	the	Millennium:	Four	Views,	
p.	40.
17
Some	other	interpretations	of	Rev.	20	have	been	proposed	by	amillennialists,	but	they	all	have	the	disadvantage	of	having	to
labor	under	the	burden	of	explaining	away	what	seems	to	be	a	straightforward	understanding	of	the	text	because	they	are
convinced	that	the	rest	of	Scripture	does	not	teach	a	future	earthly	millennium.	But	if	the	rest	of	Scripture	does	not	deny	it	(and	in
some	places	hints	at	it),	and	if	this	text	does	teach	it,	then	it	would	seem	much	more	appropriate	to	accept	it.
18
The	postmillennialist	A.	H.	Strong	argues	that	Rev.	20:4–10	“does	not	describe	the	events	commonly	called	the	second	advent
and	resurrection,	but	rather	describes	the	great	spiritual	changes	in	the	later	history	of	the	church,	which	are	typical	of,	and
preliminary	to,	the	second	advent	and	resurrection.”	He	sees	Rev.	20,	therefore,	simply	as	a	prediction	of	“the	latter	days	of	the
church	militant”	and	a	time	when	“under	the	special	influence	of	the	Holy	Ghost”	the	church	shall	“to	an	extent	unknown	before,
triumph	over	the	powers	of	evil,	both	within	and	without”	(A.	H.	Strong,	
Systematic	Theology,	
p.	1013).
19
Similarly,	when	amillennialists	talk	about	presently	“enjoying”	the	millennium,	which	they	understand	on	the	basis	of	Rev.	20
to	refer	to	the	church	age,	they	are	also	talking	about	a	very	different	kind	of	“millennium”	than	would	be	envisaged	by	either
postmillennialists	or	premillennialists.
20
This	is	not	to	say	that	such	a	position	would	be	free	of	internal	tensions	and	difficulties	(especially	the	difficulty	of	explaining
how	evil	could	diminish	when	Christ	was	absent	from	the	earth	but	grow	into	widespread	rebellion	when	he	is	physically	present
and	reigning),	but	it	is	to	say	that	there	would	be	no	absolute	inconsistency	within	this	position.
21
1	Cor.	15:25	says,	“For	he	must	reign	until	he	has	put	all	his	enemies	under	his	feet,”	but	the	immediate	context	(vv.	24,	26)
talks	about	destroying	his	enemies	(including	death	in	v.	
26),	not	about	converting	people	and	bringing	them	into	the	church.
22
One	interesting	example	in	the	United	States	is	the	state	of	Texas.	Statistics	indicate	that	over	50	percent	of	the	people	of	Texas
belong	to	Southern	Baptist	churches,	a	denomination	that	preaches	a	genuine	gospel	of	salvation	by	faith	alone,	and	the	need	for
each	individual	personally	to	be	born	again.	This	in	itself	is	a	wonderful	fact	for	which	we	should	be	thankful	to	God,	but	no	one
living	in	Texas	today	would	seriously	claim	to	be	living	already	in	the	millennium	(at	least	in	the	way	postmillennialists
understand	it).	If	we	add	to	the	Southern	Baptists	all	the	other	Bible-believing	Christians	in	the	state,	far	more	than	half	of	the
state’s	population	consists	of	born-again	Christians.	But	if	a	population	of	50	percent	Christians	cannot	bring	us	anywhere	near	to
an	earthly	millennium,	then	what	percentage	of	the	world	would	have	to	become	Christian	before	the	postmillennialist’s	hope
would	be	realized?	And	where	is	there	evidence	throughout	history	that	we	are	making	significant	progress	toward	the	realization
of	such	a	millennium?
23
”Between	1950	and	1992,	Bible	believing	Christians	went	from	just	3%	of	the	world	population	to	10%	of	the	population.	This
is	a	jump	from	80	million	to	540	million”	(Rick	Wood,	“Christianity:	Waning	or	Growing?”	in	
Mission	Frontiers	Bulletin
[Pasadena,	Calif.;	Jan.–Feb.,	1993],	p.	
25).	This	journal	publishes	similar	statistics	from	different	countries	in	almost	every	issue,
leading	one	to	conclude	that	the	growth	of	the	church	since	1950	is	so	remarkable	as	to	be	without	precedent	in	the	history	of	the
world.
24
Some	postmillennialists	believe	that	there	will	be	a	final	rebellion	before	Christ’s	return.	These	verses	would	not	constitute	an
objection	to	their	position,	but	the	following	verses	indicating	the	dominant	non-Christian	pattern	of	world	affairs	just	prior	to
Christ’s	return	would	still	weigh	against	such	a	postmillennial	view,	because	they	picture	a	world	decisively	different	from	the
millennium	of	peace	and	righteousness	brought	about	by	the	spread	of	the	gospel	in	a	postmillennial	system.
25
Here	I	am	following	the	interpretation	of	R.	T.	France,	
The	Gospel	According	to	Matthew,	
pp.	343–46.
26
Another	argument	in	favor	of	the	postmillennial	view	may	be	taken	from	the	statement	“this	generation	will	not	pass	away	till
all	these	things	take	place”	in	Matt.	24:34.	A	postmillennialist	can	take	“this	generation”	in	a	perfectly	natural	sense	to	refer	to	the
people	who	heard	Jesus	as	he	spoke,	and	thus	support	is	given	to	the	view	that	all	the	events	of	vv.	29–31	(or	even	vv.	5–31)
occurred	by	A.D.	70.	But	such	an	interpretation	is	not	necessary	to	Matt.	24:34,	because	“this	generation”	could	be	understood	to
refer	to	the	generation	that	sees	“all	these	things”	(v.	
33)	take	place,	whenever	that	may	be.	(The	“fig	tree”	in	v.	
32	should	not	be
understood	as	a	prophetic	symbol	for	a	particular	time	in	history—such	as	the	rebirth	of	Israel	as	a	nation—because	Jesus	uses	it
simply	as	an	illustration	from	nature:	when	the	fig	tree	puts	forth	leaves,	you	know	that	summer	will	come	soon;	similarly,	when
these	signs	[vv.	5–31]	occur,	you	know	that	the	Son	of	man	will	return	soon.)
27
France,	
Matthew,	
p.	345.
28
Ibid.,	p.	
344.
29
Ibid.,	p.	
344,	quoting	G.	B.	Caird,	
Jesus	and	the	Jewish	Nation	
(London:	Athlone	Press,	1965),	p.	
20.
30
It	is	true	that	some	postmillennialists	hold	that	there	will	be	a	time	of	rebellion	at	the	end	of	the	millennium,	just	before	Christ
returns.	But	a	period	of	rebellion	against	a	dominant	millennial	kingdom	of	righteousness	and	peace	is	not	the	same	as	a
tribulation	period	in	which	evil	is	dominant	and	Christians	experience	great	persecution.
31
See	
chapter	54
,	on	the	passages	teaching	Christ’s	imminent	return.
32
The	NASB	and	RSV	take	these	statements	not	as	predictions	but	as	prayers	(“May	he	have	dominion.	.	.	.	May	his	foes	bow
down	before	him,”	etc.).	But	in	either	case	this	psalm	shows	the	expectation	of	a	messianic	ruler	who	would	someday	have
dominion	“to	the	ends	of	the	earth.”
33
The	passage	still	describes	blessings	in	terms	of	old	covenant	sacrifices	and	mentions	the	feast	of	booths,	an	old	covenant
festival.	This	was	the	terminology	and	description	available	to	the	people	of	that	day,	but	the	New	Testament	can	allow	for	greater
(spiritual)	fulfillment	of	a	number	of	these	items.
34
The	Greek	word	
eita	
does	mean	“after	that”	(see	Mark	4:17,	28;	1	Cor.	15:5,	7;	1	Tim.	2:13).	It	does	not	always	indicate
temporal	sequence,	because	it	can	also	introduce	the	next	item	or	argument	in	a	logical	progression,	but	in	narrating	historical
occurrences	it	indicates	something	that	happens	after	something	else	(see	BAGD,	pp.	233–34;	also	LSJ,	p.	
498:	“used	to	denote
the	sequence	of	one	act	or	state	upon	another	.	.	.	
then,	next”
).
35
I	understand	the	aorist	indicative	
ezēsan	
in	both	cases	as	an	inceptive	aorist,	marking	the	beginning	of	an	action.
36
Much	of	the	argumentation	for	the	pretribulation	rapture	position	is	taken	from	the	very	thorough	essay	by	Paul	D.	Feinberg,
“The	Case	for	Pretribulation	Rapture	Position”	in	
The	Rapture:	Pre-,	Mid-,	or	Post-Tribulational?	
pp.	45–86.
37
Feinberg	gives	an	additional	argument	on	the	differences	between	the	passages	he	sees	as	describing	the	rapture	(before	the
tribulation)	and	the	passages	he	sees	as	describing	the	second	coming	(after	the	tribulation).	However,	most	of	these	differences
are	not	insurmountable	contradictions,	but	only	cases	where	an	event	is	mentioned	in	one	passage	and	not	in	another	(a	point	well
made	by	Douglas	Moo	in	his	“Response,”	pp.	99–101).
38
See	
chapter	54
.
39
See	
chapter	44
,	on	the	question	of	a	distinction	between	Israel	and	the	church.
40
In	
The	Rapture,	
pp.	113–45.
41
See	Paul	D.	Feinberg,	“Response,”	in	
The	Rapture,	
pp.	147–50.
42
When	Paul	says	that	“we	who	are	alive,	who	are	left,	shall	be	caught	up	together	with	them	in	the	clouds	to	
meet	
the	Lord	in	the
air”	(1	Thess.	4:17),	he	uses	the	Greek	word	
apantēsis,	
for	“meet,”	which	is	used	in	Greek	literature	outside	the	Bible	to	speak	of
citizens	going	out	of	a	city	to	meet	an	arriving	magistrate,	then	to	return	to	the	city	with	him.	“The	word	
apantēsis	
is	to	be
understood	as	a	technical	term	for	a	civic	custom	of	antiquity	whereby	a	public	welcome	was	accorded	by	a	city	to	important
visitors”	(Erik	Peterson,	
“apantēsis,”	TDNT,	
1:380).	Moulton	and	Milligan	say,	“The	word	seems	to	have	been	a	kind	of	technical
term	for	the	official	welcome	of	a	newly	arrived	dignitary—a	usage	which	accords	excellently	with	its	New	Testament	usage”
(MM,	p.	
53).
43
Leon	Morris,	
The	First	and	Second	Epistles	to	the	Thessalonians,	
p.	145.
44
See	footnote	
37
	above;	the	primary	passages	are	given	in	
chapter	54
.
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	56
The	Final	Judgment	and	Eternal
Punishment
Who	will	be	judged?	What	is	hell?
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
A.	The	Fact	of	Final	Judgment
1.
	Scriptural	Evidence	for	a	Final	Judgment.
	Scripture	frequently	affirms
the	fact	that	there	will	be	a	great	final	judgment	of	believers	and	unbelievers.
They	will	stand	before	the	judgment	seat	of	Christ	in	resurrected	bodies	and
hear	his	proclamation	of	their	eternal	destiny.
The	final	judgment	is	vividly	portrayed	in	John’s	vision	in
Revelation:
Then	I	saw	a	great	white	throne	and	him	who	sat	upon	it;	
from	his
presence	earth	and	sky	fled	away,	and	no	place	was	found	for	them.
And	I	saw	the	dead,	great	and	small,	standing	before	the	throne,	and
books	were	opened.	
Also	another	book	was	opened,	which	is	the	book
of	life.	
And	the	dead	were	judged	by	what	was	written	in	the	books,	by
what	they	had	done.	
And	the	sea	gave	up	the	dead	in	it,	death	and
hades	gave	up	the	dead	in	them,	and	all	were	judged	by	what	they	had
done.	Then	death	and	hades	were	thrown	into	the	lake	of	fire.	This	is
the	second	death,	the	lake	of	fire;	and	if	anyone’s	name	was	not	found
written	in	the	book	of	life,	he	was	thrown	into	the	lake	of	fire.	(Rev.
20:11–15)
Many	other	passages	teach	this	final	judgment.	Paul	tells	the	Greek
philosophers	in	Athens	that	God	“Now	.	.	.	commands	all	men
everywhere	to	repent,	because	
he	has	fixed	a	day	on	which	he	will
judge	the	world	in	righteousness	
by	a	man	whom	he	has	appointed,
and	of	this	he	has	given	assurance	to	all	men	by	raising	him	from
the	dead”	(Acts	17:30–31).
1
	Similarly,	Paul	talks	about	“the	day	of
wrath	when	God’s	righteous	judgment	will	be	revealed”	(Rom.
2:5).	Other	passages	speak	clearly	of	a	coming	day	of	judgment
(see	Matt.	10:15;	11:22,	24;	12:36;	25:31–46;	1	Cor.	4:5;	Heb.	6:2;
2	Peter	2:4;	Jude	6;	et	al.).
This	final	judgment	is	the	culmination	of	many	precursors	in	which
God	rewarded	righteousness	or	punished	unrighteousness
throughout	history.	While	he	brought	blessing	and	deliverance	from
danger	to	those	who	were	faithful	to	him,	including	Abel,	Noah,
Abraham,	Isaac,	Jacob,	Moses,	David,	and	the	faithful	among	the
people	of	Israel,	he	also	from	time	to	time	brought	judgment	on
those	who	persisted	in	disobedience	and	unbelief:	his	judgments
included	the	flood,	the	dispersion	of	the	people	from	the	tower	of
Babel,	the	judgments	on	Sodom	and	Gomorrah,	and	continuing
judgments	throughout	history,	both	on	individuals	(Rom.	1:18–32)
and	on	nations	(Isa.	13–23;	et	al.)	who	persisted	in	sin.	Moreover,
in	the	unseen	spiritual	realm	he	brought	judgment	on	angels	who
sinned	(2	Peter	2:4).	Peter	reminds	us	that	God’s	judgments	have
been	carried	out	periodically	and	with	certainty,	and	this	reminds	us
that	a	final	judgment	is	yet	coming,	for	“the	Lord	knows	how	to
rescue	the	godly	from	trial,	and	to	keep	the	unrighteousness	under
punishment	until	the	day	of	judgment,	and	especially	those	who
indulge	in	the	lust	of	defiling	passion	and	despise	authority”	(2
Peter	2:9–10).
2.	Will	There	Be	More	Than	One	Judgment?
	According	to	a	dispensational
view,	there	is	more	than	one	judgment	to	come.	For	example,
dispensationalists	would	not	see	the	final	judgment	in	Matthew	25:31–46:
When	the	Son	of	Man	comes	in	his	glory,	and	all	the	angels	with	him,
then	he	will	sit	on	his	glorious	throne.	
Before	him	will	be	gathered	all
the	nations,	
and	he	will	separate	them	one	from	another	as	a	shepherd
separates	the	sheep	from	the	goats,	and	he	will	place	the	sheep	at	his
right	hand,	but	the	goats	at	his	left.	Then	the	King	will	say	to	those	at
his	right	hand,	“Come,	O	blessed	of	my	Father,	inherit	the	kingdom
prepared	for	you	from	the	foundation	of	the	world;	for	I	was	hungry
and	you	gave	me	food.	.	.	.	As	you	did	it	to	one	of	the	least	of	these
my	brothers,	you	did	it	to	me.”	Then	he	will	say	to	those	at	his	left
hand,	“Depart	from	me,	you	cursed,	into	the	eternal	fire	prepared	for
the	devil	and	his	angels;	for	I	was	hungry	and	you	gave	me	no
food.	.	.	.	As	you	did	it	not	to	one	of	the	least	of	these,	you	did	it	not	to
me.”	And	they	will	go	away	into	eternal	punishment,	but	the	righteous
into	eternal	life.
From	a	dispensational	perspective,	this	passage	does	not	refer	to	final
judgment	(the	“great	white	throne	judgment”	spoken	of	in	Rev.	20:11–15),
but	rather	to	a	judgment	that	comes	after	the	tribulation	and	before	the
beginning	of	the	millennium.	They	say	that	this	will	be	a	
“judgment	of	the
nations”	
in	which	the	nations	are	judged	according	to	how	they	have	treated
the	Jewish	people	during	the	tribulation.	Those	who	have	treated	the	Jews
well	and	are	willing	to	submit	to	Christ	will	enter	into	the	millennium,	and
those	who	have	not	will	be	refused	entrance.
Thus,	in	a	dispensationalist	view	there	are	different	judgments:	(a)	a
“judgment	of	the	nations”	(Matt.	25:31–46)	to	determine	who
enters	the	millennium;	(b)	a	“judgment	of	believers’	works”
(sometimes	called	the	
bōma	
judgment	after	the	Greek	word	for
“judgment	seat”	in	2	Cor.	5:10)	in	which	Christians	will	receive
degrees	of	reward;	and	(c)	a	“great	white	throne	judgment”	at	the
end	of	the	millennium	(Rev.	20:11–15)	to	declare	eternal
punishments	for	unbelievers.
2
The	view	taken	in	this	book	is	that	these	three	passages	all	speak	of
the	same	final	judgment,	not	of	three	separate	judgments.	With
regard	to	Matthew	25:31–46	in	particular,	it	is	unlikely	that	the
dispensational	view	is	correct:	There	is	no	mention	of	entering	into
the	millennium	in	this	passage.	Moreover,	the	judgments
pronounced	speak	not	of	entrance	into	the	millennial	kingdom	on
earth	or	exclusion	from	that	kingdom	but	of	eternal	destinies	of
people:	“Inherit	the	kingdom	prepared	for	you	from	the	foundation
of	the	world.	.	.	.	Depart	from	me,	you	cursed,	into	the	eternal	fire
prepared	for	the	devil	and	his	angels.	.	.	.	And	they	will	go	away
into	
eternal	punishment,	
but	the	righteous	into	
eternal	life”	
(vv.	34,
41,	46).	Finally,	it	would	be	inconsistent	with	God’s	ways
throughout	Scripture	to	deal	with	people’s	
eternal	
destiny	on	the
basis	of	what	nation	they	belong	to,	for	unbelieving	nations	have
believers	within	them,	and	nations	that	exhibit	more	conformity	to
God’s	revealed	will	still	have	many	wicked	within	them.	And	“God
shows	no	partiality”	(Rom.	2:11).	Though	indeed	“all	the	nations”
are	gathered	before	Christ’s	throne	in	this	scene	(Matt.	25:32),	the
picture	of	judgment	is	one	of	judgment	on	individuals	(sheep	are
separated	from	goats,	and	those	individuals	who	treated	Christ’s
brothers	kindly	are	welcomed	into	the	kingdom	while	those	who
rejected	them	are	rejected,	vv.	35–40,	42–45).
B.	The	Time	of	Final	Judgment
The	final	judgment	will	occur	after	the	millennium	and	the
rebellion	that	occurs	at	the	end	of	it.	John	pictures	the	millennial
kingdom	and	the	removal	of	Satan	from	influence	on	the	earth	in
Revelation	20:1–6	(see	the	discussion	in	the	previous	two	chapters)
and	then	says	that	“when	the	thousand	years	are	ended,	Satan	will
be	loosed	from	his	prison	and	will	come	out	to	deceive	the	nations
.	.	.	to	gather	them	for	battle”	(Rev.	20:7–8).	After	God	decisively
defeats	this	final	rebellion	(Rev.	20:9–10),	John	tells	us	that
judgment	will	follow:	“Then	I	saw	a	great	white	throne	and	him
who	sat	upon	it”	(v.	
11).
C.	The	Nature	of	the	Final	Judgment
1.
	Jesus	Christ	Will	Be	the	Judge.
	Paul	speaks	of	“Jesus	Christ	who	is	to
judge	the	living	and	the	dead”	(2	Tim.	4:1).	Peter	says	that	Jesus	Christ	“is	the
one	ordained	by	God	to	be	the	judge	of	the	living	and	the	dead”	(Acts	10:42;
compare	17:31;	Matt.	25:31–33).	This	right	to	act	as	judge	over	the	whole
universe	is	something	that	the	Father	has	given	to	the	Son:	“The	Father	.	.	.
has	given	him	authority	to	execute	judgment,	because	he	is	the	Son	of	Man”
(John	5:26–27).
2.	Unbelievers	Will	Be	Judged.
	It	is	clear	that	all	unbelievers	will	stand
before	Christ	for	judgment,	for	this	judgment	includes	“the	dead,	great	and
small”	(Rev.	20:12),	and	Paul	says	that	“on	the	day	of	wrath	when	God’s
righteous	judgment	will	be	revealed,”	“he	will	render	to	every	man	according
to	his	works	.	.	.	for	those	who	are	factious	and	do	not	obey	the	truth,	but	obey
wickedness,	there	will	be	wrath	and	fury”	(Rom.	2:5–7).
This	judgment	of	unbelievers	will	include	
degrees	of	punishment,
for	we	read	that	the	dead	were	judged	“by	what	they	had	done”
(Rev.	20:12,	13),	and	this	judgment	according	to	what	people	had
done	must	therefore	involve	an	evaluation	of	the	works	that	people
have	done.
3
	Similarly,	Jesus	says:
And	that	servant	who	knew	his	master’s	will,	but	did	not	make	ready
or	act	according	to	his	will,	shall	receive	a	severe	beating.	But	he	who
did	not	know,	and	did	what	deserved	a	beating,	shall	receive	a	light
beating”	(Luke	12:47–48).
When	Jesus	says	to	the	cities	of	Chorazin	and	Bethsaida,	“It	shall	be	
more
tolerable	
on	the	day	of	judgment	for	Tyre	and	Sidon	than	for	you”	(Matt.
11:22;	compare	v.	
24),	or	when	he	says	that	the	scribes	“will	receive	the
greater	condemnation”	
(Luke	20:47),	he	implies	that	there	will	be	degrees	of
punishment	on	the	last	day.
In	fact,	every	wrong	deed	done	will	be	remembered	and	taken
account	of	in	the	punishment	that	is	meted	out	on	that	day,	because
“on	the	day	of	judgment	men	will	render	account	for	every	careless
word	they	utter”	(Matt.	12:36).	Every	word	spoken,	every	deed
done	will	be	brought	to	light	and	receive	judgment:	“For	God	will
bring	every	deed	into	judgment,	with	every	secret	thing,	whether
good	or	evil”	(Eccl.	12:14).
As	these	verses	indicate,	on	the	day	of	judgment	the	secrets	of
people’s	hearts	will	be	revealed	and	made	public.	Paul	speaks	of	the
day	when	“God	judges	the	secrets	of	men	by	Christ	Jesus”	(Rom.
2:16;	compare	Luke	8:17).	“Nothing	is	covered	up	that	will	not	be
revealed,	or	hidden	that	will	not	be	known.	Therefore	
whatever	you
have	said	in	the	dark	shall	be	heard	in	the	light,	and	what	you	have
whispered	in	private	rooms	shall	be	proclaimed	upon	the
housetops”	
(Luke	12:2–3).
3.	Believers	Will	Be	Judged.
	In	writing	to	Christians	Paul	says,	
“We	shall	all
stand	before	the	judgment	seat	of	God.	.	.	.	
Each	of	us	shall	give	account	of
himself	to	God”	(Rom.	14:10,	12).	He	also	tells	the	Corinthians,	“For	
we	must
all	appear	before	the	judgment	seat	of	Christ,	that	each	one	may	receive	what
is	due	him	for	the	things	done	while	in	the	body,	
whether	good	or	bad”	(2	Cor.
5:10;	cf.	Rom.	2:6–11;	Rev.	20:12,	15).	In	addition,	the	picture	of	the	final
judgment	in	Matthew	25:31–46	includes	Christ	separating	the	sheep	from	the
goats,	and	rewarding	those	who	receive	his	blessing.
It	is	important	to	realize	that	this	judgment	of	believers	will	be	a
judgment	to	evaluate	and	bestow	various	degrees	of	reward	(see
below),	but	the	fact	that	they	will	face	such	a	judgment	should
never	cause	believers	to	fear	that	they	will	be	eternally	condemned.
Jesus	says,	“He	who	hears	my	word	and	believes	him	who	sent	me,
has	eternal	life;	
he	does	not	come	into	judgment,	
but	has	passed
from	death	to	life”	(John	5:24).	Here	“judgment”	must	be
understood	in	the	sense	of	eternal	condemnation	and	death,	since	it
is	contrasted	with	passing	from	death	into	life.	At	the	day	of	final
judgment	more	than	at	any	other	time,	it	is	of	utmost	importance
that	“there	is	therefore	now	
no	condemnation	for	those	who	are	in
Christ	Jesus”	
(Rom.	8:1).	Thus	the	day	of	judgment	can	be
portrayed	as	one	in	which	believers	are	rewarded	and	unbelievers
are	punished:
The	nations	raged,	but	your	wrath	came,	and	the	time	for	the	dead	to
be	judged,	
for	rewarding	your	servants,	
the	prophets	and	saints,	and
those	who	fear	your	name,	both	small	and	great,	and	for	destroying
the	destroyers	of	the	earth.	(Rev.	11:18)
Will	all	the	secret	words	and	deeds	of	believers,	and	all	their	sins,
also	be	revealed	on	that	last	day?	It	seems	that	this	is	so,	because	in
writing	to	
believers	
about	the	day	of	judgment	he	says	that	when
the	Lord	comes	he	will	“
bring	to	light	the	things	now	hidden	in
darkness	
and	will	disclose	the	purposes	of	the	heart.	Then	every
man	will	receive	his	commendation	from	God”	(1	Cor.	4:5;
compare	Col.	3:25).	Certainly	this	fact	should	provide	a	motive	for
godly	living,	and	Paul	uses	it	that	way	in	2	Corinthians	5:9–10:	“
We
make	it	our	aim	to	please	him.	For	
we	must	all	appear	before	the
judgment	seat	of	Christ.”	But	it	should	not	cause	terror	or	alarm	on
the	part	of	believers,	because	even	sins	that	are	made	public	on	that
day	will	be	made	public	as	sins	that	have	been	
forgiven,	
and	thereby
they	will	be	the	occasion	for	giving	glory	to	God	for	the	richness	of
his	grace.
Scripture	also	teaches	that	there	will	be	
degrees	of	reward	for
believers.	
Paul	encourages	the	Corinthians	to	be	careful	how	they
build	the	church	on	the	foundation	that	has	already	been	laid—
Jesus	Christ	himself.
Now	if	anyone	builds	on	the	foundation	with	gold,	silver,	precious
stones,	wood,	hay,	straw—each	man’s	work	will	become	manifest;	for
the	Day	will	disclose	it,	because	it	will	be	revealed	with	fire,	and	the
fire	will	test	what	sort	of	work	each	one	has	done.	
If	the	work	which
any	man	has	built	on	the	foundation	survives,	he	will	receive	a
reward.	
If	any	man’s	work	is	burned	up,	he	will	suffer	loss,	though	he
himself	will	be	saved,	but	only	as	through	fire.	(1	Cor.	3:12–15)
Paul	similarly	says	of	Christians	that	“we	must	all	appear	before	the
judgment	seat	of	Christ,	that	each	one	may	receive	
what	is	due	him
for	the	things	done	while	in	the	body,	
whether	good	or	bad”	(2	Cor.
5:10),	again	implying	degrees	of	reward	for	what	we	have	done	in
this	life.	Likewise,	in	the	parable	of	the	pounds,	the	one	who	made
ten	pounds	more	was	told,	“You	shall	have	authority	over	ten
cities,”	and	the	one	whose	pound	had	made	five	pounds	more	was
told,	“And	you	are	to	be	over	five	cities”	(Luke	19:17,	19).	Many
other	passages	likewise	teach	or	imply	degrees	of	reward	for
believers	at	the	final	judgment.
4
But	we	must	guard	against	misunderstanding	here:	Even	though
there	will	be	degrees	of	reward	in	heaven,	the	joy	of	each	person
will	be	full	and	complete	for	eternity.	If	we	ask	how	this	can	be
when	there	are	different	degrees	of	reward,	it	simply	shows	that	our
perception	of	happiness	is	based	on	the	assumption	that	happiness
depends	on	what	we	possess	or	the	status	or	power	that	we	have.	In
actuality,	however,	our	true	happiness	consists	in	delighting	in	God
and	rejoicing	in	the	status	and	recognition	that	he	has	given	us.	The
foolishness	of	thinking	that	only	those	who	have	been	highly
rewarded	and	given	great	status	will	be	fully	happy	in	heaven	is
seen	when	we	realize	that	no	matter	how	great	a	reward	we	are
given,	there	will	always	be	those	with	greater	rewards,	or	who	have
higher	status	and	authority,	including	the	apostles,	the	heavenly
creatures,	and	Jesus	Christ	and	God	himself.	Therefore	if	highest
status	were	essential	for	people	to	be	fully	happy,	no	one	but	God
would	be	fully	happy	in	heaven,	which	is	certainly	an	incorrect
idea.	Moreover,	those	with	greater	reward	and	honor	in	heaven,
those	nearest	the	throne	of	God,	delight	not	in	their	status	but	only
in	the	privilege	of	falling	down	before	God’s	throne	to	worship	him
(see	Rev.	4:10–11).
It	would	be	morally	and	spiritually	beneficial	for	us	to	have	a
greater	consciousness	of	this	clear	New	Testament	teaching	on
degrees	of	heavenly	reward.	Rather	than	making	us	competitive
with	one	another,	it	would	cause	us	to	help	and	encourage	one
another	that	we	all	may	increase	our	heavenly	reward,	for	God	has
an	infinite	capacity	to	bring	blessing	to	us	all,	and	we	are	all
members	of	one	another	(cf.	1	Cor.	12:26–27).	We	would	more
eagerly	heed	the	admonition	of	the	author	of	Hebrews,	“
Let	us
consider	how	to	stir	up	one	another	to	love	and	good	works,	
not
neglecting	to	meet	together,	as	is	the	habit	of	some,	but
encouraging	one	another,	
and	all	the	more	as	you	see	the	Day
drawing	near”	(Heb.	10:24–25).	Moreover,	in	our	own	lives	a
heartfelt	seeking	of	future	heavenly	reward	would	motivate	us	to
work	wholeheartedly	for	the	Lord	at	whatever	task	he	calls	us	to,
whether	great	or	small,	paid	or	unpaid.	It	would	also	make	us	long
for	his	approval	rather	than	for	wealth	or	success.	It	would	motivate
us	to	work	at	building	up	the	church	on	the	one	foundation,	Jesus
Christ	(1	Cor.	3:10–15).
4.	Angels	Will	Be	Judged.
	Peter	says	that	the	rebellious	angels	have	been
committed	to	pits	of	nether	gloom	“to	be	kept	until	the	judgment”	(2	Peter
2:4),	and	Jude	says	that	rebellious	angels	have	been	kept	by	God	“until	the
judgment	of	the	great	day”	(Jude	6).	This	means	that	at	least	the	
rebellious
angels	or	demons	will	be	subject	to	judgment	on	that	last	day	as	well.
Scripture	does	not	clearly	indicate	whether	righteous	angels	will
undergo	some	kind	of	evaluation	of	their	service	as	well,	but	it	is
possible	that	they	are	included	in	Paul’s	statement	“Do	you	not
know	that	
we	are	to	judge	angels?”	
(1	Cor.	6:3).	It	is	probable	that
this	includes	righteous	angels	because	there	is	no	indication	in	the
context	that	Paul	is	speaking	of	demons	or	fallen	angels,	and	the
word	“angel”	without	further	qualification	in	the	New	Testament
would	normally	be	understood	to	refer	to	righteous	angels.	But	the
text	is	not	explicit	enough	to	give	us	certainty.
5.	We	Will	Help	in	the	Work	of	Judgment.
	It	is	a	rather	amazing	aspect	of
New	Testament	teaching	that	we	(believers)	will	take	part	in	the	process	of
judgment.	Paul	says:
Do	you	not	know	that	
the	saints	will	judge	the	world?	
And	if	the
world	is	to	be	judged	by	you,	are	you	incompetent	to	try	trivial	cases?
Do	you	not	know	that	
we	are	to	judge	angels?	
How	much	more,
matters	pertaining	to	this	life?	(1	Cor.	6:2–3)
It	might	be	argued	that	this	simply	means	we	will	be	watching	the
declaration	of	judgment	by	Christ	and	approving	it,	but	this	does
not	seem	to	fit	the	context	well,	for	here	Paul	is	encouraging	the
Corinthians	to	settle	legal	disputes	among	themselves	rather	than
taking	them	to	court	before	unbelievers.	In	this	very	context	he
says,	“Can	it	be	that	there	is	no	man	among	you	wise	enough	to
decide	between	members	of	the	brotherhood,	but	brother	goes	to
law	against	brother,	and	that	before	unbelievers?”	(1	Cor.	6:5–6).
This	kind	of	judgment	certainly	involves	careful	evaluation	and
wise	discernment.	And	this	implies	that	such	careful	evaluation	and
discernment	will	be	exercised	by	us	in	judging	angels	and	in
judging	the	world	on	the	day	of	final	judgment.
This	is	similar	to	the	teaching	of	Revelation	20,	where	John	says
that	he	saw	thrones,	and	“seated	on	them	were	
those	to	whom
judgment	was	committed”	
(Rev.	20:4).	Although	the	text	does	not
explain	the	identity	of	those	seated	on	the	thrones,	the	fact	that	they
are	mentioned	in	the	plural	indicates	that	Christ	does	not	reserve
every	aspect	of	the	process	of	judging	for	himself	alone.	Indeed,	he
tells	his	twelve	disciples	that	they	will	“sit	on	twelve	thrones,
judging	
the	twelve	tribes	of	Israel”	(Matt.	19:28;	compare	Luke
22:30).	This	accords	with	the	fact	that	throughout	the	history	of
redemption	God	has	from	time	to	time	given	the	right	to	exercise
judgment	into	the	hands	of	human	authorities,	whether	Moses	and
the	elders	who	assisted	him,	the	judges	of	Israel	whom	God	raised
up	during	the	period	of	the	judges,	the	wise	kings	such	as	David
and	Solomon,	the	civil	government	of	many	nations	(see	Rom.
13:1–7;	1	Peter	2:13–14),	or	those	who	have	authority	to	rule	and
govern	within	the	church	and	to	oversee	the	exercise	of	church
discipline.
D.	Necessity	of	Final	Judgment
Since	when	believers	die	they	pass	immediately	into	the	presence	of
God,	and	when	unbelievers	die	they	pass	into	a	state	of	separation
from	God	and	the	endurance	of	punishment,
5
	we	may	wonder	why
God	has	a	time	of	final	judgment	established	at	all.	Berkhof	wisely
points	out	that	the	final	judgment	is	not	for	the	purpose	of	letting
God	find	out	the	condition	of	our	hearts	or	the	pattern	of	conduct	of
our	lives,	for	he	already	knows	that	in	every	detail.	Berkhof	rather
says	of	the	final	judgment:
It	will	serve	the	purpose	rather	of	displaying	before	all	rational
creatures	the	declarative	glory	of	God	in	a	formal,	forensic	act,	which
magnifies	on	the	one	hand	His	holiness	and	righteousness,	and	on	the
other	hand,	His	grace	and	mercy.	Moreover,	it	should	be	borne	in
mind	that	the	judgment	at	the	last	day	will	differ	from	that	of	the
death	of	each	individual	in	more	than	one	respect.	It	will	not	be	secret,
but	public;	it	will	not	pertain	to	the	soul	only,	but	also	to	the	body;	it
will	not	have	reference	to	a	single	individual,	but	to	all	men.
6
E.	Justice	of	God	in	the	Final	Judgment
Scripture	clearly	affirms	that	God	will	be	entirely	just	in	his
judgment	and	no	one	will	be	able	to	complain	against	him	on	that
day.	God	is	the	one	who	“judges	each	one	impartially	according	to
his	deeds”	(1	Peter	1:17),	and	“God	shows	no	partiality”	(Rom.
2:11;	compare	Col.	3:25).	For	this	reason,	on	the	last	day	“every
mouth”	will	be	“stopped,”	and	the	whole	world	will	be	“held
accountable	to	God”	(Rom.	3:19),	with	no	one	being	able	to
complain	that	God	has	treated	him	or	her	unfairly.	In	fact,	one	of
the	great	blessings	of	the	final	judgment	will	be	that	saints	and
angels	will	see	demonstrated	in	millions	of	lives	the	absolutely	pure
justice	of	God,	and	this	will	be	a	source	of	praise	to	him	for	all
eternity.	At	the	time	of	the	judgment	on	wicked	Babylon,	there	will
be	great	praise	in	heaven,	for	John	says,	“I	heard	what	seemed	to	be
the	loud	voice	of	a	great	multitude	in	heaven,	crying,	‘
Hallelujah!
Salvation	and	glory	and	power	belong	to	our	God,	for	
his	judgments
are	true	and	just’	”
(Rev.	19:1–2).
F.	Moral	Application	of	the	Final	Judgment
The	doctrine	of	final	judgment	has	several	positive	moral
influences	in	our	lives.
1.
	The	Doctrine	of	Final	Judgment	Satisfies	Our	Inward	Sense	of	a	Need
for	Justice	in	the	World.
	The	fact	that	there	will	be	a	final	judgment	assures
us	that	ultimately	God’s	universe	is	
fair,	
for	God	is	in	control,	and	he	keeps
accurate	records	and	renders	just	judgment.	When	Paul	tells	slaves	to	be
submissive	to	their	masters,	he	reassures	them,	“For	the	wrongdoer	will	be
paid	back	for	the	wrong	he	has	done,	and	there	is	no	partiality”	(Col	3:25).
When	the	picture	of	a	final	judgment	mentions	the	fact	that	“books	were
opened”	(Rev.	20:12;	compare	Mal.	3:16),	it	reminds	us	(whether	the	books
are	literal	or	symbolic)	that	a	permanent	and	accurate	record	of	all	our	deeds
has	been	kept	by	God,	and	ultimately	all	accounts	will	be	settled	and	all	will
be	made	right.
2.	The	Doctrine	of	Final	Judgment	Enables	Us	to	Forgive	Others	Freely.
We	realize	that	it	is	not	up	to	us	to	take	revenge	on	others	who	have	wronged
us,	or	even	to	want	to	do	so,	because	God	has	reserved	that	right	for	himself.
“Beloved,	never	avenge	yourselves,	but	leave	it	to	the	wrath	of	God,	for	it	is
written,	
‘Vengeance	is	mine,	I	will	repay,	says	the	Lord’	”
(Rom.	12:19).	In
this	way	whenever	we	have	been	wronged,	we	can	give	into	God’s	hands	any
desire	to	harm	or	pay	back	the	person	who	has	wronged	us,	knowing	that
every	wrong	in	the	universe	will	ultimately	be	paid	for—either	it	will	turn	out
to	have	been	paid	for	by	Christ	when	he	died	on	the	cross	(if	the	wrongdoer
becomes	a	Christian),	or	it	will	be	paid	for	at	the	final	judgment	(for	those
who	do	not	trust	in	Christ	for	salvation).	But	in	either	case	we	can	give	the
situation	into	God’s	hands,	and	then	pray	that	the	wrongdoer	will	trust	Christ
for	salvation	and	thereby	receive	forgiveness	of	his	or	her	sins.	This	thought
should	keep	us	from	harboring	bitterness	or	resentment	in	our	hearts	for
injustices	we	have	suffered	that	have	not	been	made	right:	God	is	just,	and	we
can	leave	these	situations	in	his	hands,	knowing	that	he	will	someday	right	all
wrongs	and	give	absolutely	fair	rewards	and	punishments.	In	this	way	we	are
following	in	the	example	of	Christ,	who	“when	he	was	reviled,	he	did	not
revile	in	return;	when	he	suffered,	he	did	not	threaten;	but	
he	trusted	to	him
who	judges	justly”	
(1	Peter	2:22–23).	He	also	prayed,	“Father,	forgive	them,
for	they	know	not	what	they	do”	(Luke	23:34;	compare	Acts	7:60,	where
Stephen	followed	Jesus’	example	in	praying	for	those	who	put	him	to	death).
3.	The	Doctrine	of	the	Final	Judgment	Provides	a	Motive	for	Righteous
Living.
	For	believers,	the	final	judgment	is	an	incentive	to	faithfulness	and
good	works,	not	as	a	means	of	earning	forgiveness	of	sins,	but	as	a	means	of
gaining	greater	eternal	reward.
7
	This	is	a	healthy	and	good	motive	for	us—
Jesus	tells	us,	“Lay	up	for	yourselves	treasures	in	heaven”	(Matt.	6:20)—
though	it	runs	counter	to	the	popular	views	of	our	secular	culture,	a	culture
that	does	not	really	believe	in	heaven	or	eternal	rewards	at	all.
For	unbelievers,	the	doctrine	of	final	judgment	still	provides	some
moral	restraint	on	their	lives.	If	in	a	society	there	is	a	widespread
general	acknowledgment	that	all	will	someday	give	account	to	the
Creator	of	the	universe	for	their	lives,	some	“fear	of	God”	will
characterize	many	people’s	lives.	By	contrast,	those	who	have	no
deep	consciousness	of	final	judgment	give	themselves	up	to	greater
and	greater	evil,	demonstrating	that	“there	is	
no	fear	of	God	
before
their	eyes”	(Rom.	3:18).	Those	who	deny	the	final	judgment,	Peter
says,	will	be	“scoffers”	who	“will	come	in	the	last	days	with
scoffing,	
following	their	own	passions	
and	saying,	‘Where	is	the
promise	of	his	coming?’	”(2	Peter	3:3–4).	He	also	declares	that
evildoers	who	“are	surprised	that	you	do	not	now	join	them	in	the
same	wild	profligacy,”	and	“who	abuse	you”	will	nonetheless	“give
account	to	him	who	is	ready	to	judge	the	living	and	the	dead”	(1
Peter	4:4–5).	An	awareness	of	final	judgment	is	both	a	comfort	to
believers	and	a	warning	to	unbelievers	not	to	continue	in	their	evil
ways.
4.	The	Doctrine	of	Final	Judgment	Provides	a	Great	Motive	for
Evangelism.
	The	decisions	made	by	people	in	this	life	will	affect	their
destiny	for	all	eternity,	and	it	is	right	that	our	hearts	feel	and	our	mouths	echo
the	sentiment	of	the	appeal	of	God	through	Ezekiel,	
“Turn	back,	turn	back
from	your	evil	ways;	for	why	will	you	die,	O	house	of	Israel?”	
(Ezek.	33:11).
In	fact,	Peter	indicates	that	the	delay	of	the	Lord’s	return	is	due	to	the	fact	that
God	“is	forbearing	toward	you,	not	wishing	that	any	should	perish,	but	that	all
should	reach	repentance”	(2	Peter	3:9).
G.	Hell
It	is	appropriate	to	discuss	the	doctrine	of	hell	in	connection	with
the	doctrine	of	final	judgment.	We	may	define	hell	as	follows:	
Hell
is	a	place	of	eternal	conscious	punishment	for	the	wicked.	
Scripture
teaches	in	several	passages	that	there	is	such	a	place.	At	the	end	of
the	parable	of	the	talents,	the	master	says,	“Cast	the	worthless
servant	into	the	outer	darkness;	there	men	will	weep	and	gnash	their
teeth”	(Matt.	25:30).	This	is	one	among	several	indications	that
there	will	be	consciousness	of	punishment	after	the	final	judgment.
Similarly,	at	the	judgment	the	king	will	say	to	some,	“Depart	from
me,	you	cursed,	into	
the	eternal	fire	
prepared	for	the	devil	and	his
angels”	(Matt.	25:41),	and	Jesus	says	that	those	thus	condemned
“will	go	away	into	
eternal	punishment,	
but	the	righteous	into
eternal	life”	(Matt.	25:46).
8
	In	this	text,	the	parallel	between
“eternal	life”	and	“eternal	punishment”	indicates	that	both	states
will	be	without	end.
9
Jesus	refers	to	hell	as	“the	unquenchable	fire”	(Mark	9:43),	and
says	that	hell	is	a	place	“where	their	worm	does	not	die,	and	the	fire
is	not	quenched”	(Mark	9:48).
10
	The	story	of	the	rich	man	and
Lazarus	also	indicates	a	horrible	consciousness	of	punishment:
The	rich	man	also	died	and	was	buried;	and	in	Hades,	being	in
torment,	he	lifted	up	his	eyes,	and	saw	Abraham	far	off	and	Lazarus	in
his	bosom,	and	he	called	out,	“Father	Abraham,	have	mercy	upon	me,
and	send	Lazarus	to	dip	the	end	of	his	finger	in	water	and	cool	my
tongue;	for	I	am	in	anguish	in	this	flame.”	(Luke	16:22–24)
He	then	begs	Abraham	to	send	Lazarus	to	his	father’s	house,	“for	I	have	five
brothers,	so	that	he	may	warn	them,	lest	they	also	come	into	
this	place	of
torment”	
(Luke	16:28).
When	we	turn	to	Revelation,	the	descriptions	of	this	eternal
punishment	are	also	very	explicit:
If	anyone	worships	the	beast	and	its	image,	and	receives	a	mark	on	his
forehead	or	on	his	hand,	he	also	shall	drink	the	wine	of	God’s	wrath,
poured	unmixed	into	the	cup	of	his	anger,	and	he	shall	be	tormented
with	fire	and	sulphur	in	the	presence	of	the	holy	angels	and	in	the
presence	of	the	Lamb.	
And	the	smoke	of	their	torment	goes	up	forever
and	ever;	and	they	have	no	rest,	day	or	night,	these	worshipers	of	the
beast	and	its	image,	
and	whoever	receives	the	mark	of	its	name.	(Rev.
14:9–11)
This	passage	very	clearly	affirms	the	idea	of	eternal	conscious	punishment	of
unbelievers.
With	respect	to	the	judgment	on	the	wicked	city	of	Babylon,	a	large
multitude	in	heaven	cries,	“Hallelujah!	
The	smoke	from	her	goes	up
for	ever	and	ever”	
(Rev.	19:3).	After	the	final	rebellion	of	Satan	is
crushed,	we	read,	“The	devil	who	had	deceived	them	was	thrown
into	the	lake	of	fire	and	sulphur	where	the	beast	and	the	false
prophet	were,	and	
they	will	be	tormented	day	and	night	for	ever	and
ever”	
(Rev.	20:10).	This	passage	is	also	significant	in	connection
with	Matthew	25:41,	in	which	unbelievers	are	sent	“into	the	eternal
fire	prepared	for	the	devil	and	his	angels.”	These	verses	should
make	us	realize	the	immensity	of	the	evil	that	is	found	in	sin	and
rebellion	against	God,	and	the	magnitude	of	the	holiness	and	the
justice	of	God	that	calls	forth	this	kind	of	punishment.
The	idea	that	there	will	be	
eternal	
conscious	punishment	of
unbelievers	has	been	denied	recently	even	by	some	evangelical
theologians.
11
	It	has	previously	been	denied	by	the	Seventh	Day
Adventist	Church	and	by	various	individuals	throughout	church
history.	Those	who	deny	eternal	conscious	punishment	often
advocate	
“annihilationism,”	
a	teaching	that,	after	the	wicked	have
suffered	the	penalty	of	God’s	wrath	for	a	time,	God	will
“annihilate”	them	so	that	they	no	longer	exist.
12
	Many	who	believe
in	annihilationism	also	hold	to	the	reality	of	final	judgment	and
punishment	for	sin,	but	they	argue	that	after	sinners	have	suffered
for	a	certain	period	of	time,	bearing	the	wrath	of	God	against	their
sin,	they	will	finally	cease	to	exist.	The	punishment	will	therefore
be	“conscious”	but	it	will	not	be	“eternal.”
Arguments	advanced	in	favor	of	annihilationism	are:	(1)	the	biblical
references	to	the	
destruction	
of	the	wicked,	which,	some	say,
implies	that	they	will	no	longer	exist	after	they	are	destroyed	(Phil.
3:19;	1	Thess.	5:3;	2	Thess.	1:9;	2	Peter	3:7;	et	al.);	(2)	the	apparent
inconsistency	of	eternal	conscious	punishment	with	the	
love	of
God;	
(3)	the	apparent	injustice	involved	in	the	
disproportion
between	sins	committed	in	time	and	punishment	that	is	eternal;	and
(4)	the	fact	that	the	
continuing	presence	of	evil	creatures	in	God’s
universe	
will	eternally	mar	the	perfection	of	a	universe	that	God
created	to	reflect	his	glory.
In	response,	it	must	be	said	that	the	passages	which	speak	of
destruction	
(such	as	Phil.	3:19;	1	Thess.	5:3;	2	Thess.	1:9;	and	2
Peter	3:7)	do	not	necessarily	imply	the	cessation	of	existence,	for	in
these	passages	the	terms	used	for	“destruction”	do	not	necessarily
imply	a	ceasing	to	exist	or	some	kind	of	annihilation,	but	can
simply	be	ways	of	referring	to	the	harmful	and	destructive	effects	of
final	judgment	on	unbelievers.
13
With	respect	to	the	argument	from	the	love	of	God,	the	same
difficulty	in	reconciling	God’s	love	with	eternal	punishment	would
seem	to	be	present	in	reconciling	God’s	love	with	the	idea	of	divine
punishment	at	all,	and,	conversely,	if	(as	Scripture	abundantly
testifies)	it	is	consistent	for	God	to	punish	the	wicked	for	a	certain
length	of	time	after	the	last	judgment,	then	there	seems	to	be	no
necessary	reason	why	it	would	be	inconsistent	of	God	to	inflict	the
same	punishment	for	an	unending	period	of	time.
This	kind	of	reasoning	may	lead	some	people	to	adopt	another	kind
of	annihilationism,	one	in	which	there	is	no	conscious	suffering	at
all,	not	even	for	a	brief	time,	and	the	only	punishment	is	that
unbelievers	cease	to	exist	after	they	die.	But,	in	response,	it	may	be
wondered	whether	this	kind	of	immediate	annihilation	can	really	be
called	a	punishment,	since	there	would	be	no	consciousness	of	pain.
In	fact,	the	guarantee	that	there	would	be	a	cessation	of	existence
would	seem	to	many	people,	especially	those	who	are	suffering	and
in	difficulty	in	this	life,	to	be	in	some	ways	a	desirable	alternative.
And	if	there	was	no	punishment	of	unbelievers	at	all,	even	people
like	Hitler	and	Stalin	would	have	nothing	coming	to	them,	and	there
would	be	no	ultimate	justice	in	the	universe.	Then	people	would
have	great	incentive	to	be	as	wicked	as	possible	in	this	life.
The	argument	that	
eternal	
punishment	is	unfair	(because	there	is	a
disproportion	between	temporary	sin	and	eternal	punishment)
wrongly	assumes	that	we	know	the	extent	of	the	evil	done	when
sinners	rebel	against	God.	David	Kingdon	observes	that	“sin	against
the	Creator	is	heinous	to	a	degree	utterly	beyond	our	sin-warped
imaginations’	[ability]	to	conceive	of.	.	.	.	Who	would	have	the
temerity	to	suggest	to	God	what	the	punishment	.	.	.	should	be?”
14
He	also	responds	to	this	objection	by	suggesting	that	unbelievers	in
hell	may	go	on	sinning	and	receiving	punishment	for	their	sin,	but
never	repenting,	and	notes	that	Revelation	22:11	points	in	this
direction:	“Let	the	evildoer	still	do	evil,	and	the	filthy	still	be
filthy.”
15
At	this	point,	moreover,	an	argument	based	on	God’s	justice	may	be
brought	against	annihilationism.	Does	the	short	time	of	punishment
envisaged	by	the	annihilationist	actually	
pay	
for	all	of	the
unbeliever’s	sin	and	satisfy	God’s	justice?	If	it	does	not,	then	God’s
justice	has	not	been	satisfied	and	the	unbeliever	should	not	be
annihilated.	But	if	it	does,	then	the	unbeliever	should	be	allowed	to
go	to	heaven,	and	he	or	she	should	not	be	annihilated.	In	either
case,	annihilationism	is	not	necessary	or	right.
Regarding	the	fourth	argument,	while	evil	
that	remains	unpunished
does	detract	from	God’s	glory	in	the	universe,	we	also	must	realize
that	when	God	
punishes	
evil	and	
triumphs	
over	it,	the	glory	of	his
justice,	righteousness,	and	power	to	triumph	over	all	opposition	will
be	seen	(see	Rom.	9:17,	22–24).	The	depth	of	the	riches	of	God’s
mercy	will	also	then	be	revealed,	for	all	redeemed	sinners	will
recognize	that	they	too	deserve	such	punishment	from	God	and
have	avoided	it	only	by	God’s	grace	through	Jesus	Christ	(cf.	Rom.
9:23–24).
Yet	after	all	this	has	been	said,	we	have	to	admit	that	the	ultimate
resolution	of	the	depths	of	this	question	lies	far	beyond	our	ability
to	understand,	and	remains	hidden	in	the	counsels	of	God.	Were	it
not	for	the	scriptural	passages	cited	above	which	so	clearly	affirm
eternal	conscious	punishment,	annihilationism	might	seem	to	us	to
be	an	attractive	option.	Though	annihilationism	can	be	countered	by
theological	arguments,	it	is	ultimately	the	clarity	and	forcefulness
of	the	passages	themselves	that	convince	us	that	annihilationism	is
incorrect	and	that	Scripture	does	indeed	teach	the	eternal	conscious
punishment	of	the	wicked.
16
What	are	we	to	think	of	this	doctrine?	It	is	hard—and	it	should	be
hard—for	us	to	think	of	this	doctrine	today.	If	our	hearts	are	never
moved	with	deep	sorrow	when	we	contemplate	this	doctrine,	then
there	is	a	serious	deficiency	in	our	spiritual	and	emotional
sensibilities.	When	Paul	thinks	of	the	lostness	of	his	kinsmen	the
Jews,	he	says,	“I	have	
great	sorrow	
and	
unceasing	anguish	
in	my
heart”	(Rom.	9:2).	This	is	consistent	with	what	God	tells	us	of	his
own	sorrow	at	the	death	of	the	wicked:	“As	I	live,	says	the	Lord
God,	
I	have	no	pleasure	in	the	death	of	the	wicked,	
but	that	the
wicked	turn	from	his	way	and	live;	turn	back,	turn	back	from	your
evil	ways;	for	why	will	you	die,	O	house	of	Israel?”	(Ezek.	33:11).
And	Jesus’	agony	is	evident	as	he	cries	out,	“O	Jerusalem,
Jerusalem,	killing	the	prophets	and	stoning	those	who	are	sent	to
you!	How	often	would	I	have	gathered	your	children	together	as	a
hen	gathers	her	brood	under	her	wings,	and	you	would	not!	Behold,
your	house	is	forsaken	and	desolate”	(Matt.	23:37–38;	cf.	Luke
19:41–42).
The	reason	it	is	hard	for	us	to	think	of	the	doctrine	of	hell	is
because	God	has	put	in	our	hearts	a	portion	of	his	own	love	for
people	created	in	his	image,	even	his	love	for	sinners	who	rebel
against	him.	As	long	as	we	are	in	this	life,	and	as	long	as	we	see
and	think	about	others	who	need	to	hear	the	gospel	and	trust	in
Christ	for	salvation,	it	should	cause	us	great	distress	and	agony	of
spirit	to	think	about	eternal	punishment.	Yet	we	must	also	realize
that	whatever	God	in	his	wisdom	has	ordained	and	taught	in
Scripture	is	
right.	
Therefore	we	must	be	careful	that	we	do	not	hate
this	doctrine	or	rebel	against	it,	but	rather	we	should	seek,	insofar	as
we	are	able,	to	come	to	the	point	where	we	acknowledge	that
eternal	punishment	is	good	and	right,	because	in	God	there	is	no
unrighteousness	at	all.
It	may	help	us	to	realize	that	if	God	were	not	to	execute	eternal
punishment,	then,	apparently,	his	justice	would	not	be	satisfied	and
his	glory	would	not	be	furthered	in	the	way	he	deems	wise.	And	it
will	perhaps	also	help	us	to	realize	that	from	the	perspective	of	the
world	to	come	there	is	a	much	greater	recognition	of	the	necessity
and	rightness	of	eternal	punishment.	Martyred	believers	in	heaven
are	heard	by	John	to	cry	out,	“O	sovereign	Lord,	holy	and	true,	how
long	before	you	will	judge	and	avenge	our	blood	on	those	who
dwell	upon	the	earth?”	(Rev.	6:10).	Moreover,	at	the	final
destruction	of	Babylon,	the	loud	voice	of	a	great	multitude	in
heaven	cries	out	with	praise	to	God	for	the	rightness	of	his
judgment	as	they	finally	see	the	heinous	nature	of	evil	for	what	it
really	is:
Hallelujah!	Salvation	and	glory	and	power	belong	to	our	God,	for	his
judgments	are	true	and	just;	he	has	judged	the	great	harlot	who
corrupted	the	earth	with	her	fornication,	and	he	has	avenged	on	her
the	blood	of	his	servants.	.	.	.	Hallelujah!	The	smoke	from	her	goes	up
forever	and	ever.”	(Rev.	19:1–3)
As	soon	as	this	happened,	“the	24	elders	and	the	four	living	creatures	fell
down	and	worshiped	God	who	is	seated	on	the	throne,	saying,	‘Amen.
Hallelujah!’	”(Rev.	19:4).	We	cannot	say	that	this	great	multitude	of	the
redeemed	and	the	living	creatures	in	heaven	have	wrong	moral	judgment
when	they	praise	God	for	executing	justice	on	evil,	for	they	are	all	free	from
sin	and	their	moral	judgments	are	pleasing	to	God.
In	this	present	age,	however,	we	should	only	approach	such	a
celebration	of	the	justice	of	God	in	the	punishment	of	evil	when	we
meditate	on	the	eternal	punishment	given	to	Satan	and	his	demons.
When	we	think	of	them	we	do	not	instinctively	love	them,	though
they	too	were	created	by	God.	But	now	they	are	fully	devoted	to
evil	and	beyond	the	potential	of	redemption.	So	we	cannot	long	for
their	salvation	as	we	long	for	the	redemption	of	all	humanity.	We
must	believe	that	eternal	punishment	is	true	and	just,	yet	we	should
also	long	that	even	those	people	who	most	severely	persecute	the
church	should	come	to	faith	in	Christ	and	thus	escape	eternal
condemnation.
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
Have	you	thought	before	that	there	will	be	a	final	judgment	for
believers?	How	do	you	think	of	it	now?	How	does	the	awareness	of	the
fact	that	we	will	all	stand	before	the	judgment	seat	of	Christ	affect	your
life	today?	What	do	you	think	it	will	feel	like	to	have	all	your	words	and
deeds	made	public	on	that	last	day?	Is	there	an	element	of	fear	as	you
contemplate	that	day?	If	so,	meditate	on	1	John	4:16–18:
So	we	know	and	believe	the	love	God	has	for	us.	God	is	love,	and
he	who	abides	in	love	abides	in	God,	and	God	abides	in	him.	In
this	is	love	perfected	with	us,	
that	we	may	have	confidence	for	the
day	of	judgment,	
because	as	he	is	so	are	we	in	this	world.	
There	is
no	fear	in	love,	but	perfect	love	casts	out	fear.	
For	fear	has	to	do
with	punishment,	and	he	who	fears	is	not	perfected	in	love.
	
2
.	
Have	you	previously	thought	very	much	about	laying	up	treasures	in
heaven,	or	about	earning	greater	heavenly	reward?	If	you	really	believe
this	doctrine,	what	kind	of	effect	do	you	think	it	should	have	on	your
life?
3
.	
How	do	you	think	it	will	feel	to	participate	with	Christ	in	the	judging	of
angels,	and	indeed	in	the	judging	of	the	whole	world	(see	1	Cor.	6:2–3)?
What	does	the	fact	that	God	allows	us	to	participate	in	this	final
judgment	say	about	our	creation	in	the	image	of	God	and	his	purposes
for	us	in	the	universe?	How	does	that	make	you	feel	about	yourself	and
your	eternal	relationship	to	God?
4
.	
Think	of	some	of	your	Christian	friends	in	your	church.	How	do	you
think	you	will	feel	when	you	watch	them	stand	before	Christ	at	the	final
judgment?	How	will	they	feel	about	you	at	that	time?	Does	the
contemplation	of	this	future	judgment	affect	the	way	you	think	of	your
fellowship	with	each	other	as	brothers	and	sisters	in	Christ	today?
5
.	
Are	you	glad	that	there	will	be	a	final	judgment	of	both	believers	and
unbelievers?	Does	it	make	you	feel	a	sense	of	God’s	justice,	or	do	you
sense	some	unfairness	and	injustice	in	the	whole	idea?
6
.	
Are	you	convinced	that	Scripture	teaches	that	there	will	be	eternal
conscious	punishment	of	the	wicked?	When	you	think	of	that	idea	in
relationship	to	Satan	and	demons,	do	you	feel	that	it	is	right?
7
.	
Is	there	anyone	who	has	wronged	you	in	the	past,	and	whom	you	have
had	difficulty	forgiving?	Does	the	doctrine	of	final	judgment	help	you	to
be	more	able	to	forgive	that	person?
SPECIAL	TERMS
annihilationism
	
	
great	white	throne	judgment
conditional	immortality
	
	
hell
eternal	conscious	punishment
	
	
judgment	of	the	nations
final	judgment
	
	
universalism
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	note	at	
bibliography	to
chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be	found	in	
Appendix
4
.)
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92			Litton,	591–600
1930			Thomas,	525–26
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1875–76			Pope,	3:401–47
1892–94			Miley,	2:458–71
1940			Wiley,	3:338–75
1960			Purkiser,	567–74
1983			Carter,	2:1105–9,	1127–30,	1133–36
3.			Baptist
1767			Gill,	2:302–29
1887			Boyce,	461–71,	477–93
1907			Strong,	1023–29,	1033–56
1917			Mullins,	478–83,	488–503
1976–83			Henry,	4:593–614;	6:492–513
1983–85			Erickson,	1005–22,	1234–41,	1200–1204
4.			Dispensational
1947			Chafer,	4:402–12,	427–33
1949			Thiessen,	383–90,	396–97
1986			Ryrie,	512–16,	520–22
5.			Lutheran
1917–24			Pieper,	3:539–50
1934			Mueller,	630–39
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1724–58			Edwards,	2:122–30,	190–213,	515–25
1861			Heppe,	703–6
1871–73			Hodge,	3:837–54,	868–80
1878			Dabney,	842–62
1889			Shedd,	2b:659–63,	667–754
1937–66			Murray,	
CW,	
2:413–17
1938			Berkhof,	728–38
1962			Buswell,	2:306–8,	508–11
7.			Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988–92			Williams,	3:413–20,	445–77
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955			Ott,	479–82,	492–96
2.			Roman	Catholic:	Post-Vatican	II
1980			McBrien,	2:1150–55
Other	Works
Beckwith,	R.	T.	“Purgatory.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	549–50.
Blamires,	Harry.	
Knowing	the	Truth	About	Heaven	and	Hell.	
Knowing
the	Truth	Series,	eds.	J.	I.	Packer	and	Peter	Kreeft.	Ann	Arbor:	Servant,
1988.
Buis,	Harry.	
The	Doctrine	of	Eternal	Punishment.	
Philadelphia:
Presbyterian	and	Reformed,	1957.
Cameron,	Nigel	M.	de	S.,	ed.	
Universalism	and	the	Doctrine	of	Hell.
Carlisle,	U.K.:	Paternoster,	and	Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1992.
Crockett,	William	V.,	Z.	J.	Hayes,	Clark	H.	Pinnock,	and	John	F.
Walvoord.	
Four	Views	on	Hell.	
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1992.
Gerstner,	John	H.	
Repent	or	Perish.	
Ligonier,	Pa.:	Soli	Deo	Gloria,	1990.
Helm,	Paul.	“Universalism	and	the	Threat	of	Hell.”	
TrinJ	
vol.	4	N.S.,	No.
1	(Spring	1983):	35–43.
Hoekema,	Anthony	A.	
The	Bible	and	the	Future.	
Grand	Rapids:
Eerdmans,	1979,	pp.	253–73.
Hubbard,	D.	A.	“Last	Judgment,	The.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	620–21.
Martin,	James	P.	
The	Last	Judgment.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1983.
Morris,	L.	“Eternal	Punishment.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	369–70.
O’Donovan,	O.	M.	T.,	and	R.	J.	Song.	“Punishment.”	In	
NDT,	
pp.	547–
49.
Packer,	J.	I.	“Evangelicals	and	the	Way	of	Salvation:	New	Challenges	to
the	Gospel—Universalism	and	Justification	by	Faith.”	In	
Evangelical
Affirmations.	
Ed.	Kenneth	S.	Kantzer	and	Carl	F.	H.	Henry.	Grand
Rapids:	Zondervan,	1990,	pp.	107–36.
Travis,	S.	H.	“Judgment	of	God.”	In	
NDT,	
p.	358.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
Revelation	20:11–13:	
Then	I	saw	a	great	white	throne	and	him	who	sat	upon
it;	from	his	presence	earth	and	sky	fled	away,	and	no	place	was	found	for
them.	And	I	saw	the	dead,	great	and	small,	standing	before	the	throne,	and
books	were	opened.	Also	another	book	was	opened,	which	is	the	book	of	life.
And	the	dead	were	judged	by	what	was	written	in	the	books,	by	what	they	had
done.	And	the	sea	gave	up	the	dead	in	it,	Death	and	Hades	gave	up	the	dead
in	them,	and	all	were	judged	by	what	they	had	done.
HYMN
“O	Quickly	Come,	Dread	Judge	of	All”
(The	tune	is	the	familiar	tune	for	“Eternal	Father,	Strong	to	Save”)
O	quickly	come,	dread	judge	of	all;	for,	awful	though	thine	advent	be,
All	shadows	from	the	truth	will	fall,	and	falsehood	die,	in	sight	of
thee:
O	quickly	come;	for	doubt	and	fear	like	clouds	dissolve	when	thou	art
near.
O	quickly	come,	great	king	of	all;	reign	all	around	us,	and	within;
Let	sin	no	more	our	souls	enthrall,	let	pain	and	sorrow	die	with	sin:
O	quickly	come;	for	thou	alone	canst	make	thy	scattered	people	one.
O	quickly	come,	true	life	of	all;	for	death	is	mighty	all	around;
On	ev’ry	home	his	shadows	fall,	on	ev’ry	heart	his	mark	is	found:
O	quickly	come;	for	grief	and	pain	can	never	cloud	thy	glorious	reign.
O	quickly	come,	sure	light	of	all;	for	gloomy	night	broods	o’er	our
way;
And	weakly	souls	begin	to	fall	with	weary	watching	for	the	day:
O	quickly	come;	for	round	thy	throne	no	eye	is	blind,	no	night	known.
AUTHOR:	LAWRENCE	TUTTIETT,	1854
Alternate	hymn:
“Great	God,	What	Do	I	See	and	Hear!”
A	tone	of	gloom	and	judgment	pervades	both	these	hymns,	yet	this
alternate	also	contains	a	strong	focus	on	the	soul’s	preparing	to
meet	Christ	and	a	sense	of	joyful	anticipation.
Great	God,	what	do	I	see	and	hear!	The	end	of	things	created!
The	Judge	of	mankind	doth	appear,	on	clouds	of	glory	seated!
The	trumpet	sounds;	the	graves	restore	the	dead	which	they	contained
before:
Prepare,	my	soul,	to	meet	him.
The	dead	in	Christ	shall	first	arise,	at	the	last	trumpet’s	sounding,
Caught	up	to	meet	him	in	the	skies,	with	joy	their	Lord	surrounding;
No	gloomy	fears	their	souls	dismay;	his	presence	sheds	eternal	day
On	those	prepared	to	meet	him.
But	sinners,	filled	with	guilty	fears,	behold	his	wrath	prevailing;
For	they	shall	rise,	and	find	their	tears	and	sighs	are	unavailing:
The	day	of	grace	is	past	and	gone;	trembling	they	stand	before	the
throne,
All	unprepared	to	meet	him.
Great	God,	what	do	I	see	and	hear!	The	end	of	things	created!
The	Judge	of	mankind	doth	appear,	on	clouds	of	glory	seated!
Beneath	his	cross	I	view	the	day	when	heav’n	and	earth	shall	pass
away,
And	thus	prepare	to	meet	him.
AUTHOR:	FIRST	STANZA,	ANONYMOUS,	1802;
STANZAS	2–4,	WILLIAM	B.	COLLYER,	1812;
ALTERNATE	RENDERING,	THOMAS	COTTERILL,	1820
NOTES
1
It	is	interesting	that	Paul	proclaimed	eternal	judgment	to	unbelieving	Gentiles	who	had	little	if	any	knowledge	of	the	teachings	of
the	Old	Testament.	Paul	also	argued	about	“future	judgment”	(Acts	24:25)	before	another	unbeliever,	the	Roman	governor	Felix.
In	both	cases	Paul	apparently	realized	that	the	brute	fact	that	a	day	of	accountability	before	God	was	coming	to	all	men	would
give	to	his	hearers	a	sobering	realization	that	their	eternal	destiny	was	at	stake	as	they	listened	to	him	preach	about	Jesus.
2
See	Lewis	Sperry	Chafer,	
Systematic	Theology,	
7:213–17,	who	includes	other	judgments	as	well.
3
The	fact	that	there	will	be	degrees	of	punishment	for	unbelievers	according	to	their	works	does	not	mean	that	unbelievers	can
ever	do	enough	good	to	merit	God’s	approval	or	earn	salvation,	for	salvation	only	comes	as	a	free	gift	to	those	who	trust	in	Christ:
“He	who	believes	in	him	is	not	condemned;	he	who	does	not	believe	is	condemned	already,	because	he	has	not	believed	in	the
name	of	the	only	Son	of	God”	(John	3:18).
For	a	discussion	of	the	fact	that	there	will	be	no	“second	chance”	for	people	to	accept	Christ	after	they	die,	see	
chapter	41
.
4
See	also	Dan.	12:2;	Matt.	6:20–21;	19:21;	Luke	6:22–23;	12:18–21,	32,	42–48;	14:13–14;	1	Cor.	3:8;	9:18;	13:3;	15:19,	29–32,
58;	Gal.	6:9–10;	Eph.	6:7–8;	Col.	3:23–24;	1	Tim.	6:18;	Heb.	10:34,	35;	11:10,	14–16,	26,	35;	1	Peter	1:4;	2	John	8;	Rev.	11:18;
22:12;	cf.	also	Matt.	5:46;	6:2–6,	16–18,	24;	Luke	6:35.
5
See	
chapter	41
,	for	evidence	supporting	the	idea	that	believers	go	immediately	into	God’s	presence	when	they	die,	and
unbelievers	go	immediately	to	a	place	of	punishment	separated	from	God.	(See	also	Luke	16:24–26;	Heb.	9:27.)
6
Berkhof,	
Systematic	Theology,	
p.	731.
7
The	idea	of	working	for	greater	heavenly	reward	is	a	frequent	theme	in	the	New	Testament:	see	the	verses	listed	at	footnote	4
above.
8
The	word	translated	“punishment”	here	is	
kolasis,	
which	is	used	elsewhere	of	great	physical	suffering	or	torture	that	was	endured
by	persecuted	Christians	(
Martyrdom	of	Polycarp	
2.4;	compare	Ignatius,	
To	the	Romans	
5.3).	At	other	times	it	simply	refers	to
divine	punishment	in	general,	without	specification	of	the	nature	of	that	punishment	(cf.	BAGD,	pp.	440–41).
9
These	texts	and	others	which	are	quoted	in	the	following	paragraphs	clearly	indicate	that	the	Bible	does	not	teach	
universalism
(the	doctrine	that	all	people	will	ultimately	be	saved).
10
Compare	Isa.	66:24,	speaking	of	those	who	have	rebelled	against	God:	“For	their	worm	shall	not	die,	and	their	fire	shall	not	be
quenched.”
11
See	Philip	E.	Hughes,	
The	True	Image:	The	Origin	and	Destiny	of	Man	in	Christ	
(Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1989),	pp.	405–
407;	David	L.	Edwards	and	John	R.	W.	Stott,	
Essentials:	A	Liberal-Evangelical	Dialogue	
(London:	Hodder	and	Stoughton,	1988),
pp.	275–76;	Clark	Pinnock,	“The	Destruction	of	the	Finally	Impenitent,”	
CThRev	
4	(Spring	1990),	pp.	243–59.
12
A	variation	of	the	view	that	God	will	eventually	annihilate	unbelievers	(annihilationism	proper)	is	the	view	called	
“conditional
immortality,”	
the	idea	that	God	has	created	people	so	that	they	only	have	immortality	(the	power	to	live	forever)	if	they	accept
Christ	as	Savior.	Those	who	do	not	become	Christians,	then,	do	not	have	the	gift	of	immortal	life	and	at	death	or	at	the	time	of
final	judgment	they	simply	cease	to	exist.	This	view	is	very	close	to	that	of	annihilationism,	and	I	have	not	discussed	it	separately
in	this	chapter.	(Some	versions	of	conditional	immortality	deny	conscious	punishment	altogether,	even	for	a	brief	time.)
13
In	Phil.	3:19	and	2	Peter	3:7,	the	term	for	“destruction”	is	
apōleia,	
which	is	the	same	word	used	by	the	disciples	in	Matt.	26:8	to
speak	of	the	“waste”	(in	their	view)	of	the	ointment	that	had	just	been	poured	on	Jesus’	head.	Now	the	ointment	did	not	cease	to
exist;	it	was	very	evident	on	Jesus’	head.	But	it	had	been	“destroyed”	in	the	sense	that	it	was	no	longer	able	to	be	used	on	someone
else,	or	sold.	In	1	Thess.	5:3	and	2	Thess.	1:9	another	word,	
olethros,	
is	used	of	the	destruction	of	the	wicked,	but	again	this	word
does	not	imply	that	something	will	cease	to	exist,	for	it	is	used	in	1	Cor.	5:5	of	delivering	a	man	to	Satan	(putting	him	out	of	the
church)	for	the	
destruction	
of	the	flesh—but	certainly	his	flesh	did	not	cease	to	exist	when	he	was	put	out	of	the	church,	even
though	he	may	have	suffered	in	his	body	(this	would	be	true	whether	we	take	“flesh”	to	mean	his	physical	body	or	his	sinful
nature).
14
David	Kingdon,	“Annihilationism:	Gain	or	Loss?”	(March,	1992;	unpublished	paper	obtained	from	the	author),	p.	
9.
15
Ibid.,	pp.	9–10.
16
Because	the	doctrine	of	eternal	conscious	punishment	is	so	foreign	to	the	thought	patterns	of	our	culture,	and,	on	a	deeper	level,
to	our	instinctive	and	God-given	sense	of	love	and	desire	for	redemption	for	every	human	being	created	in	God’s	image,	this
doctrine	is	emotionally	one	of	the	most	difficult	doctrines	for	Christians	to	affirm	today.	It	also	tends	to	be	one	of	the	first
doctrines	given	up	by	people	who	are	moving	away	from	a	commitment	to	the	Bible	as	absolutely	truthful	in	all	that	it	affirms.
Among	liberal	theologians	who	do	not	accept	the	absolute	truthfulness	of	the	Bible,	there	is	probably	no	one	today	who	believes
in	the	doctrine	of	eternal	conscious	punishment.
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter	57
The	New	Heavens	and	New	Earth
What	is	heaven?	Is	it	a	place?	How	will	the	earth	be	renewed?
What	will	it	be	like	to	live	in	the	new	heavens	and	new	earth?
EXPLANATION	AND	SCRIPTURAL	BASIS
A.	We	Will	Live	Eternally	With	God	in	New	Heavens	and	a	New	Earth
After	the	final	judgment,	believers	will	enter	into	the	full	enjoyment
of	life	in	the	presence	of	God	forever.	Jesus	will	say	to	us,	“Come,
O	blessed	of	my	Father,	inherit	the	kingdom	prepared	for	you	from
the	foundation	of	the	world”	(Matt.	25:34).	We	will	enter	a
kingdom	where	“there	shall	no	more	be	anything	accursed,	but	the
throne	of	God	and	of	the	Lamb	shall	be	in	it,	and	his	servants	shall
worship	him”	(Rev.	22:3).
When	referring	to	this	place,	Christians	often	talk	about	living	with
God	“in	heaven”	forever.	But	in	fact	the	biblical	teaching	is	richer
than	that:	it	tells	us	that	there	will	be	new	heavens	
and	a	new	earth
—
an	entirely	renewed	creation—and	we	will	live	with	God	there.
The	Lord	promises	through	Isaiah,	“For	behold,	I	create	
new
heavens	and	a	new	earth;	
and	the	former	things	shall	not	be
remembered”	(Isa.	65:17),	and	speaks	of	“the	new	heavens	and	the
new	earth	which	I	will	make”	(Isa.	66:22).	Peter	says,	“according	to
his	promise	we	wait	for	
new	heavens	and	a	new	earth	
in	which
righteousness	dwells”	(2	Peter	3:13).	In	John’s	vision	of	events	to
follow	the	final	judgment,	he	says,	“Then	I	saw	a	
new	heaven	and	a
new	earth;	
for	the	first	heaven	and	the	first	earth	had	passed	away”
(Rev.	21:1).	He	goes	on	to	tell	us	that	there	will	also	be	a	new	kind
of	unification	of	heaven	and	earth,	for	he	sees	the	holy	city,	the
“new	Jerusalem,”	coming	“down	out	of	heaven	from	God”	(Rev.
21:2),	and	hears	a	voice	proclaiming	that	“the	dwelling	of	God	is
with	men.	He	will	dwell	with	them,	and	they	shall	be	his	people,
and	God	himself	will	be	with	them”	(v.	
3).	So	there	will	be	a
joining	of	heaven	and	earth	in	this	new	creation,	and	there	we	will
live	in	the	presence	of	God.
1.
	What	Is	Heaven?
	During	this	present	age,	the	place	where	God	dwells	is
frequently	called	“heaven”	in	Scripture.	The	Lord	says,	“Heaven	is	my
throne”	(Isa.	66:1),	and	Jesus	teaches	us	to	pray,	“Our	Father	who	art	in
heaven”	
(Matt.	6:9).	Jesus	now	“
has	gone	into	heaven,	
and	is	at	the	right	hand
of	God”	(1	Peter	3:22).	In	fact,	heaven	may	be	defined	as	follows:	
Heaven	is
the	place	where	God	most	fully	makes	known	his	presence	to	bless.
We	discussed	earlier	how	God	is	present	everywhere
1
	but	how	he
especially	manifests	his	presence	to	bless	in	certain	places.	The
greatest	manifestation	of	God’s	presence	to	bless	is	seen	in	heaven,
where	he	makes	his	glory	known,	and	where	angels,	other	heavenly
creatures,	and	redeemed	saints	all	worship	him.
2.	Heaven	Is	a	Place,	Not	Just	a	State	of	Mind.
	But	someone	may	wonder
how	heaven	can	be	joined	together	with	earth.	Clearly	the	earth	is	a	
place	
that
exists	at	a	certain	location	in	our	space-time	universe,	but	can	heaven	also	be
thought	of	as	a	
place	
that	can	be	joined	to	the	earth?
Outside	of	the	evangelical	world	the	idea	of	heaven	as	a	place	is
often	denied,	chiefly	because	its	existence	can	only	be	known	from
the	testimony	of	Scripture.	Recently	even	some	evangelical
scholars	have	been	hesitant	to	affirm	the	fact	that	heaven	is	a
place.
2
	Should	the	fact	that	we	
only	
know	about	heaven	from	the
Bible,	and	cannot	give	any	empirical	evidence	for	it,	be	a	reason	not
to	believe	that	heaven	is	a	real	place?
The	New	Testament	teaches	the	idea	of	a	location	for	heaven	in
several	different	ways,	and	quite	clearly.	When	Jesus	ascended	into
heaven,	the	fact	that	he	went	to	a	
place	
seems	to	be	the	entire	point
of	the	narrative,	and	the	point	that	Jesus	intended	his	disciples	to
understand	by	the	way	in	which	he	gradually	ascended	even	while
speaking	to	them:	“As	they	were	looking	on,	he	was	lifted	up,	and	a
cloud	took	him	out	of	their	sight”	(Acts	1:9;	cf.	Luke	24:51:	“While
he	blessed	them,	he	parted	from	them”).	The	angels	exclaimed,
“This	Jesus,	who	was	taken	up	from	you	
into	heaven,	
will	come	in
the	same	way	as	you	saw	him	go	into	heaven”	(Acts	1:11).	It	is	hard
to	imagine	how	the	fact	of	Jesus’	ascension	to	a	
place	
could	be
taught	more	clearly.
A	similar	conclusion	can	be	drawn	from	the	story	of	Stephen’s
death.	Just	before	he	was	stoned,	he,	“full	of	the	Holy	Spirit,	
gazed
into	heaven	
and	saw	the	glory	of	God,	and	Jesus	standing	at	the
right	hand	of	God;	and	he	said,	‘Behold,	I	see	the	heavens	opened,
and	the	Son	of	Man	standing	at	the	right	hand	of	God’	”(Acts	7:55–
56).	He	did	not	see	mere	symbols	of	a	state	of	existence.	It	seems
rather	that	his	eyes	were	opened	to	see	a	spiritual	dimension	of
reality	which	God	has	hidden	from	us	in	this	present	age,	a
dimension	which	nonetheless	really	does	exist	in	our	space/time
universe,	and	within	which	Jesus	now	lives	in	his	physical
resurrection	body,	waiting	even	now	for	the	time	when	he	will
return	to	earth.
3
	Moreover,	the	fact	that	we	will	have	resurrection
bodies	like	Christ’s	resurrection	body	indicates	that	heaven	will	be
a	place,	for	in	such	physical	bodies	(made	perfect,	never	to	become
weak	or	die	again),
4
	we	will	inhabit	a	specific	place	at	a	specific
time,	just	as	Jesus	now	does	in	his	resurrection	body.
The	idea	of	heaven	as	a	place	is	also	the	easiest	sense	in	which	to
understand	Jesus’	promise,	“I	go	to	prepare	a	
place	
for	you”	(John
14:2).	He	speaks	quite	clearly	of	going	from	his	existence	in	this
world	back	to	the	Father,	and	then	returning	again:	“And	when	I	go
and	prepare	a	
place	
for	you,	I	will	come	again	and	will	take	you	to
myself,	that	
where	I	am	
you	may	be	also”	(John	14:3).
These	texts	lead	us	to	conclude	that	heaven	is	even	now	a	place—
though	one	whose	location	is	now	unknown	to	us	and	whose
existence	is	now	unable	to	be	perceived	by	our	natural	senses.	It	is
this	place	of	God’s	dwelling	that	will	be	somehow	made	new	at	the
time	of	the	final	judgment	and	will	be	joined	to	a	renewed	earth.
3.	The	Physical	Creation	Will	Be	Renewed	and	We	Will	Continue	to	Exist
and	Act	in	It.
	In	addition	to	a	renewed	heaven,	God	will	make	a	“new	earth”
(2	Peter	3:13;	Rev.	21:1).	Several	passages	indicate	that	the	physical	creation
will	be	renewed	in	a	significant	way.	“The	creation	waits	with	eager	longing
for	the	revealing	of	the	sons	of	God;	for	the	creation	was	subjected	to	futility,
not	of	its	own	will	but	by	the	will	of	him	who	subjected	it	in	hope;	because
the	creation	itself	will	be	set	free	from	its	bondage	to	decay	and	obtain	the
glorious	liberty	of	the	children	of	God”	
(Rom.	8:19–21).
But	will	earth	simply	be	renewed,	or	will	it	be	completely	destroyed
and	replaced	by	another	earth,	newly	created	by	God?	Some
passages	appear	to	speak	of	an	entire	new	creation:	The	author	of
Hebrews	(quoting	Ps.	102)	tells	us	of	the	heavens	and	earth,	“They
will	perish,	but	you	remain;	they	will	all	grow	old	like	a	garment,
like	a	mantle	you	will	roll	them	up,	and	they	will	be	changed”
(Heb.	1:11–12).	Later	he	tells	us	that	God	has	promised,	“Yet	once
more	I	will	shake	not	only	the	earth	but	also	the	heaven,”	a	shaking
so	severe	as	to	involve	“the	removal	of	what	is	shaken	.	.	.	in	order
that	what	cannot	be	shaken	may	remain”	(Heb.	12:26–27).	Peter
says,	“The	day	of	the	Lord	will	come	like	a	thief,	and	then	
the
heavens	will	pass	away	with	a	loud	noise,	
and	the	elements	will	be
dissolved	with	fire,	and	
the	earth	and	all	the	works	that	are	upon	it
will	be	burned	up”	
(2	Peter	3:10).	A	similar	picture	is	found	in
Revelation,	where	John	says,	“From	his	presence	earth	and	sky	fled
away,	and	no	place	was	found	for	them”	(Rev.	20:11).	Moreover,
John	says,	“Then	I	saw	a	new	heaven	and	a	new	earth;	for	the	first
heaven	and	the	first	earth	had	passed	away,	and	the	sea	was	no
more”	(Rev.	21:1).
Within	the	Protestant	world,	there	has	been	disagreement	as	to
whether	the	earth	is	to	be	destroyed	completely	and	replaced,	or	just
changed	and	renewed.	Berkhof	says	that	Lutheran	scholars	have
emphasized	the	fact	that	it	will	be	an	entirely	new	creation,	while
Reformed	scholars	have	tended	to	emphasize	those	verses	that	say
simply	that	this	present	creation	will	be	renewed.
5
	The	Reformed
position	seems	preferable	here,	for	it	is	difficult	to	think	that	God
would	entirely	annihilate	his	original	creation,	thereby	seeming	to
give	the	devil	the	last	word	and	scrapping	the	creation	that	was
originally	“very	good”	(Gen.	1:31).	The	passages	above	that	speak
of	shaking	and	removing	the	earth	and	of	the	first	earth	passing
away	may	simply	refer	to	its	existence	in	its	present	form,	not	its
very	existence	itself,	and	even	2	Peter	3:10,	which	speaks	of	the
elements	dissolving	and	the	earth	and	the	works	on	it	being	burned
up,	may	not	be	speaking	of	the	earth	as	a	planet	but	rather	the
surface	things	on	the	earth	(that	is,	much	of	the	ground	and	the
things	on	the	ground).
4.	Our	Resurrection	Bodies	Will	Be	Part	of	the	Renewed	Creation.
	In	the
new	heavens	and	new	earth,	there	will	be	a	place	and	activities	for	our
resurrection	bodies,	which	will	never	grow	old	or	become	weak	or	ill.	A
strong	consideration	in	favor	of	this	viewpoint	is	the	fact	that	God	made	the
original	physical	creation	“very	good”	(Gen.	1:31).	There	is	therefore	nothing
inherently	sinful	or	evil	or	“unspiritual”	about	the	physical	world	that	God
made	or	the	creatures	that	he	put	in	it,	or	about	the	physical	bodies	that	he
gave	us	at	creation.	Though	all	these	things	have	been	marred	and	distorted
by	sin,	God	will	not	completely	destroy	the	physical	world	(which	would	be
an	acknowledgement	that	sin	had	frustrated	and	defeated	God’s	purposes),	but
rather	he	will	perfect	the	entire	creation	and	bring	it	into	harmony	with	the
purposes	for	which	he	originally	created	it.	Therefore	we	can	expect	that	in
the	new	heavens	and	new	earth	there	will	be	a	fully	perfect	earth	that	is	once
again	“very	good.”	And	we	can	expect	that	we	will	have	physical	bodies	that
will	once	again	be	“very	good”	in	God’s	sight,	and	that	will	function	to	fulfill
the	purposes	for	which	he	originally	placed	man	on	the	earth.
When	the	author	of	Hebrews	says	that	we	do	“not	yet”	see
everything	in	subjection	to	man	(Heb.	2:8),	he	implies	that
eventually	all	things	will	eventually	be	subject	to	us,	under	the
kingship	of	the	man	Christ	Jesus	(note	v.	
9:	“But	we	see	Jesus	.	.	.
crowned	with	glory	and	honor”).	This	will	fulfill	God’s	original
plan	to	have	everything	in	the	world	subject	to	the	human	beings
that	he	had	made.
6
	In	this	sense,	then,	we	will	“inherit	the	earth”
(Matt.	5:5)	and	reign	over	it	as	God	originally	intended.
For	that	reason,	it	should	not	strike	us	as	surprising	to	find	that
some	of	the	descriptions	of	life	in	heaven	include	features	that	are
very	much	part	of	the	physical	or	material	creation	that	God	has
made.	We	shall	
eat	and	drink	
at	“the	marriage	supper	of	the	Lamb”
(Rev.	19:9).	Jesus	will	once	again	
drink	wine	
with	his	disciples	in
the	heavenly	kingdom	(Luke	22:18).	The	“
river	
of	the	water	of	life”
will	flow	“from	the	throne	of	God	and	of	the	Lamb	through	the
middle	of	the	
street	of	the	city”	
(Rev.	22:1).	The	
tree	of	life	
will
bear	“twelve	kinds	of	fruit,	yielding	its	fruit	each	month”	(Rev.
22:2).	There	is	no	strong	reason	to	say	these	expressions	are	merely
symbolic,	without	any	literal	reference.	Are	symbolic	banquets	and
symbolic	wine	and	symbolic	rivers	and	trees	somehow	superior	to
real	banquets	and	real	wine	and	real	rivers	and	trees	in	God’s
eternal	plan?	These	things	are	just	some	of	the	excellent	features	of
the	perfection	and	final	goodness	of	the	physical	creation	that	God
has	made.
Of	course,	there	are	symbolic	descriptions	in	the	book	of
Revelation,	and	it	is	inevitable	that	at	some	points	we	will	be
unable	to	decide	whether	something	is	to	be	taken	symbolically	or
literally.	But	it	does	not	seem	difficult	to	think	that	the	description
of	the	heavenly	city	with	gates	and	a	wall	and	foundations	is	a
description	of	something	that	is	literal	and	real,	“the	holy	city
Jerusalem	coming	down	out	of	heaven	from	God,	having	the	glory
of	God,	its	radiance	like	a	most	rare	jewel”	(Rev.	21:10–11).	“And
the	street	of	the	city	is	pure	gold,	transparent	as	glass.	.	.	.	And	the
kings	of	the	earth	shall	bring	their	glory	into	it,	and	its	gates	shall
never	be	shut	by	day—and	there	shall	be	no	night	there;	they	shall
bring	into	it	the	glory	and	the	honor	of	the	nations”	(Rev.	21:21–
26).
While	we	may	have	some	uncertainty	about	the	understanding	of
certain	details,	it	does	not	seem	inconsistent	with	this	picture	to	say
that	we	will	eat	and	drink	in	the	new	heavens	and	new	earth,	and
carry	on	other	physical	activities	as	well.	Music	certainly	is
prominent	in	the	descriptions	of	heaven	in	Revelation,	and	we
might	imagine	that	both	musical	and	artistic	activities	would	be
done	to	the	glory	of	God.	Perhaps	people	will	work	at	the	whole
range	of	investigation	and	development	of	the	creation	by
technological,	creative,	and	inventive	means,	thus	exhibiting	the
full	extent	of	their	excellent	creation	in	the	image	of	God.
Moreover,	since	God	is	infinite	and	we	can	never	exhaust	his
greatness	(Ps.	145:3),	and	since	we	are	finite	creatures	who	will
never	equal	God’s	knowledge	or	be	omniscient,
7
	we	may	expect
that	for	all	eternity	we	will	be	able	to	go	on	learning	more	about
God	and	about	his	relationship	to	his	creation.	In	this	way	we	will
continue	the	process	of	learning	that	was	begun	in	this	life,	in
which	a	life	“fully	pleasing	to	him”	is	one	that	includes	continually
“increasing	in	the	knowledge	of	God”	(Col.	1:10).
5.	The	New	Creation	Will	Not	Be	“Timeless”	but	Will	Include	an
Unending	Succession	of	Moments.
	Although	a	popular	hymn	speaks	of	the
time	“when	the	trumpet	of	the	Lord	shall	sound	and	time	shall	be	no	more,”
Scripture	does	not	give	support	to	that	idea.	Certainly	the	heavenly	city	that
receives	its	light	from	the	glory	of	God	(Rev.	21:23)	will	never	experience
darkness	or	night:	“There	shall	be	no	night	there”	(Rev.	21:25).	But	this	does
not	mean	that	heaven	will	be	a	place	where	time	is	unknown,	or	where	things
cannot	be	done	one	after	another.	Indeed,	all	the	pictures	of	heavenly	worship
in	the	book	of	Revelation	include	words	that	are	spoken	one	after	another	in
coherent	sentences,	and	actions	(such	as	falling	down	before	God’s	throne	and
casting	crowns	before	his	throne)	that	involve	a	sequence	of	events.	When	we
read	that	“the	kings	of	the	earth	.	.	.	shall	bring	into	it	the	glory	and	honor	of
the	nations”	(Rev.	21:24–26),	we	see	another	activity	that	involves	a	sequence
of	events,	one	happening	after	another.	And	certainly	that	is	the	clear
implication	of	the	fact	that	the	tree	of	life	has	twelve	kinds	of	fruit,	“yielding
its	fruit	
each	month”	
(Rev.	22:2).	(On	Rev.	10:6	see	chapter	11,	p.	
219,	n.	18.)
Since	we	are	finite	creatures,	we	might	also	expect	that	we	will
always	live	in	a	succession	of	moments.	Just	as	we	will	never	attain
to	God’s	omniscience	or	omnipresence,	so	we	shall	never	attain	to
God’s	eternity	in	the	sense	of	seeing	all	time	equally	vividly	and	not
living	in	a	succession	of	moments	or	being	limited	by	time.	As
finite	creatures,	we	will	rather	live	in	a	succession	of	moments	that
will	never	end.
B.	The	Doctrine	of	the	New	Creation	Provides	a	Great	Motivation	for	Storing	Up	Treasures	in	Heaven	Rather
Than	on	Earth
When	we	consider	the	fact	that	this	present	creation	is	a	temporary
one	and	that	our	life	in	the	new	creation	will	last	for	eternity,	we
have	a	strong	motivation	for	godly	living	and	for	living	in	such	a
way	as	to	store	up	treasures	in	heaven.	In	reflecting	on	the	fact	that
heaven	and	earth	will	be	destroyed,	Peter	says	the	following:
Since	all	these	things	are	thus	to	be	dissolved,	what	sort	of	persons
ought	you	to	be	in	lives	of	holiness	and	godliness,	
waiting	for	and
hastening	the	coming	of	the	day	of	God,	because	of	which	the
heavens	will	be	kindled	and	dissolved,	and	the	elements	will	melt
with	fire!	But	according	to	his	promise	we	wait	for	new	heavens	and	a
new	earth	in	which	righteousness	dwells.	(2	Peter	3:11–13)
And	Jesus	very	explicitly	tells	us:
Do	not	lay	up	for	yourselves	treasures	on	earth,	where	moth	and	rust
consume	and	where	thieves	break	in	and	steal,	but	
lay	up	for	yourselves
treasures	in	heaven,	
where	neither	moth	nor	rust	consumes	and	where
thieves	do	not	break	in	and	steal.	For	where	your	treasure	is,	there	will
your	heart	be	also.	(Matt.	6:19–21)
8
C.	The	New	Creation	Will	Be	a	Place	of	Great	Beauty	and	Abundance	and	Joy	in	the	Presence	of	God
Amid	all	the	questions	that	we	naturally	have	concerning	the	new
heavens	and	new	earth,	we	must	not	lose	sight	of	the	fact	that
Scripture	consistently	portrays	this	new	creation	as	a	place	of	great
beauty	and	joy.	In	the	description	of	heaven	in	Revelation	21	and
22,	this	theme	is	repeatedly	affirmed.	It	is	a	“holy	city”	(21:2),	a
place	“prepared	as	a	bride	adorned	for	her	husband”	(21:2).	In	that
place	“death	shall	be	no	more,	neither	shall	there	be	mourning	nor
crying	nor	pain	any	more”	(21:4).	There	we	can	drink	“from	the
fountain	of	the	water	of	life	without	payment”	(21:6).	It	is	a	city
that	has	“the	glory	of	God,	its	radiance	like	a	most	rare	jewel,	like	a
jasper,	clear	as	crystal”	(21:11).	It	is	a	city	of	immense	size,
whether	the	measurements	be	understood	as	literal	or	symbolic.	Its
length	measures	“12,000	stadia”	(21:16),	or	about	1,400	miles
(2,250	kilometers),	and	“its	length	and	breadth	
and	height	
are
equal”	(21:6).	Parts	of	the	city	are	constructed	of	immense	precious
jewels	of	various	colors	(21:18–21).	It	will	be	free	from	all	evil,	for
“nothing	unclean	shall	enter	it,	nor	anyone	who	practices
abomination	or	falsehood,	but	only	those	who	are	written	in	the
Lamb’s	book	of	life”	(21:7).	In	that	city	we	shall	also	have
positions	of	rule	over	God’s	entire	creation,	for	“they	shall	reign	for
ever	and	ever”	(22:5).
But	more	important	than	all	the	physical	beauty	of	the	heavenly
city,	more	important	than	the	fellowship	we	will	enjoy	eternally
with	all	God’s	people	from	all	nations	and	all	periods	in	history,
more	important	than	our	freedom	from	pain	and	sorrow	and
physical	suffering,	and	more	important	than	reigning	over	God’s
kingdom—more	important	by	far	than	any	of	these	will	be	the	fact
that	we	will	be	in	the	presence	of	God	and	enjoying	unhindered
fellowship	with	him.	“Behold,	
the	dwelling	of	God	is	with	men.	
He
will	dwell	with	them,	and	they	shall	be	his	people,	and	
God	himself
will	be	with	them;	
he	will	wipe	away	every	tear	from	their	eyes”
(21:3–4).
In	the	Old	Testament,	when	the	glory	of	God	filled	the	temple,	the
priests	were	unable	to	stand	and	minister	(2	Chron.	5:14).	In	the
New	Testament,	when	the	glory	of	God	surrounded	the	shepherds
in	the	field	outside	Bethlehem	“they	were	filled	with	fear”	(Luke
2:9).	But	here	in	the	heavenly	city	we	will	be	able	to	endure	the
power	and	holiness	of	the	presence	of	God’s	glory,	for	we	will	live
continually	
in	the	atmosphere	of	the	glory	of	God.	“And	the	city
has	no	need	of	sun	or	moon	to	shine	upon	it,	
for	the	glory	of	God	is
its	light,	and	its	lamp	is	the	Lamb”	
(21:23).	This	will	be	the
fulfillment	of	God’s	purpose	to	call	us	“to	his	own	glory	and
excellence”	(2	Peter	1:3):	then	we	shall	dwell	continually	in	
“the
presence	of	his	glory	with	rejoicing”	
(Jude	1:24;	cf.	Rom.	3:23;
8:18;	9:23;	1	Cor.	15:43;	2	Cor.	3:18;	4:17;	Col.	3:4;	1	Thess.	2:12;
Heb.	2:10;	1	Peter	5:1,	4,	10).
In	that	city	we	shall	live	in	the	presence	of	God,	for	“the	throne	of
God	and	of	the	Lamb	shall	be	in	it,	and	his	servants	shall	worship
him”	(22:3).	From	time	to	time	here	on	earth	we	experience	the	joy
of	genuine	worship	of	God,	and	we	realize	that	it	is	our	highest	joy
to	be	giving	him	glory.	But	in	that	city	this	joy	will	be	multiplied
many	times	over	and	we	will	know	the	fulfillment	of	that	for	which
we	were	created.	Our	greatest	joy	will	be	in	seeing	the	Lord	himself
and	in	being	with	him	forever.	When	John	speaks	of	the	blessings
of	the	heavenly	city,	the	culmination	of	those	blessings	comes	in	the
short	statement,	
“They	shall	see	his	face”	
(22:4).	When	we	look
into	the	face	of	our	Lord	and	he	looks	back	at	us	with	infinite	love,
we	will	see	in	him	the	fulfillment	of	everything	that	we	know	to	be
good	and	right	and	desirable	in	the	universe.	In	the	face	of	God	we
will	see	the	fulfillment	of	all	the	longing	we	have	ever	had	to	know
perfect	love,	peace,	and	joy,	and	to	know	truth	and	justice,	holiness
and	wisdom,	goodness	and	power,	and	glory	and	beauty.	As	we
gaze	into	the	face	of	our	Lord,	we	will	know	more	fully	than	ever
before	that	
“in	your	presence	there	is	fullness	of	joy,	at	your	right
hand	are	pleasures	for	evermore”	
(Ps.	16:11).	Then	will	be	fulfilled
the	longing	of	our	hearts	with	which	we	have	cried	out	in	the	past,
“One	thing	I	have	asked	of	the	Lord,	that	will	I	seek	after;	that	I
may	dwell	in	the	house	of	the	Lord	all	the	days	of	my	life,	
to	behold
the	beauty	of	the	Lord,	
and	to	inquire	in	his	temple”	(Ps.	27:4).
When	we	finally	see	the	Lord	face	to	face,	our	hearts	will	want
nothing	else.	“
Whom	have	I	in	heaven	but	you?	
And	there	is
nothing	upon	earth	that	I	desire	besides	you.	.	.	.	God	is	the	strength
of	my	heart	and	my	portion	forever”	(Ps.	73:25–26).	Then	with	joy
our	hearts	and	voices	will	join	with	the	redeemed	from	all	ages	and
with	the	mighty	armies	of	heaven	singing,	“Holy,	holy,	holy,	is	the
Lord	God	Almighty,	who	was	and	is	and	is	to	come!”	(Rev.	4:8).
QUESTIONS	FOR	PERSONAL	APPLICATION
1
.	
In	your	Christian	life	to	this	point,	have	you	spent	much	time	thinking
about	life	in	the	new	heavens	and	new	earth?	Do	you	think	there	is	a
very	strong	longing	for	this	in	your	heart?	If	it	has	not	been	strong,	why
do	you	think	this	has	been	the	case?
2
.	
In	what	ways	has	this	chapter	made	you	more	excited	about	entering	the
heavenly	city?	What	positive	effects	on	your	Christian	life	do	you	think
would	come	about	because	of	a	stronger	longing	for	the	life	to	come?
3
.	
Are	you	convinced	that	the	new	creation	is	a	place	where	we	will	exist
with	physical	bodies	that	are	made	perfect?	If	so,	are	you	encouraged	or
discouraged	by	this	idea?	Why?	Why	do	you	think	it	is	necessary	to
insist	that	heaven	is	an	actual	place	even	today?
4
.	
What	are	some	ways	in	which	you	already	have	stored	up	treasure	in
heaven	rather	than	on	earth?	Are	there	more	ways	you	could	do	that	in
your	own	life	now?	Do	you	think	you	will?
5
.	
Sometimes	people	have	thought	that	they	would	be	bored	in	the	life	to
come.	Do	you	feel	that	way	yourself?	What	is	a	good	answer	to	the
objection	that	the	eternal	state	will	be	boring?
6
.	
Can	you	describe	at	all	what	you	think	you	will	feel	like	when	you
finally	stand	in	the	presence	of	God	and	see	him	face-to-face?
SPECIAL	TERMS
heaven
new	heavens	and	new	earth
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(For	explanation	of	this	bibliography	see	note	at	
bibliography	to
chapter	1
.	Complete	bibliographical	data	may	be	found	in	
Appendix
4
.)
Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92			Litton,	600–605
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1875–76			Pope,	3:447–54
1892–94			Miley,	2:472–75
1940			Wiley,	3:375–93
1960			Purkiser,	574–77
1983			Carter,	2:1130–33,	1136–40
3.Baptist
1767			Gill,	2:258–68,	329–40
1887			Boyce,	471–77
1907			Strong,	1029–33
1917			Mullins,	483–88
1976–83			Henry,	4:593–614
1983–85			Erickson,	1225–34
4.			Dispensational
1947			Chafer,	4:433–39;	5:365–76
1949			Thiessen,	397–99
5.			Lutheran
1917–24			Pieper,	3:550–55
1934			Mueller,	639–44
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1724–58			Edwards,	2:617–41
1861			Heppe,	706–12
1871–73			Hodge,	3:855–61
1878			Dabney,	849–52
1889			Shedd,	2b:664–66
1938			Berkhof,	736–38
1962			Buswell,	2:511–38
7.			Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988–92			Williams,	3:479–508
Sections	in	Representative	Roman	Catholic	Systematic	Theologies
1.			Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955			Ott,	476–79
2.			Roman	Catholic:	Post-Vatican	II
1980			McBrien,	2:1141–42,	1155–56
Other	Works
Blamires,	Harry.	
Knowing	the	Truth	About	Heaven	and	Hell.	
Knowing
the	Truth	series,	eds.	J.	I.	Packer	and	Peter	Kreeft.	Ann	Arbor:	Servant,
1988.
Gilmore,	John.	
Probing	Heaven:	Key	Questions	on	the	Hereafter.	
Grand
Rapids:	Baker,	1989.
Grider,	J.K.	“Heaven.”	In	
EDT,	
pp.	499–500.
Hoekema,	Anthony	A.	“The	New	Earth.”	In	
The	Bible	and	the	Future.
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1979,	pp.	274–87.
Lincoln,	Andrew	T.	
Paradise	Now	and	Not	Yet:	Studies	in	the	Role	of	the
Heavenly	Dimension	in	Paul’s	Thought	With	Special	Reference	to	His
Eschatology.	
Society	for	New	Testament	Studies	Monograph	Series.
London;	New	York:	Cambridge,	1981.
Murray,	John.	“Glorification.”	In	
Redemption	Accomplished	and	Applied.
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1955,	pp.	174–81.
Smith,	Wilbur	M.	
The	Biblical	Doctrine	of	Heaven.	
Chicago:	Moody,
1968.
SCRIPTURE	MEMORY	PASSAGE
Revelation	2
1
:3–4:	
And	I	heard	a	loud	voice	from	the	throne	saying,
“Behold,	the	dwelling	of	God	is	with	men.	He	will	dwell	with	them,	and	they
shall	be	his	people,	and	God	himself	will	be	with	them;	he	will	wipe	away
every	tear	from	their	eyes,	and	death	shall	be	no	more,	neither	shall	there	be
mourning	nor	crying	nor	pain	any	more,	for	the	former	things	have	passed
away.”
HYMN
“The	Sands	of	Time	Are	Sinking”
This	is	one	of	the	most	beautiful	hymns	ever	written	in	any
language.	It	expresses	so	clearly	the	fact	that	the	beauty	of	heaven
is	the	glory	of	God,	and	the	great	beauty	of	God’s	glory	is	the	Lamb
who	died	for	us	and	now	reigns.
The	sands	of	time	are	sinking,	the	dawn	of	heaven	breaks,
The	summer	morn	I’ve	sighed	for,	the	fair	sweet	morn	awakes;
Dark,	dark	hath	been	the	midnight,	but	dayspring	is	at	hand,
And	glory,	glory	dwelleth	in	Emmanuel’s	land.
The	king	there	in	his	beauty	without	a	veil	is	seen;
It	were	a	well-spent	journey	though	sev’n	deaths	lay	between:
The	Lamb	with	his	fair	army	doth	on	Mount	Zion	stand,
And	glory,	glory	dwelleth	in	Emmanuel’s	land.
O	Christ,	he	is	the	fountain,	the	deep	sweet	well	of	love!
The	streams	on	earth	I’ve	tasted,	more	deep	I’ll	drink	above:
There	to	an	ocean	fullness	his	mercy	doth	expand,
And	glory,	glory	dwelleth	in	Emmanuel’s	land.
The	bride	eyes	not	her	garment,	but	her	dear	bridegroom’s	face;
I	will	not	gaze	at	glory,	but	on	my	King	of	grace;
Not	at	the	crown	he	giveth,	but	on	his	pierced	hand:
The	lamb	is	all	the	glory	of	Emmanuel’s	land.
AUTHOR:	ANNE	R.	COUSIN,	1857
NOTES
1
See	
chapter	11
,	on	the	omnipresence	of	God.
2
Millard	Erickson,	
Christian	Theology,	
says,	“While	heaven	is	both	a	place	and	a	state,	it	is	primarily	a	state”	(p.	
1232),	a
statement	that	is	difficult	to	understand.	Something	either	is	a	place	or	it	is	not	a	place;	it	is	not	somewhat	a	place	but	“primarily	a
state.”	Even	stronger	is	Donald	Guthrie,	who	says	of	the	New	Testament,	“We	shall	not	expect,	however,	to	find	a	description	of	a
place,	so	much	as	the	presence	of	a	person,”	(
New	Testament	Theology,	
p.	875)	and	“Paul	does	not	think	of	heaven	as	a	place,	but
thinks	of	it	in	terms	of	the	presence	of	God”	(
New	Testament	Theology,	
p.	880).	But	does	such	a	distinction	make	any	sense?	If	a
person	is	
present,	
then	by	definition	there	is	a	
place,	
because	to	be	“present”	means	to	be	“located	in	this	place.”
3
See	the	discussion	of	Christ’s	resurrection	body	and	his	ascension	in	
chapter	28
.
4
See	
chapter	42
,	on	the	nature	of	our	resurrection	bodies.
5
Berkhof,	
Systematic	Theology,	
p.	737.
6
See	
chapter	15
	and	
chapter	21
	on	God’s	original	purpose	to	have	man	rule	over	all	creation.
7
1	Cor.	13:12	does	not	say	that	we	will	be	omniscient	or	know	everything	(Paul	could	have	said	we	will	know	all	things,	
ta	panta,
if	he	had	wished	to	do	so),	but,	rightly	translated,	simply	says	that	we	will	know	in	a	fuller	or	more	intensive	way,	“even	as	we
have	been	known,”	that	is,	without	any	error	or	misconceptions	in	our	knowledge.
8
See	the	discussion	of	degrees	of	heavenly	reward	in	
chapter	56
.
OceanofPDF.com
Appendix	1:
Historic	Confessions	of	Faith
This	appendix	reprints	several	of	the	most	significant	confessions	of	faith
from	various	periods	in	the	history	of	the	church.	From	the	ancient	church	I
have	included	the	four	great	ecumenical	confessions:	the	Apostles’	Creed
(third–fourth	centuries	A.D.),	the	Nicene	Creed	(A.D.	325/381),	the
Athanasian	Creed	(late	fourth–early	fifth	century	A.D.),	and	the	Chalcedonian
Creed	(A.D.	451).	From	the	Protestant	churches	since	the	Reformation	I	have
included	four	other	confessions:	the	Thirty-nine	Articles	(1571)	[Church	of
England;	also	Methodist];	the	Westminster	Confession	of	Faith	(1643–1646)
[British	Reformed	and	Presbyterian];	the	New	Hampshire	Baptist	Confession
(1833);	and	the	Baptist	Faith	and	Message	(1925/1963)	[Southern	Baptist].
Finally,	I	have	also	included	the	Chicago	Statement	on	Biblical	Inerrancy
(1978),	because	it	was	the	product	of	a	conference	representing	a	broad
variety	of	evangelical	traditions,	and	because	it	has	gained	widespread
acceptance	as	a	valuable	doctrinal	standard	concerning	an	issue	of	recent	and
current	controversy	in	the	church.
Because	of	space	limitations,	I	was	able	to	include	only	one	of	the	very	long
confessions	of	faith	that	came	out	of	the	Reformation,	and	I	chose	the
Westminster	Confession	of	Faith,	which	represents	a	doctrinal	position	very
close	to	the	position	of	this	book.	This	meant	that	I	did	not	have	space	to
include	either	of	the	two	great	Lutheran	confessions,	the	Augsburg
Confession	(1530)	or	the	Formula	of	Concord	(1576).
1
Students	who	take	the	time	to	read	these	creeds	thoughtfully	will	find	that
they	provide	excellent	summaries	of	the	doctrinal	teachings	of	Scripture.
Following	is	a	list	of	creed	found	in	this	appendix:
Apostles’	Creed
Nicene	Creed
Chalcedonian	Creed
Athanasian	Creed
Thirty-nine	Articles
Westminster	Confession
New	Hampshire	Baptist	Confession
Baptist	Faith	and	Message
Chicago	Statement	on	Biblical	Inerrancy
THE	APOSTLES’	CREED	
(third–fourth	centuries	A.D.)
I	believe	in	God	the	Father	Almighty;	Maker	of	heaven	and	earth.
And	in	Jesus	Christ	his	only	Son	our	Lord;	who	was	conceived	by	the	Holy
Spirit,
2
	born	of	the	virgin	Mary;	suffered	under	Pontius	Pilate,	was	crucified,
dead	and	buried;
3
	the	third	day	he	rose	from	the	dead;	he	ascended	into
heaven;	and	sitteth	at	the	right	hand	of	God	the	Father	Almighty;	from	thence
he	shall	come	to	judge	the	quick	and	the	dead.
I	believe	in	the	Holy	Spirit;	the	holy	catholic	Church;	the	communion	of
saints;	the	forgiveness	of	sins;	the	resurrection	of	the	body;	and	the	life
everlasting.	Amen.
*	*	*
THE	NICENE	CREED	
(A.D.	325;	revised	at	Constantinople	A.D.	381)
I	believe	in	one	God	the	Father	Almighty;	Maker	of	heaven	and	earth,	and	of
all	things	visible	and	invisible.
And	in	one	Lord	Jesus	Christ,	the	only-begotten	Son	of	God,	begotten	of	the
Father	before	all	worlds,	God	of	God,	Light	of	Light,	very	God	of	very	God,
begotten,	not	made,	being	of	one	substance	with	the	Father;	by	whom	all
things	were	made;	who,	for	us	men	and	for	our	salvation,	came	down	from
heaven,	and	was	incarnate	by	the	Holy	Spirit	of	the	Virgin	Mary,	and	was
made	man;	and	was	crucified	also	for	us	under	Pontius	Pilate;	he	suffered	and
was	buried;	and	the	third	day	he	rose	again,	according	to	the	Scriptures;	and
ascended	into	heaven,	and	sitteth	on	the	right	hand	of	the	Father;	and	he	shall
come	again,	with	glory,	to	judge	both	the	quick	and	the	dead;	whose	kingdom
shall	have	no	end.
And	in	the	Holy	Spirit,	the	Lord	and	Giver	of	Life;	who	proceedeth	from	the
Father	and	the	Son;
4
	who	with	the	Father	and	the	Son	together	is	worshiped
and	glorified;	who	spake	by	the	Prophets.	And	one	Holy	Catholic	and
Apostolic	Church.	I	acknowledge	one	Baptism	for	the	remission	of	sins;	and	I
look	for	the	resurrection	of	the	dead,	and	the	life	of	the	world	to	come.	Amen.
*	*	*
THE	CHALCEDONIAN	CREED	
(A.D.	451)
We,	then,	following	the	holy	Fathers,	all	with	one	consent,	teach	men	to
confess	one	and	the	same	Son,	our	Lord	Jesus	Christ,	the	same	perfect	in
Godhead	and	also	perfect	in	manhood;	truly	God	and	truly	man,	of	a
reasonable	soul	and	body;	consubstantial	with	the	Father	according	to	the
Godhead,	and	consubstantial	with	us	according	to	the	Manhood;	in	all	things
like	unto	us,	without	sin;	begotten	before	all	ages	of	the	Father	according	to
the	Godhead,	and	in	these	latter	days,	for	us	and	for	our	salvation,	born	of	the
Virgin	Mary,	the	Mother	of	God,	according	to	the	Manhood;	one	and	the	same
Christ,	Son,	Lord,	Only-begotten,	to	be	acknowledged	in	two	natures,
inconfusedly,	unchangeably,	indivisibly,	inseparably;	the	distinction	of	natures
being	by	no	means	taken	away	by	the	union,	but	rather	the	property	of	each
nature	being	preserved,	and	concurring	in	one	Person	and	one	Subsistence,
not	parted	or	divided	into	two	persons,	but	one	and	the	same	Son,	and	only
begotten,	God	the	Word,	the	Lord	Jesus	Christ,	as	the	prophets	from	the
beginning	have	declared	concerning	him,	and	the	Lord	Jesus	Christ	himself
has	taught	us,	and	the	Creed	of	the	holy	Fathers	has	handed	down	to	us.
*	*	*
THE	ATHANASIAN	CREED	
(fourth–fifth	centuries	A.D.)
1
.	
Whosoever	will	be	saved:	before	all	things	it	is	necessary	that	he	hold
the	Catholic	Faith:
2
.	
Which	Faith	except	every	one	do	keep	whole	and	undefiled:	without
doubt	he	shall	perish	everlastingly.
3
.	
And	the	Catholic	Faith	is	this:	That	we	worship	one	God	in	Trinity,	and
Trinity	in	Unity;
4
.	
Neither	confounding	the	Persons:	nor	dividing	the	Substance.
5
.	
For	there	is	one	Person	of	the	Father:	another	of	the	Son:	and	another	of
the	Holy	Spirit.
6
.	
But	the	Godhead	of	the	Father,	of	the	Son,	and	of	the	Holy	Spirit,	is	all
one:	the	Glory	equal,	the	Majesty	coeternal.
7
.	
Such	as	the	Father	is:	such	is	the	Son:	and	such	is	the	Holy	Spirit.
8
.	
The	Father	uncreated:	the	Son	uncreated:	and	the	Holy	Spirit	uncreated.
9
.	
The	Father	incomprehensible:	the	Son	incomprehensible:	and	the	Holy
Spirit	incomprehensible.
10
.	
The	Father	eternal:	the	Son	eternal:	and	the	Holy	Spirit	eternal.
11
.	
And	yet	they	are	not	three	eternals:	but	one	eternal.
12
.	
And	also	there	are	not	three	uncreated:	nor	three	incomprehensibles,	but
one	uncreated:	and	one	incomprehensible.
13
.	
So	likewise	the	Father	is	Almighty:	the	Son	Almighty:	and	the	Holy
Spirit	Almighty.
14
.	
And	yet	they	are	not	three	Almighties:	but	one	Almighty.
15
.	
So	the	Father	is	God:	the	Son	is	God:	and	the	Holy	Spirit	is	God.
16
.	
And	yet	they	are	not	three	Gods:	but	one	God.
17
.	
So	likewise	the	Father	is	Lord:	the	Son	Lord:	and	the	Holy	Spirit	Lord.
18
.	
And	yet	not	three	Lords:	but	one	Lord.
19
.	
For	like	as	we	are	compelled	by	the	Christian	verity:	to	acknowledge
every	Person	by	himself	to	be	God	and	Lord:
20
.	
So	are	we	forbidden	by	the	Catholic	Religion:	to	say,	There	be	three
Gods,	or	three	Lords.
21
.	
The	Father	is	made	of	none:	neither	created,	nor	begotten.
22
.	
The	Son	is	of	the	Father	alone:	not	made,	nor	created:	but	begotten.
23
.	
The	Holy	Spirit	is	of	the	Father	and	of	the	Son:	neither	made,	nor
created,	nor	begotten:	but	proceeding.
24
.	
So	there	is	one	Father,	not	three	Fathers:	one	Son,	not	three	Sons:	one
Holy	Spirit,	not	three	Holy	Spirits.
25
.	
And	in	this	Trinity	none	is	afore,	or	after	another:	none	is	greater,	or	less
than	another.
26
.	
But	the	whole	three	Persons	are	coeternal,	and	coequal.
27
.	
So	that	in	all	things,	as	aforesaid:	the	Unity	in	Trinity,	and	the	Trinity	in
Unity,	is	to	be	worshipped.
28
.	
He	therefore	that	will	be	saved,	must	thus	think	of	the	Trinity.
29
.	
Furthermore	it	is	necessary	to	everlasting	salvation:	that	he	also	believe
rightly	the	Incarnation	of	our	Lord	Jesus	Christ.
30
.	
For	the	right	Faith	is,	that	we	believe	and	confess:	that	our	Lord	Jesus
Christ,	the	Son	of	God,	is	God	and	Man;
31
.	
God,	of	the	Substance	of	the	Father;	begotten	before	the	worlds:	and
Man,	of	the	Substance	of	his	Mother,	born	in	the	world.
32
.	
Perfect	God:	and	perfect	Man,	of	a	reasonable	soul	and	human	flesh
subsisting.
33
.	
Equal	to	the	Father,	as	touching	his	Godhead:	and	inferior	to	the	Father
as	touching	his	Manhood.
34
.	
Who	although	he	be	God	and	Man;	yet	he	is	not	two,	but	one	Christ.
35
.	
One;	not	by	conversion	of	the	Godhead	into	flesh:	but	by	taking	of	the
Manhood	into	God.
36
.	
One	altogether;	not	by	confusion	of	Substance:	but	by	unity	of	Person.
37
.	
For	as	the	reasonable	soul	and	flesh	is	one	man;	so	God	and	Man	is	one
Christ;
38
.	
Who	suffered	for	our	salvation:	descended	into	hell:	rose	again	the	third
day	from	the	dead.
39
.	
He	ascended	into	heaven,	he	sitteth	on	the	right	hand	of	the	Father	God
Almighty.
40
.	
From	whence	he	shall	come	to	judge	the	quick	and	the	dead.
41
.	
At	whose	coming	all	men	shall	rise	again	with	their	bodies;
42
.	
And	shall	give	account	for	their	own	works.
43
.	
And	they	that	have	done	good	shall	go	into	life	everlasting:	and	they	that
have	done	evil,	into	everlasting	fire.
44
.	
This	is	the	Catholic	Faith:	which	except	a	man	believe	faithfully,	he	can
not	be	saved.
*	*	*
ARTICLES	OF	RELIGION	
(THIRTY-NINE	ARTICLES)	
(1571:	Church	of	England)
I.	Of	Faith	in	the	Holy	Trinity.
There	is	but	one	living	and	true	God,	everlasting,	without	body,	parts,	or
passions;	of	infinite	power,	wisdom,	and	goodness;	the	Maker,	and	Preserver
of	all	things	both	visible	and	invisible.	And	in	unity	of	this	Godhead	there	be
three	Persons,	of	one	substance,	power,	and	eternity:	the	Father,	the	Son,	and
the	Holy	Spirit.
II.	Of	the	Word	or	Son	of	God,	Which	Was	Made	Very	Man.
The	Son,	which	is	the	Word	of	the	Father,	begotten	from	everlasting	of	the
Father,	the	very	and	eternal	God,	and	of	one	substance	with	the	Father,	took
Man’s	nature	in	the	womb	of	the	blessed	Virgin,	of	her	substance:	so	that	two
whole	and	perfect	Natures,	that	is	to	say,	the	Godhead	and	Manhood,	were
joined	together	in	one	Person,	never	to	be	divided,	whereof	is	one	Christ,	very
God,	and	very	Man;	who	truly	suffered,	was	crucified,	dead	and	buried,	to
reconcile	his	Father	to	us,	and	to	be	a	sacrifice,	not	only	for	original	guilt,	but
also	for	actual	sins	of	men.
III.	Of	the	Going	Down	of	Christ	Into	Hell.
As	Christ	died	for	us,	and	was	buried,	so	also	is	it	to	be	believed,	that	he	went
down	into	Hell.
IV.	Of	the	Resurrection	of	Christ.
Christ	did	truly	rise	again	from	death,	and	took	again	his	body,	with	flesh,
bones,	and	all	things	appertaining	to	the	perfection	of	Man’s	nature;
wherewith	he	ascended	into	Heaven,	and	there	sitteth,	until	he	return	to	judge
all	Men	at	the	last	day.
V.	Of	the	Holy	Spirit.
The	Holy	Spirit,	proceeding	from	the	Father	and	the	Son,	is	of	one	substance,
majesty,	and	glory,	with	the	Father	and	the	Son,	very	and	eternal	God.
VI.	Of	the	Sufficiency	of	the	Holy	Scriptures	for	Salvation.
Holy	Scripture	containeth	all	things	necessary	to	salvation:	so	that	whatsoever
is	not	read	therein,	nor	may	be	proved	thereby,	is	not	to	be	required	of	any
man,	that	it	should	be	believed	as	an	article	of	the	Faith,	or	be	thought
requisite	or	necessary	to	salvation.	In	the	name	of	the	Holy	Scripture	we	do
understand	those	canonical	Books	of	the	Old	and	New	Testament,	of	whose
authority	was	never	any	doubt	in	the	Church.
Of	the	Names	and	Number	of	the	Canonical	Books.
Genesis,
	
	
	
The	First	Book	of	Chronicles,
Exodus,
	
	
	
The	Second	Book	of	Chronicles,
Leviticus,
	
	
	
The	First	Book	of	Esdras,
Numbers,
	
	
	
The	Second	Book	of	Esdras,
Deuteronomy,
	
	
	
The	Book	of	Esther,
Joshua,
	
	
	
The	Book	of	Job,
Judges,
	
	
	
The	Psalms,
Ruth,
	
	
	
The	Proverbs,
The	First	Book	of	Samuel,
	
	
	
Ecclesiastes	or	Preacher,
The	Second	of	Samuel,
	
	
	
Cantica,	or	Song	of	Solomon,
The	First	Book	of	Kings,
	
	
	
Four	Prophets	the	greater,
The	Second	Book	of	Kings,
	
	
	
Twelve	Prophets	the	less.
And	the	other	Books	the	Church	doth	read	for	example	of	life	and	instruction
of	manners;	but	yet	doth	it	not	apply	to	them	to	establish	any	doctrine:	such
are	these	following:
The	Third	Book	of	Esdras,
	
	
Baruch	the	Prophet,
The	Fourth	Book	of	Esdras,
	
	
The	Song	of	the	Three	Children,
The	Book	of	Tobias,
	
	
The	Story	of	Susanna,
The	Book	of	Judith,
	
	
Of	Bel	and	the	Dragon,
The	rest	of	the	Book	of	Esther,
	
	
The	Prayer	of	Manasses,
The	Book	of	Wisdom,
	
	
The	First	Book	of	Maccabees,
Jesus	the	Son	of	Sirach,
	
	
The	Second	Book	of	Maccabees.
All	the	Books	of	the	New	Testament,	as	they	are	commonly	received,	we	do
receive,	and	account	them	Canonical.
VII.	Of	the	Old	Testament.
The	Old	Testament	is	not	contrary	to	the	New:	for	both	in	the	Old	and	New
Testament	everlasting	life	is	offered	to	mankind	by	Christ,	who	is	the	only
Mediator	between	God	and	Man,	being	both	God	and	Man.	Wherefore	they
are	not	to	be	heard,	which	feign	that	the	old	Fathers	did	look	only	for
transitory	promises.	Although	the	Law	given	from	God	by	Moses,	as	touching
Ceremonies	and	Rites,	do	not	bind	Christian	men,	nor	the	Civil	precepts
thereof	ought	of	necessity	to	be	received	in	any	commonwealth;	yet
notwithstanding,	no	Christian	man	whatsoever	is	free	from	the	obedience	of
the	Commandments	which	are	called	Moral.
VIII.	Of	the	Creeds.
The	Nicene	Creed,	and	that	which	is	commonly	called	the	Apostles’	Creed,
ought	thoroughly	to	be	received	and	believed:	for	they	may	be	proved	by
most	certain	warrants	of	Holy	Scripture.
IX.	Of	Original	or	Birth-Sin.
Original	Sin	standeth	not	in	the	following	of	Adam,	(as	the	Pelagians	do
vainly	talk;)	but	it	is	the	fault	and	corruption	to	the	Nature	of	every	man,	that
naturally	is	ingendered	of	the	offspring	of	Adam;	whereby	man	is	very	far
gone	from	original	righteousness,	and	is	of	his	own	nature	inclined	to	evil,	so
that	the	flesh	lusteth	always	contrary	to	the	spirit;	and	therefore	in	every
person	born	into	this	world,	it	deserveth	God’s	wrath	and	damnation.	And	this
infection	of	nature	doth	remain,	yea	in	them	that	are	regenerated;	whereby	the
lust	of	the	flesh,	called	in	the	Greek	
phronēma	sarkos	
(which	some	do
expound	the	wisdom,	some	sensuality,	some	of	the	affection,	some	of	the
desire,	of	the	flesh),	is	not	subject	to	the	Law	of	God.	And	although	there	is
no	condemnation	for	them	that	believe	and	are	baptized;	yet	the	Apostle	doth
confess,	that	concupiscence	and	lust	hath	of	itself	the	nature	of	sin.
X.	Of	Free-Will.
The	condition	of	Man	after	the	fall	of	Adam	is	such,	that	he	cannot	turn	and
prepare	himself,	by	his	own	natural	strength	and	good	works,	to	faith,	and
calling	upon	God.	Wherefore	we	have	no	power	to	do	good	works	pleasant
and	acceptable	to	God,	without	the	grace	of	God	by	Christ	preventing	us,	that
we	may	have	a	good	will,	and	working	with	us,	when	we	have	that	good	will.
XI.	Of	the	Justification	of	Man.
We	are	accounted	righteous	before	God,	only	for	the	merit	of	our	Lord	and
Saviour	Jesus	Christ	by	Faith,	and	not	for	our	own	works	or	deservings.
Wherefore,	that	we	are	justified	by	Faith	only,	is	a	most	wholesome	Doctrine,
and	very	full	of	comfort,	as	more	largely	is	expressed	in	the	Homily	of
Justification.
XII.	Of	Good	Works.
Albeit	that	Good	Works,	which	are	the	fruits	of	Faith,	and	follow	after
Justification,	cannot	put	away	our	sins,	and	endure	the	severity	of	God’s
judgment;	yet	are	they	pleasing	and	acceptable	to	God	in	Christ,	and	do
spring	out	necessarily	of	a	true	and	lively	faith;	insomuch	that	by	them	a
lively	Faith	may	be	as	evidently	known	as	a	tree	discerned	by	the	fruit.
XIII.	Of	Works	Before	Justification.
Works	done	before	the	grace	of	Christ,	and	the	Inspiration	of	his	Spirit,	are
not	pleasant	to	God,	forasmuch	as	they	spring	not	of	faith	in	Jesus	Christ;
neither	do	they	make	men	meet	to	receive	grace,	or	(as	the	School-authors
say)	deserve	grace	of	congruity:	yea	rather,	for	that	they	are	not	done	as	God
hath	willed	and	commanded	them	to	be	done,	we	doubt	not	but	they	have	the
nature	of	sin.
XIV.	Of	Works	of	Supererogation.
Voluntary	Works	besides,	over	and	above,	God’s	Commandments,	which	they
call	Works	of	Supererogation,	cannot	be	taught	without	arrogancy	and
impiety:	for	by	them	men	do	declare,	that	they	do	not	only	render	unto	God	as
much	as	they	are	bound	to	do,	but	that	they	do	more	for	his	sake,	than	of
bounden	duty	is	required:	whereas	Christ	saith	plainly,	When	ye	have	done	all
that	are	commanded	to	you,	say,	We	are	unprofitable	servants.
XV.	Of	Christ	Alone	Without	Sin.
Christ	in	the	truth	of	our	nature	was	made	like	unto	us	in	all	things,	sin	only
except,	from	which	he	was	clearly	void,	both	in	his	flesh,	and	in	his	spirit.	He
came	to	be	the	Lamb	without	spot,	who,	by	sacrifice	of	himself	once	made,
should	take	away	the	sins	of	the	world;	and	sin,	(as	Saint	John	saith)	was	not
in	him.	But	all	we	the	rest,	although	baptized,	and	born	again	in	Christ,	yet
offend	in	many	things;	and	if	we	say	we	have	no	sin,	we	deceive	ourselves,
and	the	truth	is	not	in	us.
XVI.	Of	Sin	After	Baptism.
Not	every	deadly	sin	willingly	committed	after	Baptism	is	sin	against	the
Holy	Spirit,	and	unpardonable.	Wherefore	the	grant	of	repentance	is	not	to	be
denied	to	such	as	fall	into	sin	after	Baptism.	After	we	have	received	the	Holy
Spirit,	we	may	depart	from	grace	given,	and	fall	into	sin,	and	by	the	grace	of
God	we	may	arise	again,	and	amend	our	lives.	And	therefore	they	are	to	be
condemned,	which	say,	they	can	no	more	sin	as	long	as	they	live	here,	or	deny
the	place	of	forgiveness	to	such	as	truly	repent.
XVII.	Of	Predestination	and	Election.
Predestination	to	Life	is	the	everlasting	purpose	of	God,	whereby	(before	the
foundations	of	the	world	were	laid)	he	hath	constantly	decreed	by	his	counsel
secret	to	us,	to	deliver	from	curse	and	damnation	those	whom	he	hath	chosen
in	Christ	out	of	mankind,	and	to	bring	them	by	Christ	to	everlasting	salvation,
as	vessels	made	to	honour.	Wherefore,	they	which	be	endued	with	so
excellent	a	benefit	of	God,	be	called	according	to	God’s	purpose	by	his	Spirit
working	in	due	season:	they	through	Grace	obey	the	calling:	they	be	justified
freely:	they	be	made	sons	of	God	by	adoption:	they	be	made	like	the	image	of
his	only-begotten	Son	Jesus	Christ:	they	walk	religiously	in	good	works,	and
at	length,	by	God’s	mercy,	they	attain	to	everlasting	felicity.
As	the	godly	consideration	of	Predestination,	and	our	Election	in	Christ,	is
full	of	sweet,	pleasant,	and	unspeakable	comfort	to	godly	persons,	and	such	as
feel	in	themselves	the	working	of	the	Spirit	of	Christ,	mortifying	the	works	of
the	flesh,	and	their	earthly	members,	and	drawing	up	their	mind	to	high	and
heavenly	things,	as	well	because	it	doth	greatly	establish	and	confirm	their
faith	of	eternal	Salvation	to	be	enjoyed	through	Christ,	as	because	it	doth
fervently	kindle	their	love	towards	God:	So,	for	curious	and	carnal	persons,
lacking	the	Spirit	of	Christ,	to	have	continually	before	their	eyes	the	sentence
of	God’s	Predestination,	is	a	most	dangerous	downfall,	whereby	the	Devil
doth	thrust	them	either	into	desperation,	or	into	wretchlessness	of	most
unclean	living,	no	less	perilous	than	desperation.
Furthermore,	we	must	receive	God’s	promises	in	such	wise,	as	they	be
generally	set	forth	to	us	in	Holy	Scripture:	and,	in	our	doings,	that	Will	of
God	is	to	be	followed,	which	we	have	expressly	declared	unto	us	in	the	Word
of	God.
XVIII.	Of	Obtaining	Eternal	Salvation	Only	
by	the	Name	of	Christ.
They	also	are	to	be	had	accursed	that	presume	to	say,	That	every	man	shall	be
saved	by	the	Law	or	Sect	which	he	professeth,	so	that	he	be	diligent	to	frame
his	life	according	to	that	Law,	and	the	light	of	Nature.	For	Holy	Scripture	doth
set	out	unto	us	only	the	Name	of	Jesus	Christ,	whereby	men	must	be	saved.
XIX.	Of	the	Church.
The	visible	Church	of	Christ	is	a	congregation	of	faithful	men,	in	the	which
the	pure	Word	of	God	is	preached,	and	the	Sacraments	be	duly	ministered
according	to	Christ’s	ordinance,	in	all	those	things	that	of	necessity	are
requisite	to	the	same.
As	the	Church	of	Jerusalem,	Alexandria,	and	Antioch,	have	erred;	so	also	the
Church	of	Rome	hath	erred,	not	only	their	living	and	manner	of	Ceremonies,
but	also	in	matters	of	Faith.
XX.	Of	the	Authority	of	the	Church.
The	Church	hath	power	to	decree	Rites	or	Ceremonies,	and	authority	in
Controversies	of	Faith:	and	yet	it	is	not	lawful	for	the	Church	to	ordain	any
thing	that	is	contrary	to	God’s	Word	written,	neither	may	it	so	expound	one
place	of	Scripture,	that	it	be	repugnant	to	another.	Wherefore,	although	the
Church	be	a	witness	and	a	keeper	of	Holy	Writ,	yet,	as	it	ought	not	to	decree
any	thing	against	the	same,	so	besides	the	same	ought	it	not	to	enforce	any
thing	to	be	believed	for	necessity	of	Salvation.
XXI.	Of	the	Authority	of	General	Councils.
General	Councils	may	not	be	gathered	together	without	the	commandment
and	will	of	Princes.	And	when	they	be	gathered	together	(foreasmuch	as	they
be	an	assembly	of	men,	whereof	all	be	not	governed	with	the	Spirit	and	Word
of	God)	they	may	err,	and	sometimes	have	erred,	even	in	things	pertaining
unto	God.	Wherefore,	things	ordained	by	them	as	necessary	to	salvation	have
neither	strength	nor	authority,	unless	it	may	be	declared	that	they	be	taken	out
of	holy	Scripture.
XXII.	Of	Purgatory.
The	Romish	Doctrine	concerning	Purgatory,	Pardons,	Worshipping	and
Adoration,	as	well	of	Images	as	of	Relics,	and	also	Invocation	of	Saints,	is	a
fond	thing,	vainly	invented,	and	grounded	upon	no	warranty	of	Scripture,	but
rather	repugnant	to	the	Word	of	God.
XXIII.	Of	Ministering	in	the	Congregation
It	is	not	lawful	for	any	man	to	take	upon	him	the	office	of	public	preaching,	or
ministering	the	Sacraments	in	the	Congregation,	before	he	be	lawfully	called,
and	sent	to	execute	the	same.	And	those	we	ought	to	judge	lawfully	called	and
sent,	which	be	chosen	and	called	to	this	work	by	men	who	have	public
authority	given	unto	them	in	the	Congregation,	to	call	and	send	Ministers	into
the	Lord’s	vineyard.
XXIV.	Of	Speaking	in	the	Congregation	in	Such	a	Tongue	
As	the	People	Understandeth.
It	is	a	thing	plainly	repugnant	to	the	Word	of	God,	and	the	custom	of	the
Primitive	Church,	to	have	public	Prayer	in	the	Church,	or	to	minister	the
Sacraments	in	a	tongue	not	understanded	of	the	people.
XXV.	Of	the	Sacraments.
Sacraments	ordained	of	Christ	be	not	only	badges	or	tokens	of	Christian
men’s	profession,	but	rather	they	be	certain	sure	witnesses,	and	effectual	signs
of	grace,	and	God’s	good	will	toward	us,	by	the	which	he	doth	work	invisibly
in	us,	and	doth	not	only	quicken,	but	also	strengthen	and	confirm	our	Faith	in
him.
There	are	two	Sacraments	ordained	of	Christ	our	Lord	in	the	Gospel,	that	is	to
say,	Baptism,	and	the	Supper	of	the	Lord.
Those	five	commonly	called	Sacraments,	that	is	to	say,	Confirmation,
Penance,	Orders,	Matrimony,	and	Extreme	Unction,	are	not	to	be	counted	for
Sacraments	of	the	Gospel,	being	such	as	have	grown	partly	of	the	corrupt
following	of	the	Apostles,	partly	are	states	of	life	allowed	in	the	Scriptures;
but	yet	have	not	like	nature	of	Sacraments	with	Baptism,	and	the	Lord’s
Supper,	for	that	they	have	not	any	visible	sign	or	ceremony	ordained	of	God.
The	Sacraments	were	not	ordained	of	Christ	to	be	gazed	upon,	or	to	be	carried
about,	but	that	we	should	duly	use	them.	And	in	such	only	as	worthily	receive
the	same,	they	have	a	wholesome	effect	or	operation:	but	they	that	receive
them	unworthily,	purchase	to	themselves	damnation,	as	Saint	Paul	saith.
XXVI.	Of	the	Unworthiness	of	the	Ministers,	
Which	Hinders	Not	the	Effect	of	the	Sacrament.
Although	in	the	visible	Church	the	evil	be	ever	mingled	with	the	good,	and
sometimes	the	evil	have	chief	authority	in	the	Ministration	of	the	Word	and
Sacraments,	yet	forasmuch	as	they	do	not	the	same	in	their	own	name,	but	in
Christ’s,	and	do	minister	by	his	commission	and	authority,	we	may	use	their
Ministry,	both	in	hearing	the	Word	of	God,	and	in	receiving	the	Sacraments.
Neither	is	the	effect	of	Christ’s	ordinance	taken	away	by	their	wickedness,	nor
the	grace	of	God’s	gifts	diminished	from	such	as	by	faith,	and	rightly,	do
receive	the	Sacraments	ministered	unto	them;	which	be	effectual,	because	of
Christ’s	institution	and	promise,	although	they	be	ministered	by	evil	men.
Nevertheless,	it	appertaineth	to	the	discipline	of	the	Church,	that	inquiry	be
made	of	evil	Ministers,	and	that	they	be	accused	by	those	that	have
knowledge	of	their	offences;	and	finally,	being	found	guilty,	by	just	judgment
be	deposed.
XXVII.	Of	Baptism.
Baptism	is	not	only	a	sign	of	profession,	and	mark	of	difference,	whereby
Christian	men	are	discerned	from	others	that	be	not	christened,	but	it	is	also	a
sign	of	Regeneration	or	New-Birth,	whereby,	as	by	an	instrument,	they	that
receive	Baptism	rightly	are	grafted	into	the	Church;	the	promises	of
forgiveness	of	sin,	and	of	our	adoption	to	be	the	sons	of	God	by	the	Holy
Spirit,	are	visibly	signed	and	sealed;	Faith	is	confirmed,	and	Grace	increased
by	virtue	of	prayer	unto	God.	The	Baptism	of	young	Children	is	in	any	wise
to	be	retained	in	the	Church,	as	most	agreeable	with	the	institution	of	Christ.
XXVIII.	Of	the	Lord’s	Supper.
The	Supper	of	the	Lord	is	not	only	a	sign	of	the	love	that	Christians	ought	to
have	among	themselves	one	to	another;	but	rather	it	is	a	Sacrament	of	our
Redemption	by	Christ’s	death:	insomuch	that	to	such	as	rightly,	worthily,	and
with	faith,	receive	the	same,	the	Bread	which	we	break	is	a	partaking	of	the
Body	of	Christ;	and	likewise	the	Cup	of	Blessing	is	a	partaking	of	the	Blood
of	Christ.
Transubstantiation	(or	the	change	of	the	substance	of	Bread	and	Wine)	in	the
Supper	of	the	Lord,	cannot	be	proved	by	Holy	Writ;	but	is	repugnant	to	the
plain	words	of	Scripture,	overthroweth	the	nature	of	a	Sacrament,	and	hath
given	occasion	to	many	superstitions.
The	Body	of	Christ	is	given,	taken,	and	eaten,	in	the	Supper,	only	after	an
heavenly	and	spiritual	manner.	And	the	mean	whereby	the	Body	of	Christ	is
received	and	eaten	in	the	Supper,	is	Faith.
The	Sacrament	of	the	Lord’s	Supper	was	not	by	Christ’s	ordinance	reserved,
carried	about,	lifted	up,	or	worshipped.
XXIX.	Of	the	Wicked,	Which	Eat	Not	the	Body	of	Christ	in	the	Use	of	the	Lord’s	Supper.
The	Wicked,	and	such	as	be	void	of	a	lively	faith,	although	they	do	carnally
and	visibly	press	with	their	teeth	(as	Saint	Augustine	saith)	the	Sacrament	of
the	Body	and	Blood	of	Christ;	yet	in	no	wise	are	they	partakers	of	Christ:	but
rather,	to	their	condemnation,	do	eat	and	drink	the	sign	or	Sacrament	of	so
great	a	thing.
XXX.	Of	Both	Kinds.
The	Cup	of	the	Lord	is	not	to	be	denied	to	the	Lay-people:	for	both	the	parts
of	the	Lord’s	Sacrament,	by	Christ’s	ordinance	and	commandment,	ought	to
be	ministered	to	all	Christian	men	alike.
XXXI.	Of	the	One	Oblation	of	Christ	Finished	Upon	the	Cross.
The	Offering	of	Christ	once	made	is	that	perfect	redemption,	propitiation,	and
satisfaction,	for	all	the	sins	of	the	whole	world,	both	original	and	actual;	and
there	is	none	other	satisfaction	for	sin,	but	that	alone.	Wherefore	the	sacrifices
of	Masses,	in	the	which	it	was	commonly	said	that	the	Priest	did	offer	Christ
for	the	quick	and	the	dead,	to	have	remission	of	pain	or	guilt,	were
blasphemous	fables,	and	dangerous	deceits.
XXXII.	Of	the	Marriage	of	Priests.
Bishops,	Priests,	and	Deacons,	are	not	commanded	by	God’s	Law,	either	to
vow	the	estate	of	single	life,	or	to	abstain	from	marriage:	therefore	it	is	lawful
for	them,	as	for	all	other	Christian	men,	to	marry	at	their	own	discretion,	as
they	shall	judge	the	same	to	serve	better	to	godliness.
XXXIII.	Of	Excommunicate	Persons,	How	They	Are	to	be	Avoided.
That	person	which	by	open	denunciation	of	the	Church	is	rightly	cut	off	from
the	unity	of	the	Church,	and	excommunicated,	ought	to	be	taken	of	the	whole
multitude	of	the	faithful,	as	a	Heathen	and	Publican,	until	he	be	openly
reconciled	by	penance,	and	received	into	the	Church	by	a	judge	that	hath
authority	thereunto.
XXXIV.	Of	the	Traditions	of	the	Church.
It	is	not	necessary	that	Traditions	and	Ceremonies	be	in	all	places	one,	or
utterly	like;	for	at	all	times	they	have	been	divers,	and	may	be	changed
according	to	the	diversities	of	countries,	times,	and	men’s	manners,	so	that
nothing	be	ordained	against	God’s	Word.	Whosoever	through	his	private
judgment,	willingly	and	purposely,	doth	openly	break	the	Traditions	and
Ceremonies	of	the	Church,	which	be	not	repugnant	to	the	Word	of	God,	and
be	ordained	and	approved	by	common	authority,	ought	to	be	rebuked	openly,
(that	others	may	fear	to	do	the	like)	as	he	that	offendeth	against	the	common
order	of	the	Church,	and	hurteth	the	authority	of	the	Magistrate,	and
woundeth	the	consciences	of	the	weak	brethren.
Every	particular	or	national	Church	hath	authority	to	ordain,	change,	and
abolish,	Ceremonies	or	Rites	of	the	Church	ordained	only	by	man’s	authority,
so	that	all	things	be	done	to	edifying.
XXXV.	Of	the	Homilies.
The	Second	Book	of	Homilies,	the	several	titles	whereof	we	have	joined
under	this	Article,	doth	contain	a	godly	and	wholesome	Doctrine,	and
necessary	for	these	times,	as	doth	the	former	Book	of	Homilies,	which	were
set	forth	in	the	time	of	Edward	the	Sixth;	and	therefore	we	judge	them	to	be
read	in	Churches	by	the	Ministers,	diligently	and	distinctly,	that	they	may	be
understanded	of	the	people.
Of	The	Names	of	the	Homilies
1
.	
Of	the	right	Use	of	the	Church.
2
.	
Against	Peril	of	Idolatry.
3
.	
Of	the	repairing	and	keeping	clean	of	Churches.
4
.	
Of	good	Works:	first	of	Fasting.
5
.	
Against	Gluttony	and	Drunkenness.
6
.	
Against	Excess	of	Apparel.
7
.	
Of	Prayer.
8
.	
Of	the	Place	and	Time	of	Prayer.
9
.	
That	Common	Prayers	and	Sacraments	ought	to	be	ministered	in	a
known	tongue.
10
.	
Of	the	reverend	Estimation	of	God’s	Word.
11
.	
Of	Alms-doing.
12
.	
Of	the	Nativity	of	Christ.
13
.	
Of	the	Passion	of	Christ.
14
.	
Of	the	Resurrection	of	Christ.
15
.	
Of	the	worthy	receiving	of	the	Sacrament	of	the	Body	and	Blood	of
Christ.
16
.	
Of	the	Gifts	of	the	Holy	Spirit.
17
.	
For	the	Rogation-days.
18
.	
Of	the	State	of	Matrimony.
19
.	
Of	Repentance.
20
.	
Against	Idleness.
21
.	
Against	Rebellion.
XXXVI.	Of	Consecration	of	Bishops	and	Ministers.
The	Book	of	Consecration	of	Archbishops	and	Bishops,	and	Ordering	of
Priests	and	Deacons,	lately	set	forth	in	the	time	of	Edward	the	Sixth,	and
confirmed	at	the	same	time	by	authority	of	Parliament,	doth	contain	all	things
necessary	to	such	Consecration	and	Ordering:	neither	hath	it	any	thing	that	of
itself	is	superstitious	and	ungodly.	And	therefore	whosoever	are	consecrated
or	ordered	according	to	the	Rites	of	that	Book,	since	the	second	year	of	the
forenamed	King	Edward	unto	this	time,	or	hereafter	shall	be	consecrated	or
ordered	according	to	the	same	Rites;	we	decree	all	such	to	be	rightly,	orderly,
and	lawfully	consecrated	and	ordered.
XXXVII.	Of	the	Civil	Magistrates.
The	Queen’s	Majesty	hath	the	chief	power	in	this	Realm	of	England,	and
other	her	Dominions,	unto	whom	the	chief	Government	of	all	Estates	of	this
Realm,	whether	they	be	Ecclesiastical	or	Civil,	in	all	causes	doth	appertain,
and	is	not,	nor	ought	to	be,	subject	to	any	foreign	Jurisdiction.
Where	we	attribute	to	the	Queen’s	Majesty	the	chief	government,	by	which
Titles	we	understand	the	minds	of	some	slanderous	folks	to	be	offended;	we
give	not	to	our	Princes	the	ministering	either	of	God’s	Word,	or	of	the
Sacraments,	the	which	thing	the	Injunctions	also	lately	set	forth	by	Elizabeth
our	Queen	do	most	plainly	testify;	but	that	only	prerogative,	which	we	see	to
have	been	given	always	to	all	godly	Princes	in	holy	Scriptures	by	God
himself;	that	is,	that	they	should	rule	all	estates	and	degrees	committed	to
their	charge	by	God,	whether	they	be	Ecclesiastical	or	Temporal,	and	restrain
with	the	civil	sword	the	stubborn	and	evil-doers.
The	Bishop	of	Rome	hath	no	jurisdiction	in	this	Realm	of	England.
The	Laws	of	the	Realm	may	punish	Christian	men	with	death,	for	heinous	and
grievous	offences.
It	is	lawful	for	Christian	men,	at	the	commandment	of	the	Magistrate,	to	wear
weapons,	and	serve	in	the	wars.
XXXVIII.	Of	Christian	Men’s	Goods,	Which	Are	Not	Common.
The	Riches	and	Goods	of	Christians	are	not	common,	as	touching	the	right,
title,	and	possession	of	the	same;	as	certain	Anabaptists	do	falsely	boast.
Notwithstanding,	every	man	ought,	of	such	things	as	he	possesseth,	liberally
to	give	alms	to	the	poor,	according	to	his	ability.
XXXIX.	Of	a	Christian	Man’s	Oath.
As	we	confess	that	vain	and	rash	Swearing	is	forbidden	Christian	men	by	our
Lord	Jesus	Christ,	and	James	his	Apostle,	so	we	judge,	that	Christian	Religion
doth	not	prohibit,	but	that	a	man	may	swear	when	the	Magistrate	requireth,	in
a	cause	of	faith	and	charity,	so	it	be	done	according	to	the	Prophet’s	teaching,
in	justice,	judgment,	and	truth.
*	*	*
	
WESTMINSTER	CONFESSION	OF	FAITH	
(1643–46)
Chapter	
1
:	Of	the	Holy	Scripture
1.	Although	the	light	of	nature,	and	the	works	of	creation	and	providence	do
so	far	manifest	the	goodness,	wisdom,	and	power	of	God,	as	to	leave	men
unexcusable;	yet	are	they	not	sufficient	to	give	that	knowledge	of	God,	and	of
his	will,	which	is	necessary	unto	salvation.	Therefore	it	pleased	the	Lord,	at
sundry	times,	and	in	divers	manners,	to	reveal	himself,	and	to	declare	that	his
will	unto	his	church;	and	afterwards,	for	the	better	preserving	and	propagating
of	the	truth,	and	for	the	more	sure	establishment	and	comfort	of	the	church
against	the	corruption	of	the	flesh,	and	the	malice	of	Satan	and	of	the	world,
to	commit	the	same	wholly	unto	writing:	which	maketh	the	holy	Scripture	to
be	most	necessary;	those	former	ways	of	God’s	revealing	his	will	unto	his
people	being	now	ceased.
2.	Under	the	name	of	holy	Scripture,	or	the	Word	of	God	written,	are	now
contained	all	the	books	of	the	Old	and	New	Testaments,	which	are	these:
Old	Testament
Genesis
	
	
	
	
2	Chronicles
	
	
	
	
Daniel
Exodus
	
	
	
	
Ezra
	
	
	
	
Hosea
Leviticus
	
	
	
	
Nehemiah
	
	
	
	
Joel
Numbers
	
	
	
	
Esther
	
	
	
	
Amos
Deuteronomy
	
	
	
	
Job
	
	
	
	
Obadiah
Joshua
	
	
	
	
Psalms
	
	
	
	
Jonah
Judges
	
	
	
	
Proverbs
	
	
	
	
Micah
Ruth
	
	
	
	
Ecclesiastes
	
	
	
	
Nahum
1	Samuel
	
	
	
	
Song	of	Songs
	
	
	
	
Habakkuk
2	Samuel
	
	
	
	
Isaiah
	
	
	
	
Zephaniah
1	Kings
	
	
	
	
Jeremiah
	
	
	
	
Haggai
2	Kings
	
	
	
	
Lamentations
	
	
	
	
Zechariah
1	Chronicles
	
	
	
	
Ezekiel
	
	
	
	
Malachi
New	Testament
Matthew
	
	
	
	
	
	
1	Timothy
Mark
	
	
	
	
	
	
2	Timothy
Luke
	
	
	
	
	
	
Titus
John
	
	
	
	
	
	
Philemon
Acts
	
	
	
	
	
	
Hebrews
Romans
	
	
	
	
	
	
James
1	Corinthians
	
	
	
	
	
	
1	Peter
2	Corinthians
	
	
	
	
	
	
2	Peter
Galatians
	
	
	
	
	
	
1	John
Ephesians
	
	
	
	
	
	
2	John
Philippians
	
	
	
	
	
	
3	John
Colossians
	
	
	
	
	
	
Jude
1	Thessalonians
	
	
	
	
	
	
Revelation
2	Thessalonians
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
All	which	are	given	by	inspiration	of	God	to	be	the	rule	of	faith	and	life.
3.	The	books	commonly	called	Apocrypha,	not	being	of	divine	inspiration,
are	no	part	of	the	canon	of	the	Scripture,	and	therefore	are	of	no	authority	in
the	church	of	God,	nor	to	be	any	otherwise	approved,	or	made	use	of,	than
other	human	writings.
4.	The	authority	of	the	holy	Scripture,	for	which	it	ought	to	be	believed,	and
obeyed,	dependeth	not	upon	the	testimony	of	any	man,	or	church;	but	wholly
upon	God	(who	is	truth	itself)	the	author	thereof:	and	therefore	it	is	to	be
received,	because	it	is	the	Word	of	God.
5.	We	may	be	moved	and	induced	by	the	testimony	of	the	church	to	an	high
and	reverent	esteem	of	the	holy	Scripture.	And	the	heavenliness	of	the	matter,
the	efficacy	of	the	doctrine,	the	majesty	of	the	style,	the	consent	of	all	the
parts,	the	scope	of	the	whole	(which	is,	to	give	all	glory	to	God),	the	full
discovery	it	makes	of	the	only	way	of	man’s	salvation,	the	many	other
incomparable	excellencies,	and	the	entire	perfection	thereof,	are	arguments
whereby	it	doth	abundantly	evidence	itself	to	be	the	Word	of	God:	yet
notwithstanding,	our	full	persuasion	and	assurance	of	the	infallible	truth	and
divine	authority	thereof,	is	from	the	inward	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	bearing
witness	by	and	with	the	Word	in	our	hearts.
6.	The	whole	counsel	of	God	concerning	all	things	necessary	for	his	own
glory,	man’s	salvation,	faith	and	life,	is	either	expressly	set	down	in	Scripture,
or	by	good	and	necessary	consequence	may	be	deduced	from	Scripture:	unto
which	nothing	at	any	time	is	to	be	added,	whether	by	new	revelations	of	the
Spirit,	or	traditions	of	men.	Nevertheless,	we	acknowledge	the	inward
illumination	of	the	Spirit	of	God	to	be	necessary	for	the	saving	understanding
of	such	things	as	are	revealed	in	the	Word:	and	that	there	are	some
circumstances	concerning	the	worship	of	God,	and	government	of	the	church,
common	to	human	actions	and	societies,	which	are	to	be	ordered	by	the	light
of	nature,	and	Christian	prudence,	according	to	the	general	rules	of	the	Word,
which	are	always	to	be	observed.
7.	All	things	in	Scripture	are	not	alike	plain	in	themselves,	nor	alike	clear	unto
all:	yet	those	things	which	are	necessary	to	be	known,	believed,	and	observed
for	salvation,	are	so	clearly	propounded,	and	opened	in	some	place	of
Scripture	or	other,	that	not	only	the	learned,	but	the	unlearned,	in	a	due	use	of
the	ordinary	means,	may	attain	unto	a	sufficient	understanding	of	them.
8.	The	Old	Testament	in	Hebrew	(which	was	the	native	language	of	the
people	of	God	of	old),	and	the	New	Testament	in	Greek	(which,	at	the	time	of
the	writing	of	it,	was	most	generally	known	to	the	nations),	being
immediately	inspired	by	God,	and,	by	his	singular	care	and	providence,	kept
pure	in	all	ages,	are	therefore	authentical;	so	as,	in	all	controversies	of
religion,	the	church	is	finally	to	appeal	unto	them.	But,	because	these	original
tongues	are	not	known	to	all	the	people	of	God,	who	have	right	unto,	and
interest	in	the	Scriptures,	and	are	commanded,	in	the	fear	of	God,	to	read	and
search	them,	therefore	they	are	to	be	translated	into	the	vulgar	language	of
every	nation	unto	which	they	come,	that,	the	Word	of	God	dwelling
plentifully	in	all,	they	may	worship	him	in	an	acceptable	manner;	and,
through	patience	and	comfort	of	the	Scriptures,	may	have	hope.
9.	The	infallible	rule	of	interpretation	of	Scripture	is	the	Scripture	itself:	and
therefore,	when	there	is	a	question	about	the	true	and	full	sense	of	any
Scripture	(which	is	not	manifold,	but	one),	it	must	be	searched	and	known	by
other	places	that	speak	more	clearly.
10.	The	supreme	judge	by	which	all	controversies	of	religion	are	to	be
determined,	and	all	decrees	of	councils,	opinions	of	ancient	writers,	doctrines
of	men,	and	private	spirits,	are	to	be	examined,	and	in	whose	sentence	we	are
to	rest,	can	be	no	other	but	the	Holy	Spirit	speaking	in	the	Scripture.
Chapter	2:	Of	God,	and	of	the	Holy	Trinity
1.	There	is	but	one	only,	living,	and	true	God,	who	is	infinite	in	being	and
perfection,	a	most	pure	spirit,	invisible,	without	body,	parts,	or	passions;
immutable,	immense,	eternal,	incomprehensible,	almighty,	most	wise,	most
holy,	most	free,	most	absolute;	working	all	things	according	to	the	counsel	of
his	own	immutable	and	most	righteous	will,	for	his	own	glory;	most	loving,
gracious,	merciful,	long-suffering,	abundant	in	goodness	and	truth,	forgiving
iniquity,	transgression,	and	sin;	the	rewarder	of	them	that	diligently	seek	him;
and	withal,	most	just,	and	terrible	in	his	judgments,	hating	all	sin,	and	who
will	by	no	means	clear	the	guilty.
2.	God	hath	all	life,	glory,	goodness,	blessedness,	in	and	of	himself;	and	is
alone	in	and	unto	himself	all-sufficient,	not	standing	in	need	of	any	creatures
which	he	hath	made,	nor	deriving	any	glory	from	them,	but	only	manifesting
his	own	glory	in,	by,	unto,	and	upon	them.	He	is	the	alone	fountain	of	all
being,	of	whom,	through	whom,	and	to	whom	are	all	things;	and	hath	most
sovereign	dominion	over	them,	to	do	by	them,	for	them,	or	upon	them
whatsoever	himself	pleaseth.	In	his	sight	all	things	are	open	and	manifest,	his
knowledge	is	infinite,	infallible,	and	independent	upon	the	creature,	so	as
nothing	is	to	him	contingent,	or	uncertain.	He	is	most	holy	in	all	his	counsels,
in	all	his	works,	and	in	all	his	commands.	To	him	is	due	from	angels	and	men,
and	every	other	creature,	whatsoever	worship,	service,	or	obedience	he	is
pleased	to	require	of	them.
3.	In	the	unity	of	the	Godhead	there	be	three	persons,	of	one	substance,
power,	and	eternity:	God	the	Father,	God	the	Son,	and	God	the	Holy	Ghost:
the	Father	is	of	none,	neither	begotten,	nor	proceeding;	the	Son	is	eternally
begotten	of	the	Father;	the	Holy	Ghost	eternally	proceeding	from	the	Father
and	the	Son.
Chapter	3:	Of	God’s	Eternal	Decree
1.	God,	from	all	eternity,	did,	by	the	most	wise	and	holy	counsel	of	his	own
will,	freely,	and	unchangeably	ordain	whatsoever	comes	to	pass:	yet	so,	as
thereby	neither	is	God	the	author	of	sin,	nor	is	violence	offered	to	the	will	of
the	creatures;	nor	is	the	liberty	or	contingency	of	second	causes	taken	away,
but	rather	established.
2.	Although	God	knows	whatsoever	may	or	can	come	to	pass	upon	all
supposed	conditions,	yet	hath	he	not	decreed	anything	because	he	foresaw	it
as	future,	or	as	that	which	would	come	to	pass	upon	such	conditions.
3.	By	the	decree	of	God,	for	the	manifestation	of	his	glory,	some	men	and
angels	are	predestinated	unto	everlasting	life;	and	others	foreordained	to
everlasting	death.
4.	These	angels	and	men,	thus	predestinated,	and	foreordained,	are
particularly	and	unchangeably	designed,	and	their	number	so	certain	and
definite,	that	it	cannot	be	either	increased	or	diminished.
5.	Those	of	mankind	that	are	predestinated	unto	life,	God,	before	the
foundation	of	the	world	was	laid,	according	to	his	eternal	and	immutable
purpose,	and	the	secret	counsel	and	good	pleasure	of	his	will,	hath	chosen,	in
Christ,	unto	everlasting	glory,	out	of	his	mere	free	grace	and	love,	without	any
foresight	of	faith,	or	good	works,	or	perseverance	in	either	of	them,	or	any
other	thing	in	the	creature,	as	conditions,	or	causes	moving	him	thereunto;
and	all	to	the	praise	of	his	glorious	grace.
6.	As	God	hath	appointed	the	elect	unto	glory,	so	hath	he,	by	the	eternal	and
most	free	purpose	of	his	will,	foreordained	all	the	means	thereunto.
Wherefore,	they	who	are	elected,	being	fallen	in	Adam,	are	redeemed	by
Christ,	are	effectually	called	unto	faith	in	Christ	by	his	Spirit	working	in	due
season,	are	justified,	adopted,	sanctified,	and	kept	by	his	power,	through	faith,
unto	salvation.	Neither	are	any	other	redeemed	by	Christ,	effectually	called,
justified,	adopted,	sanctified,	and	saved,	but	the	elect	only.
7.	The	rest	of	mankind	God	was	pleased,	according	to	the	unsearchable
counsel	of	his	own	will,	whereby	he	extendeth	or	withholdeth	mercy,	as	he
pleaseth,	for	the	glory	of	his	sovereign	power	over	his	creatures,	to	pass	by;
and	to	ordain	them	to	dishonor	and	wrath	for	their	sin,	to	the	praise	of	his
glorious	justice.
8.	The	doctrine	of	this	high	mystery	of	predestination	is	to	be	handled	with
special	prudence	and	care,	that	men,	attending	the	will	of	God	revealed	in	his
Word,	and	yielding	obedience	thereunto,	may,	from	the	certainty	of	their
effectual	vocation,	be	assured	of	their	eternal	election.	So	shall	this	doctrine
afford	matter	of	praise,	reverence,	and	admiration	of	God;	and	of	humility,
diligence,	and	abundant	consolation	to	all	that	sincerely	obey	the	gospel.
Chapter	4:	Of	Creation
1.	It	pleased	God	the	Father,	Son,	and	Holy	Ghost,	for	the	manifestation	of	the
glory	of	his	eternal	power,	wisdom,	and	goodness,	in	the	beginning,	to	create,
or	make	of	nothing,	the	world,	and	all	things	therein	whether	visible	or
invisible,	in	the	space	of	six	days;	and	all	very	good.
2.	After	God	had	made	all	other	creatures,	he	created	man,	male	and	female,
with	reasonable	and	immortal	souls,	endued	with	knowledge,	righteousness,
and	true	holiness,	after	his	own	image;	having	the	law	of	God	written	in	their
hearts,	and	power	to	fulfil	it:	and	yet	under	a	possibility	of	transgressing,
being	left	to	the	liberty	of	their	own	will,	which	was	subject	unto	change.
Beside	this	law	written	in	their	hearts,	they	received	a	command,	not	to	eat	of
the	tree	of	the	knowledge	of	good	and	evil;	which	while	they	kept,	they	were
happy	in	their	communion	with	God,	and	had	dominion	over	the	creatures.
Chapter	5:	Of	Providence
1.	God	the	great	Creator	of	all	things	doth	uphold,	direct,	dispose,	and	govern
all	creatures,	actions,	and	things,	from	the	greatest	even	to	the	least,	by	his
most	wise	and	holy	providence,	according	to	his	infallible	foreknowledge,
and	the	free	and	immutable	counsel	of	his	own	will,	to	the	praise	of	the	glory
of	his	wisdom,	power,	justice,	goodness,	and	mercy.
2.	Although,	in	relation	to	the	foreknowledge	and	decree	of	God,	the	first
Cause,	all	things	come	to	pass	immutably,	and	infallibly;	yet,	by	the	same
providence,	he	ordereth	them	to	fall	out,	according	to	the	nature	of	second
causes,	either	necessarily,	freely,	or	contingently.
3.	God,	in	his	ordinary	providence,	maketh	use	of	means,	yet	is	free	to	work
without,	above,	and	against	them,	at	his	pleasure.
4.	The	almighty	power,	unsearchable	wisdom,	and	infinite	goodness	of	God
so	far	manifest	themselves	in	his	providence,	that	it	extendeth	itself	even	to
the	first	fall,	and	all	other	sins	of	angels	and	men;	and	that	not	by	a	bare
permission,	but	such	as	hath	joined	with	it	a	most	wise	and	powerful
bounding,	and	otherwise	ordering,	and	governing	of	them,	in	a	manifold
dispensation,	to	his	own	holy	ends;	yet	so,	as	the	sinfulness	thereof
proceedeth	only	from	the	creature,	and	not	from	God,	who,	being	most	holy
and	righteous,	neither	is	nor	can	be	the	author	or	approver	of	sin.
5.	The	most	wise,	righteous,	and	gracious	God	doth	oftentimes	leave,	for	a
season,	his	own	children	to	manifold	temptations,	and	the	corruption	of	their
own	hearts,	to	chastise	them	for	their	former	sins,	or	to	discover	unto	them	the
hidden	strength	of	corruption	and	deceitfulness	of	their	hearts,	that	they	may
be	humbled;	and,	to	raise	them	to	a	more	close	and	constant	dependence	for
their	support	upon	himself,	and	to	make	them	more	watchful	against	all	future
occasions	of	sin,	and	for	sundry	other	just	and	holy	ends.
6.	As	for	those	wicked	and	ungodly	men	whom	God,	as	a	righteous	Judge,	for
former	sins,	doth	blind	and	harden,	from	them	he	not	only	withholdeth	his
grace	whereby	they	might	have	been	enlightened	in	their	understandings,	and
wrought	upon	in	their	hearts;	but	sometimes	also	withdraweth	the	gifts	which
they	had,	and	exposeth	them	to	such	objects	as	their	corruption	makes
occasions	of	sin;	and,	withal,	gives	them	over	to	their	own	lusts,	the
temptations	of	the	world,	and	the	power	of	Satan,	whereby	it	comes	to	pass
that	they	harden	themselves,	even	under	those	means	which	God	useth	for	the
softening	of	others.
7.	As	the	providence	of	God	doth,	in	general,	reach	to	all	creatures;	so,	after	a
most	special	manner,	it	taketh	care	of	his	church,	and	disposeth	all	things	to
the	good	thereof.
Chapter	6:	Of	the	Fall	of	Man,	of	Sin,	
and	of	the	Punishment	Thereof
1.	Our	first	parents,	being	seduced	by	the	subtlety	and	temptation	of	Satan,
sinned,	in	eating	the	forbidden	fruit.	This	their	sin,	God	was	pleased,
according	to	his	wise	and	holy	counsel,	to	permit,	having	purposed	to	order	it
to	his	own	glory.
2.	By	this	sin	they	fell	from	their	original	righteousness	and	communion	with
God,	and	so	became	dead	in	sin,	and	wholly	defiled	in	all	the	parts	and
faculties	of	soul	and	body.
3.	They	being	the	root	of	all	mankind,	the	guilt	of	this	sin	was	imputed;	and
the	same	death	in	sin,	and	corrupted	nature,	conveyed	to	all	their	posterity
descending	from	them	by	ordinary	generation.
4.	From	this	original	corruption,	whereby	we	are	utterly	indisposed,	disabled,
and	made	opposite	to	all	good,	and	wholly	inclined	to	all	evil,	do	proceed	all
actual	transgressions.
5.	This	corruption	of	nature,	during	this	life,	doth	remain	in	those	that	are
regenerated;	and	although	it	be,	through	Christ,	pardoned,	and	mortified;	yet
both	itself,	and	all	the	motions	thereof,	are	truly	and	properly	sin.
6.	Every	sin,	both	original	and	actual,	being	a	transgression	of	the	righteous
law	of	God,	and	contrary	thereunto,	doth,	in	its	own	nature,	bring	guilt	upon
the	sinner,	whereby	he	is	bound	over	to	the	wrath	of	God,	and	curse	of	the
law,	and	so	made	subject	to	death,	with	all	miseries	spiritual,	temporal,	and
eternal.
Chapter	7:	Of	God’s	Covenant	With	Man
1.	The	distance	between	God	and	the	creature	is	so	great,	that	although
reasonable	creatures	do	owe	obedience	unto	him	as	their	Creator,	yet	they
could	never	have	any	fruition	of	him	as	their	blessedness	and	reward,	but	by
some	voluntary	condescension	on	God’s	part,	which	he	hath	been	pleased	to
express	by	way	of	covenant.
2.	The	first	covenant	made	with	man	was	a	covenant	of	works,	wherein	life
was	promised	to	Adam;	and	in	him	to	his	posterity,	upon	condition	of	perfect
and	personal	obedience.
3.	Man,	by	his	fall,	having	made	himself	incapable	of	life	by	that	covenant,
the	Lord	was	pleased	to	make	a	second,	commonly	called	the	covenant	of
grace;	wherein	he	freely	offereth	unto	sinners	life	and	salvation	by	Jesus
Christ;	requiring	of	them	faith	in	him,	that	they	may	be	saved,	and	promising
to	give	unto	all	those	that	are	ordained	unto	eternal	life	his	Holy	Spirit,	to
make	them	willing,	and	able	to	believe.
4.	This	covenant	of	grace	is	frequently	set	forth	in	Scripture	by	the	name	of	a
testament,	in	reference	to	the	death	of	Jesus	Christ	the	Testator,	and	to	the
everlasting	inheritance,	with	all	things	belonging	to	it,	therein	bequeathed.
5.	This	covenant	was	differently	administered	in	the	time	of	the	law,	and	in
the	time	of	the	gospel:	under	the	law,	it	was	administered	by	promises,
prophecies,	sacrifices,	circumcision,	the	paschal	lamb,	and	other	types	and
ordinances	delivered	to	the	people	of	the	Jews,	all	foresignifying	Christ	to
come;	which	were,	for	that	time,	sufficient	and	efficacious,	through	the
operation	of	the	Spirit,	to	instruct	and	build	up	the	elect	in	faith	in	the
promised	Messiah,	by	whom	they	had	full	remission	of	sins,	and	eternal
salvation;	and	is	called	the	Old	Testament.
6.	Under	the	gospel,	when	Christ,	the	substance,	was	exhibited,	the
ordinances	in	which	this	covenant	is	dispensed	are	the	preaching	of	the	Word,
and	the	administration	of	the	sacraments	of	Baptism	and	the	Lord’s	Supper:
which,	though	fewer	in	number,	and	administered	with	more	simplicity,	and
less	outward	glory,	yet,	in	them,	it	is	held	forth	in	more	fullness,	evidence	and
spiritual	efficacy,	to	all	nations,	both	Jews	and	Gentiles;	and	is	called	the	New
Testament.	There	are	not	therefore	two	covenants	of	grace,	differing	in
substance,	but	one	and	the	same,	under	various	dispensations.
Chapter	8:	Of	Christ	the	Mediator
1.	It	pleased	God,	in	his	eternal	purpose,	to	choose	and	ordain	the	Lord	Jesus,
his	only	begotten	Son,	to	be	the	Mediator	between	God	and	man,	the	Prophet,
Priest,	and	King,	the	Head	and	Savior	of	his	church,	the	Heir	of	all	things,	and
Judge	of	the	world:	unto	whom	he	did	from	all	eternity	give	a	people,	to	be
his	seed,	and	to	be	by	him	in	time	redeemed,	called,	justified,	sanctified,	and
glorified.
2.	The	Son	of	God,	the	second	person	in	the	Trinity,	being	very	and	eternal
God,	of	one	substance	and	equal	with	the	Father,	did,	when	the	fullness	of
time	was	come,	take	upon	him	man’s	nature,	with	all	the	essential	properties,
and	common	infirmities	thereof,	yet	without	sin;	being	conceived	by	the
power	of	the	Holy	Ghost,	in	the	womb	of	the	virgin	Mary,	of	her	substance.
So	that	two	whole,	perfect,	and	distinct	natures,	the	Godhead	and	the
manhood,	were	inseparably	joined	together	in	one	person,	without
conversion,	composition,	or	confusion.	Which	person	is	very	God,	and	very
man,	yet	one	Christ,	the	only	Mediator	between	God	and	man.
3.	The	Lord	Jesus,	in	his	human	nature	thus	united	to	the	divine,	was
sanctified,	and	anointed	with	the	Holy	Spirit,	above	measure,	having	in	him
all	the	treasures	of	wisdom	and	knowledge;	in	whom	it	pleased	the	Father	that
all	fullness	should	dwell;	to	the	end	that,	being	holy,	harmless,	undefiled,	and
full	of	grace	and	truth,	he	might	be	thoroughly	furnished	to	execute	the	office
of	a	mediator,	and	surety.	Which	office	he	took	not	unto	himself,	but	was
thereunto	called	by	his	Father,	who	put	all	power	and	judgment	into	his	hand,
and	gave	him	commandment	to	execute	the	same.
4.	This	office	the	Lord	Jesus	did	most	willingly	undertake;	which	that	he
might	discharge,	he	was	made	under	the	law,	and	did	perfectly	fulfil	it;
endured	most	grievous	torments	immediately	in	his	soul,	and	most	painful
sufferings	in	his	body;	was	crucified,	and	died,	was	buried,	and	remained
under	the	power	of	death,	yet	saw	no	corruption.	On	the	third	day	he	arose
from	the	dead,	with	the	same	body	in	which	he	suffered,	with	which	also	he
ascended	into	heaven,	and	there	sitteth	at	the	right	hand	of	his	Father,	making
intercession,	and	shall	return,	to	judge	men	and	angels,	at	the	end	of	the
world.
5.	The	Lord	Jesus,	by	his	perfect	obedience,	and	sacrifice	of	himself,	which
he,	through	the	eternal	Spirit,	once	offered	up	unto	God,	hath	fully	satisfied
the	justice	of	his	Father;	and	purchased,	not	only	reconciliation,	but	an
everlasting	inheritance	in	the	kingdom	of	heaven,	for	all	those	whom	the
Father	hath	given	unto	him.
6.	Although	the	work	of	redemption	was	not	actually	wrought	by	Christ	till
after	his	incarnation,	yet	the	virtue,	efficacy,	and	benefits	thereof	were
communicated	unto	the	elect,	in	all	ages	successively	from	the	beginning	of
the	world,	in	and	by	those	promises,	types,	and	sacrifices,	wherein	he	was
revealed,	and	signified	to	be	the	seed	of	the	woman	which	should	bruise	the
serpent’s	head;	and	the	Lamb	slain	from	the	beginning	of	the	world;	being
yesterday	and	today	the	same,	and	forever.
7.	Christ,	in	the	work	of	mediation,	acts	according	to	both	natures,	by	each
nature	doing	that	which	is	proper	to	itself;	yet,	by	reason	of	the	unity	of	the
person,	that	which	is	proper	to	one	nature	is	sometimes	in	Scripture	attributed
to	the	person	denominated	by	the	other	nature.
8.	To	all	those	for	whom	Christ	hath	purchased	redemption,	he	doth	certainly
and	effectually	apply	and	communicate	the	same;	making	intercession	for
them,	and	revealing	unto	them,	in	and	by	the	Word,	the	mysteries	of	salvation;
effectually	persuading	them	by	his	Spirit	to	believe	and	obey,	and	governing
their	hearts	by	his	Word	and	Spirit;	overcoming	all	their	enemies	by	his
almighty	power	and	wisdom,	in	such	manner,	and	ways,	as	are	most
consonant	to	his	wonderful	and	unsearchable	dispensation.
Chapter	9:	Of	Free	Will
1.	God	hath	endued	the	will	of	man	with	that	natural	liberty,	that	it	is	neither
forced,	nor,	by	any	absolute	necessity	of	nature,	determined	to	good,	or	evil.
2.	Man,	in	his	state	of	innocency,	had	freedom,	and	power	to	will	and	to	do
that	which	was	good	and	well	pleasing	to	God;	but	yet,	mutably,	so	that	he
might	fall	from	it.
3.	Man,	by	his	fall	into	a	state	of	sin,	hath	wholly	lost	all	ability	of	will	to	any
spiritual	good	accompanying	salvation:	so	as,	a	natural	man,	being	altogether
averse	from	that	good,	and	dead	in	sin,	is	not	able,	by	his	own	strength,	to
convert	himself,	or	to	prepare	himself	thereunto.
4.	When	God	converts	a	sinner,	and	translates	him	into	the	state	of	grace,	he
freeth	him	from	his	natural	bondage	under	sin;	and,	by	his	grace	alone,
enables	him	freely	to	will	and	to	do	that	which	is	spiritually	good;	yet	so,	as
that	by	reason	of	his	remaining	corruption,	he	doth	not	perfectly,	nor	only,
will	that	which	is	good,	but	doth	also	will	that	which	is	evil.
5.	The	will	of	man	is	made	perfectly	and	immutably	free	to	good	alone,	in	the
state	of	glory	only.
Chapter	
1
0:	Of	Effectual	Calling
1.	All	those	whom	God	hath	predestinated	unto	life,	and	those	only,	he	is
pleased,	in	his	appointed	and	accepted	time,	effectually	to	call,	by	his	Word
and	Spirit,	out	of	that	state	of	sin	and	death,	in	which	they	are	by	nature,	to
grace	and	salvation,	by	Jesus	Christ;	enlightening	their	minds	spiritually	and
savingly	to	understand	the	things	of	God,	taking	away	their	heart	of	stone,	and
giving	unto	them	a	heart	of	flesh;	renewing	their	wills,	and,	by	his	almighty
power,	determining	them	to	that	which	is	good,	and	effectually	drawing	them
to	Jesus	Christ:	yet	so,	as	they	come	most	freely,	being	made	willing	by	his
grace.
2.	This	effectual	call	is	of	God’s	free	and	special	grace	alone,	not	from
anything	at	all	foreseen	in	man,	who	is	altogether	passive	therein,	until,	being
quickened	and	renewed	by	the	Holy	Spirit,	he	is	thereby	enabled	to	answer
this	call,	and	to	embrace	the	grace	offered	and	conveyed	in	it.
3.	Elect	infants,	dying	in	infancy,	are	regenerated,	and	saved	by	Christ,
through	the	Spirit,	who	worketh	when,	and	where,	and	how	he	pleaseth:	so
also	are	all	other	elect	persons	who	are	incapable	of	being	outwardly	called	by
the	ministry	of	the	Word.
4.	Others,	not	elected,	although	they	may	be	called	by	the	ministry	of	the
Word,	and	may	have	some	common	operations	of	the	Spirit,	yet	they	never
truly	come	unto	Christ,	and	therefore	cannot	be	saved:	much	less	can	men,	not
professing	the	Christian	religion,	be	saved	in	any	other	way	whatsoever,	be
they	never	so	diligent	to	frame	their	lives	according	to	the	light	of	nature,	and
the	laws	of	that	religion	they	do	profess.	And,	to	assert	and	maintain	that	they
may,	is	very	pernicious,	and	to	be	detested.
Chapter	
11
:	Of	Justification
1.	Those	whom	God	effectually	calleth,	he	also	freely	justifieth:	not	by
infusing	righteousness	into	them,	but	by	pardoning	their	sins,	and	by
accounting	and	accepting	their	persons	as	righteous;	not	for	anything	wrought
in	them,	or	done	by	them,	but	for	Christ’s	sake	alone;	nor	by	imputing	faith
itself,	the	act	of	believing,	or	any	other	evangelical	obedience	to	them,	as	their
righteousness;	but	by	imputing	the	obedience	and	satisfaction	of	Christ	unto
them,	they	receiving	and	resting	on	him	and	his	righteousness,	by	faith;	which
faith	they	have	not	of	themselves,	it	is	the	gift	of	God.
2.	Faith,	thus	receiving	and	resting	on	Christ	and	his	righteousness,	is	the
alone	instrument	of	justification:	yet	is	it	not	alone	in	the	person	justified,	but
is	ever	accompanied	with	all	other	saving	graces,	and	is	no	dead	faith,	but
worketh	by	love.
3.	Christ,	by	his	obedience	and	death,	did	fully	discharge	the	debt	of	all	those
that	are	thus	justified,	and	did	make	a	proper,	real,	and	full	satisfaction	to	his
Father’s	justice	in	their	behalf.	Yet,	inasmuch	as	he	was	given	by	the	Father
for	them;	and	his	obedience	and	satisfaction	accepted	in	their	stead;	and	both,
freely,	not	for	anything	in	them;	their	justification	is	only	of	free	grace;	that
both	the	exact	justice	and	rich	grace	of	God	might	be	glorified	in	the
justification	of	sinners.
4.	God	did,	from	all	eternity,	decree	to	justify	all	the	elect,	and	Christ	did,	in
the	fullness	of	time,	die	for	their	sins,	and	rise	again	for	their	justification:
nevertheless,	they	are	not	justified,	until	the	Holy	Spirit	doth,	in	due	time,
actually	apply	Christ	unto	them.
5.	God	doth	continue	to	forgive	the	sins	of	those	that	are	justified;	and,
although	they	can	never	fall	from	the	state	of	justification,	yet	they	may,	by
their	sins,	fall	under	God’s	fatherly	displeasure,	and	not	have	the	light	of	his
countenance	restored	unto	them,	until	they	humble	themselves,	confess	their
sins,	beg	pardon,	and	renew	their	faith	and	repentance.
6.	The	justification	of	believers	under	the	Old	Testament	was,	in	all	these
respects,	one	and	the	same	with	the	justification	of	believers	under	the	New
Testament.
Chapter	
1
2:	Of	Adoption
1.	All	those	that	are	justified,	God	vouchsafeth,	in	and	for	his	only	Son	Jesus
Christ,	to	make	partakers	of	the	grace	of	adoption,	by	which	they	are	taken
into	the	number,	and	enjoy	the	liberties	and	privileges	of	the	children	of	God,
have	his	name	put	upon	them,	receive	the	spirit	of	adoption,	have	access	to
the	throne	of	grace	with	boldness,	are	enabled	to	cry,	Abba,	Father,	are	pitied,
protected,	provided	for,	and	chastened	by	him,	as	by	a	Father:	yet	never	cast
off,	but	sealed	to	the	day	of	redemption;	and	inherit	the	promises,	as	heirs	of
everlasting	salvation.
Chapter	
1
3:	Of	Sanctification
1.	They,	who	are	once	effectually	called,	and	regenerated,	having	a	new	heart,
and	a	new	spirit	created	in	them,	are	further	sanctified,	really	and	personally,
through	the	virtue	of	Christ’s	death	and	resurrection,	by	his	Word	and	Spirit
dwelling	in	them:	the	dominion	of	the	whole	body	of	sin	is	destroyed,	and	the
several	lusts	thereof	are	more	and	more	weakened	and	mortified;	and	they
more	and	more	quickened	and	strengthened	in	all	saving	graces,	to	the
practice	of	true	holiness,	without	which	no	man	shall	see	the	Lord.
2.	This	sanctification	is	throughout,	in	the	whole	man;	yet	imperfect	in	this
life,	there	abiding	still	some	remnants	of	corruption	in	every	part;	whence
ariseth	a	continual	and	irreconcilable	war,	the	flesh	lusting	against	the	Spirit,
and	the	Spirit	against	the	flesh.
3.	In	which	war,	although	the	remaining	corruption,	for	a	time,	may	much
prevail;	yet,	through	the	continual	supply	of	strength	from	the	sanctifying
Spirit	of	Christ,	the	regenerate	part	doth	overcome;	and	so,	the	saints	grow	in
grace,	perfecting	holiness	in	the	fear	of	God.
Chapter	
1
4:	Of	Saving	Faith
1.	The	grace	of	faith,	whereby	the	elect	are	enabled	to	believe	to	the	saving	of
their	souls,	is	the	work	of	the	Spirit	of	Christ	in	their	hearts,	and	is	ordinarily
wrought	by	the	ministry	of	the	Word,	by	which	also,	and	by	the
administration	of	the	sacraments,	and	prayer,	it	is	increased	and	strengthened.
2.	By	this	faith,	a	Christian	believeth	to	be	true	whatsoever	is	revealed	in	the
Word,	for	the	authority	of	God	himself	speaking	therein;	and	acteth
differently	upon	that	which	each	particular	passage	thereof	containeth;
yielding	obedience	to	the	commands,	trembling	at	the	threatenings,	and
embracing	the	promises	of	God	for	this	life,	and	that	which	is	to	come.	But
the	principal	acts	of	saving	faith	are	accepting,	receiving,	and	resting	upon
Christ	alone	for	justification,	sanctification,	and	eternal	life,	by	virtue	of	the
covenant	of	grace.
3.	This	faith	is	different	in	degrees,	weak	or	strong;	may	be	often	and	many
ways	assailed,	and	weakened,	but	gets	the	victory:	growing	up	in	many	to	the
attainment	of	a	full	assurance,	through	Christ,	who	is	both	the	author	and
finisher	of	our	faith.
Chapter	
1
5:	Of	Repentance	Unto	Life
1.	Repentance	unto	life	is	an	evangelical	grace,	the	doctrine	whereof	is	to	be
preached	by	every	minister	of	the	gospel,	as	well	as	that	of	faith	in	Christ.
2.	By	it,	a	sinner,	out	of	the	sight	and	sense	not	only	of	the	danger,	but	also	of
the	filthiness	and	odiousness	of	his	sins,	as	contrary	to	the	holy	nature,	and
righteous	law	of	God;	and	upon	the	apprehension	of	his	mercy	in	Christ	to
such	as	are	penitent,	so	grieves	for,	and	hates	his	sins,	as	to	turn	from	them	all
unto	God,	purposing	and	endeavoring	to	walk	with	him	in	all	the	ways	of	his
commandments.
3.	Although	repentance	be	not	to	be	rested	in,	as	any	satisfaction	for	sin,	or
any	cause	of	the	pardon	thereof,	which	is	the	act	of	God’s	free	grace	in	Christ;
yet	it	is	of	such	necessity	to	all	sinners,	that	none	may	expect	pardon	without
it.
4.	As	there	is	no	sin	so	small,	but	it	deserves	damnation;	so	there	is	no	sin	so
great,	that	it	can	bring	damnation	upon	those	who	truly	repent.
5.	Men	ought	not	to	content	themselves	with	a	general	repentance,	but	it	is
every	man’s	duty	to	endeavor	to	repent	of	his	particular	sins,	particularly.
6.	As	every	man	is	bound	to	make	private	confession	of	his	sins	to	God,
praying	for	the	pardon	thereof;	upon	which,	and	the	forsaking	of	them,	he
shall	find	mercy;	so,	he	that	scandalizeth	his	brother,	or	the	church	of	Christ,
ought	to	be	willing,	by	a	private	or	public	confession,	and	sorrow	for	his	sin,
to	declare	his	repentance	to	those	that	are	offended,	who	are	thereupon	to	be
reconciled	to	him,	and	in	love	to	receive	him.
Chapter	
1
6:	Of	Good	Works
1.	Good	works	are	only	such	as	God	hath	commanded	in	his	holy	Word,	and
not	such	as,	without	the	warrant	thereof,	are	devised	by	men,	out	of	blind
zeal,	or	upon	any	pretense	of	good	intention.
2.	These	good	works,	done	in	obedience	to	God’s	commandments,	are	the
fruits	and	evidences	of	a	true	and	lively	faith:	and	by	them	believers	manifest
their	thankfulness,	strengthen	their	assurance,	edify	their	brethren,	adorn	the
profession	of	the	gospel,	stop	the	mouths	of	the	adversaries,	and	glorify	God,
whose	workmanship	they	are,	created	in	Christ	Jesus	thereunto,	that,	having
their	fruit	unto	holiness,	they	may	have	the	end,	eternal	life.
3.	Their	ability	to	do	good	works	is	not	at	all	of	themselves,	but	wholly	from
the	Spirit	of	Christ.	And	that	they	may	be	enabled	thereunto,	beside	the	graces
they	have	already	received,	there	is	required	an	actual	influence	of	the	same
Holy	Spirit,	to	work	in	them	to	will,	and	to	do,	of	his	good	pleasure:	yet	are
they	not	hereupon	to	grow	negligent,	as	if	they	were	not	bound	to	perform	any
duty	unless	upon	a	special	motion	of	the	Spirit;	but	they	ought	to	be	diligent
in	stirring	up	the	grace	of	God	that	is	in	them.
4.	They	who,	in	their	obedience,	attain	to	the	greatest	height	which	is	possible
in	this	life,	are	so	far	from	being	able	to	supererogate,	and	to	do	more	than
God	requires,	as	that	they	fall	short	of	much	which	in	duty	they	are	bound	to
do.
5.	We	cannot	by	our	best	works	merit	pardon	of	sin,	or	eternal	life	at	the	hand
of	God,	by	reason	of	the	great	disproportion	that	is	between	them	and	the
glory	to	come;	and	the	infinite	distance	that	is	between	us	and	God,	whom,	by
them,	we	can	neither	profit,	nor	satisfy	for	the	debt	of	our	former	sins,	but
when	we	have	done	all	we	can,	we	have	done	but	our	duty,	and	are
unprofitable	servants:	and	because,	as	they	are	good,	they	proceed	from	his
Spirit;	and	as	they	are	wrought	by	us,	they	are	defiled,	and	mixed	with	so
much	weakness	and	imperfection,	that	they	cannot	endure	the	severity	of
God’s	judgment.
6.	Notwithstanding,	the	persons	of	believers	being	accepted	through	Christ,
their	good	works	also	are	accepted	in	him;	not	as	though	they	were	in	this	life
wholly	unblamable	and	unreprovable	in	God’s	sight;	but	that	he,	looking	upon
them	in	his	Son,	is	pleased	to	accept	and	reward	that	which	is	sincere,
although	accompanied	with	many	weaknesses	and	imperfections.
7.	Works	done	by	unregenerate	men,	although	for	the	matter	of	them	they
may	be	things	which	God	commands;	and	of	good	use	both	to	themselves	and
others:	yet,	because	they	proceed	not	from	an	heart	purified	by	faith;	nor	are
done	in	a	right	manner,	according	to	the	Word;	nor	to	a	right	end,	the	glory	of
God,	they	are	therefore	sinful,	and	cannot	please	God,	or	make	a	man	meet	to
receive	grace	from	God:	and	yet,	their	neglect	of	them	is	more	sinful	and
displeasing	unto	God.
Chapter	
1
7:	Of	The	Perseverance	of	the	Saints
1.	They,	whom	God	hath	accepted	in	his	Beloved,	effectually	called,	and
sanctified	by	his	Spirit,	can	neither	totally	nor	finally	fall	away	from	the	state
of	grace,	but	shall	certainly	persevere	therein	to	the	end,	and	be	eternally
saved.
2.	This	perseverance	of	the	saints	depends	not	upon	their	own	free	will,	but
upon	the	immutability	of	the	decree	of	election,	flowing	from	the	free	and
unchangeable	love	of	God	the	Father;	upon	the	efficacy	of	the	merit	and
intercession	of	Jesus	Christ,	the	abiding	of	the	Spirit,	and	of	the	seed	of	God
within	them,	and	the	nature	of	the	covenant	of	grace:	from	all	which	ariseth
also	the	certainty	and	infallibility	thereof.
3.	Nevertheless,	they	may,	through	the	temptations	of	Satan	and	of	the	world,
the	prevalency	of	corruption	remaining	in	them,	and	the	neglect	of	the	means
of	their	preservation,	fall	into	grievous	sins;	and,	for	a	time,	continue	therein:
whereby	they	incur	God’s	displeasure,	and	grieve	his	Holy	Spirit,	come	to	be
deprived	of	some	measure	of	their	graces	and	comforts,	have	their	hearts
hardened,	and	their	consciences	wounded;	hurt	and	scandalize	others,	and
bring	temporal	judgments	upon	themselves.
Chapter	
1
8:	Of	Assurance	of	Grace	and	Salvation
1.	Although	hypocrites	and	other	unregenerate	men	may	vainly	deceive
themselves	with	false	hopes	and	carnal	presumptions	of	being	in	the	favor	of
God,	and	estate	of	salvation	(which	hope	of	theirs	shall	perish):	yet	such	as
truly	believe	in	the	Lord	Jesus,	and	love	him	in	sincerity,	endeavoring	to	walk
in	all	good	conscience	before	him,	may,	in	this	life,	be	certainly	assured	that
they	are	in	the	state	of	grace,	and	may	rejoice	in	the	hope	of	the	glory	of	God,
which	hope	shall	never	make	them	ashamed.
2.	This	certainty	is	not	a	bare	conjectural	and	probable	persuasion	grounded
upon	a	fallible	hope;	but	an	infallible	assurance	of	faith	founded	upon	the
divine	truth	of	the	promises	of	salvation,	the	inward	evidence	of	those	graces
unto	which	these	promises	are	made,	the	testimony	of	the	Spirit	of	adoption
witnessing	with	our	spirits	that	we	are	the	children	of	God,	which	Spirit	is	the
earnest	of	our	inheritance,	whereby	we	are	sealed	to	the	day	of	redemption.
3.	This	infallible	assurance	doth	not	so	belong	to	the	essence	of	faith,	but	that
a	true	believer	may	wait	long,	and	conflict	with	many	difficulties	before	he	be
partaker	of	it:	yet,	being	enabled	by	the	Spirit	to	know	the	things	which	are
freely	given	him	of	God,	he	may,	without	extraordinary	revelation,	in	the	right
use	of	ordinary	means,	attain	thereunto.	And	therefore	it	is	the	duty	of
everyone	to	give	all	diligence	to	make	his	calling	and	election	sure,	that
thereby	his	heart	may	be	enlarged	in	peace	and	joy	in	the	Holy	Ghost,	in	love
and	thankfulness	to	God,	and	in	strength	and	cheerfulness	in	the	duties	of
obedience,	the	proper	fruits	of	this	assurance;	so	far	is	it	from	inclining	men
to	looseness.
4.	True	believers	may	have	the	assurance	of	their	salvation	divers	ways
shaken,	diminished,	and	intermitted;	as,	by	negligence	in	preserving	of	it,	by
falling	into	some	special	sin	which	woundeth	the	conscience	and	grieveth	the
Spirit;	by	some	sudden	or	vehement	temptation,	by	God’s	withdrawing	the
light	of	his	countenance,	and	suffering	even	such	as	fear	him	to	walk	in
darkness	and	to	have	no	light:	yet	are	they	never	utterly	destitute	of	that	seed
of	God,	and	life	of	faith,	that	love	of	Christ	and	the	brethren,	that	sincerity	of
heart,	and	conscience	of	duty,	out	of	which,	by	the	operation	of	the	Spirit,	this
assurance	may,	in	due	time,	be	revived;	and	by	the	which,	in	the	meantime,
they	are	supported	from	utter	despair.
Chapter	
1
9:	Of	the	Law	of	God
1.	God	gave	to	Adam	a	law,	as	a	covenant	of	works,	by	which	he	bound	him
and	all	his	posterity	to	personal,	entire,	exact,	and	perpetual	obedience,
promised	life	upon	the	fulfilling,	and	threatened	death	upon	the	breach	of	it,
and	endued	him	with	power	and	ability	to	keep	it.
2.	This	law,	after	his	fall,	continued	to	be	a	perfect	rule	of	righteousness;	and,
as	such,	was	delivered	by	God	upon	Mount	Sinai,	in	ten	commandments,	and
written	in	two	tables:	the	four	first	commandments	containing	our	duty
towards	God;	and	the	other	six,	our	duty	to	man.
3.	Beside	this	law,	commonly	called	moral,	God	was	pleased	to	give	to	the
people	of	Israel,	as	a	church	under	age,	ceremonial	laws,	containing	several
typical	ordinances,	partly	of	worship,	prefiguring	Christ,	his	graces,	actions,
sufferings,	and	benefits;	and	partly,	holding	forth	divers	instructions	of	moral
duties.	All	which	ceremonial	laws	are	now	abrogated,	under	the	New
Testament.
4.	To	them	also,	as	a	body	politic,	he	gave	sundry	judicial	laws,	which	expired
together	with	the	state	of	that	people;	not	obliging	any	other	now,	further	than
the	general	equity	thereof	may	require.
5.	The	moral	law	doth	forever	bind	all,	as	well	justified	persons	as	others,	to
the	obedience	thereof;	and	that,	not	only	in	regard	of	the	matter	contained	in
it,	but	also	in	respect	of	the	authority	of	God	the	Creator,	who	gave	it.	Neither
doth	Christ,	in	the	gospel,	any	way	dissolve,	but	much	strengthen	this
obligation.
6.	Although	true	believers	be	not	under	the	law,	as	a	covenant	of	works,	to	be
thereby	justified,	or	condemned;	yet	is	it	of	great	use	to	them,	as	well	as	to
others;	in	that,	as	a	rule	of	life	informing	them	of	the	will	of	God,	and	their
duty,	it	directs	and	binds	them	to	walk	accordingly;	discovering	also	the	sinful
pollutions	of	their	nature,	hearts,	and	lives;	so	as,	examining	themselves
thereby,	they	may	come	to	further	conviction	of,	humiliation	for,	and	hatred
against	sin,	together	with	a	clearer	sight	of	the	need	they	have	of	Christ,	and
the	perfection	of	his	obedience.	It	is	likewise	of	use	to	the	regenerate,	to
restrain	their	corruptions,	in	that	it	forbids	sin:	and	the	threatenings	of	it	serve
to	show	what	even	their	sins	deserve;	and	what	afflictions,	in	this	life,	they
may	expect	for	them,	although	freed	from	the	curse	thereof	threatened	in	the
law.	The	promises	of	it,	in	like	manner,	show	them	God’s	approbation	of
obedience,	and	what	blessings	they	may	expect	upon	the	performance	thereof:
although	not	as	due	to	them	by	the	law	as	a	covenant	of	works.	So	as,	a	man’s
doing	good,	and	refraining	from	evil,	because	the	law	encourageth	to	the	one,
and	deterreth	from	the	other,	is	no	evidence	of	his	being	under	the	law;	and,
not	under	grace.
7.	Neither	are	the	forementioned	uses	of	the	law	contrary	to	the	grace	of	the
gospel,	but	do	sweetly	comply	with	it;	the	Spirit	of	Christ	subduing	and
enabling	the	will	of	man	to	do	that	freely,	and	cheerfully,	which	the	will	of
God,	revealed	in	the	law,	requireth	to	be	done.
Chapter	20:	Of	Christian	Liberty,	and	Liberty	of	Conscience
1.	The	liberty	which	Christ	hath	purchased	for	believers	under	the	gospel
consists	in	their	freedom	from	the	guilt	of	sin,	the	condemning	wrath	of	God,
the	curse	of	the	moral	law;	and,	in	their	being	delivered	from	this	present	evil
world,	bondage	to	Satan,	and	dominion	of	sin;	from	the	evil	of	afflictions,	the
sting	of	death,	the	victory	of	the	grave,	and	everlasting	damnation;	as	also,	in
their	free	access	to	God,	and	their	yielding	obedience	unto	him,	not	out	of
slavish	fear,	but	a	childlike	love	and	willing	mind.	All	which	were	common
also	to	believers	under	the	law.	But,	under	the	New	Testament,	the	liberty	of
Christians	is	further	enlarged,	in	their	freedom	from	the	yoke	of	the
ceremonial	law,	to	which	the	Jewish	church	was	subjected;	and	in	greater
boldness	of	access	to	the	throne	of	grace,	and	in	fuller	communications	of	the
free	Spirit	of	God,	than	believers	under	the	law	did	ordinarily	partake	of.
2.	God	alone	is	Lord	of	the	conscience,	and	hath	left	it	free	from	the	doctrines
and	commandments	of	men,	which	are,	in	anything,	contrary	to	his	Word;	or
beside	it,	if	matters	of	faith,	or	worship.	So	that,	to	believe	such	doctrines,	or
to	obey	such	commands,	out	of	conscience,	is	to	betray	true	liberty	of
conscience:	and	the	requiring	of	an	implicit	faith,	and	an	absolute	and	blind
obedience,	is	to	destroy	liberty	of	conscience,	and	reason	also.
3.	They	who,	upon	pretense	of	Christian	liberty,	do	practice	any	sin,	or
cherish	any	lust,	do	thereby	destroy	the	end	of	Christian	liberty,	which	is,	that
being	delivered	out	of	the	hands	of	our	enemies,	we	might	serve	the	Lord
without	fear,	in	holiness	and	righteousness	before	him,	all	the	days	of	our	life.
4.	And	because	the	powers	which	God	hath	ordained,	and	the	liberty	which
Christ	hath	purchased,	are	not	intended	by	God	to	destroy,	but	mutually	to
uphold	and	preserve	one	another,	they	who,	upon	pretense	of	Christian	liberty,
shall	oppose	any	lawful	power,	or	the	lawful	exercise	of	it,	whether	it	be	civil
or	ecclesiastical,	resist	the	ordinance	of	God.	And,	for	their	publishing	of	such
opinions,	or	maintaining	of	such	practices,	as	are	contrary	to	the	light	of
nature,	or	to	the	known	principles	of	Christianity	(whether	concerning	faith,
worship,	or	conversation),	or	to	the	power	of	godliness;	or,	such	erroneous
opinions	or	practices,	as	either	in	their	own	nature,	or	in	the	manner	of
publishing	or	maintaining	them,	are	destructive	to	the	external	peace	and
order	which	Christ	hath	established	in	the	church,	they	may	lawfully	be	called
to	account,	and	proceeded	against,	by	the	censures	of	the	church.
Chapter	21:	Of	Religious	Worship,	and	the	Sabbath-Day
1.	The	light	of	nature	showeth	that	there	is	a	God,	who	hath	lordship	and
sovereignty	over	all,	is	good,	and	doth	good	unto	all,	and	is	therefore	to	be
feared,	loved,	praised,	called	upon,	trusted	in,	and	served,	with	all	the	heart,
and	with	all	the	soul,	and	with	all	the	might.	But	the	acceptable	way	of
worshiping	the	true	God	is	instituted	by	himself,	and	so	limited	by	his	own
revealed	will,	that	he	may	not	be	worshiped	according	to	the	imaginations	and
devices	of	men,	or	the	suggestions	of	Satan,	under	any	visible	representation,
or	any	other	way	not	prescribed	in	the	holy	Scripture.
2.	Religious	worship	is	to	be	given	to	God,	the	Father,	Son,	and	Holy	Ghost;
and	to	him	alone;	not	to	angels,	saints,	or	any	other	creature:	and,	since	the
fall,	not	without	a	Mediator;	nor	in	the	mediation	of	any	other	but	of	Christ
alone.
3.	Prayer,	with	thanksgiving,	being	one	special	part	of	religious	worship,	is	by
God	required	of	all	men:	and,	that	it	may	be	accepted,	it	is	to	be	made	in	the
name	of	the	Son,	by	the	help	of	his	Spirit,	according	to	his	will,	with
understanding,	reverence,	humility,	fervency,	faith,	love,	and	perseverance;
and,	if	vocal,	in	a	known	tongue.
4.	Prayer	is	to	be	made	for	things	lawful;	and	for	all	sorts	of	men	living,	or
that	shall	live	hereafter:	but	not	for	the	dead,	nor	for	those	of	whom	it	may	be
known	that	they	have	sinned	the	sin	unto	death.
5.	The	reading	of	the	Scriptures	with	godly	fear,	the	sound	preaching	and
conscionable	hearing	of	the	Word,	in	obedience	unto	God,	with
understanding,	faith,	and	reverence,	singing	of	psalms	with	grace	in	the	heart;
as	also,	the	due	administration	and	worthy	receiving	of	the	sacraments
instituted	by	Christ,	are	all	parts	of	the	ordinary	religious	worship	of	God:
beside	religious	oaths,	vows,	solemn	fastings,	and	thanksgivings	upon	special
occasions,	which	are,	in	their	several	times	and	seasons,	to	be	used	in	an	holy
and	religious	manner.
6.	Neither	prayer,	nor	any	other	part	of	religious	worship,	is	now,	under	the
gospel,	either	tied	unto,	or	made	more	acceptable	by	any	place	in	which	it	is
performed,	or	towards	which	it	is	directed:	but	God	is	to	be	worshiped
everywhere,	in	spirit	and	truth;	as,	in	private	families	daily,	and	in	secret,	each
one	by	himself;	so,	more	solemnly	in	the	public	assemblies,	which	are	not
carelessly	or	wilfully	to	be	neglected,	or	forsaken,	when	God,	by	his	Word	or
providence,	calleth	thereunto.
7.	As	it	is	the	law	of	nature,	that,	in	general,	a	due	proportion	of	time	be	set
apart	for	the	worship	of	God;	so,	in	his	Word,	by	a	positive,	moral,	and
perpetual	commandment	binding	all	men	in	all	ages,	he	hath	particularly
appointed	one	day	in	seven,	for	a	sabbath,	to	be	kept	holy	unto	him:	which,
from	the	beginning	of	the	world	to	the	resurrection	of	Christ,	was	the	last	day
of	the	week;	and,	from	the	resurrection	of	Christ,	was	changed	into	the	first
day	of	the	week,	which,	in	Scripture,	is	called	the	Lord’s	day,	and	is	to	be
continued	to	the	end	of	the	world,	as	the	Christian	sabbath.
8.	This	sabbath	is	then	kept	holy	unto	the	Lord,	when	men,	after	a	due
preparing	of	their	hearts,	and	ordering	of	their	common	affairs	beforehand,	do
not	only	observe	an	holy	rest,	all	the	day,	from	their	own	works,	words,	and
thoughts	about	their	worldly	employments	and	recreations,	but	also	are	taken
up,	the	whole	time,	in	the	public	and	private	exercises	of	his	worship,	and	in
the	duties	of	necessity	and	mercy.
Chapter	22:	Of	Lawful	Oaths	and	Vows
1.	A	lawful	oath	is	a	part	of	religious	worship,	wherein,	upon	just	occasion,
the	person	swearing	solemnly	calleth	God	to	witness	what	he	asserteth,	or
promiseth,	and	to	judge	him	according	to	the	truth	or	falsehood	of	what	he
sweareth.
2.	The	name	of	God	only	is	that	by	which	men	ought	to	swear,	and	therein	it
is	to	be	used	with	all	holy	fear	and	reverence.	Therefore,	to	swear	vainly,	or
rashly,	by	that	glorious	and	dreadful	Name;	or,	to	swear	at	all	by	any	other
thing,	is	sinful,	and	to	be	abhorred.	Yet,	as	in	matters	of	weight	and	moment,
an	oath	is	warranted	by	the	Word	of	God,	under	the	New	Testament	as	well	as
under	the	Old;	so	a	lawful	oath,	being	imposed	by	lawful	authority,	in	such
matters,	ought	to	be	taken.
3.	Whosoever	taketh	an	oath	ought	duly	to	consider	the	weightiness	of	so
solemn	an	act,	and	therein	to	avouch	nothing	but	what	he	is	fully	persuaded	is
the	truth:	neither	may	any	man	bind	himself	by	oath	to	anything	but	what	is
good	and	just,	and	what	he	believeth	so	to	be,	and	what	he	is	able	and
resolved	to	perform.
4.	An	oath	is	to	be	taken	in	the	plain	and	common	sense	of	the	words,	without
equivocation,	or	mental	reservation.	It	cannot	oblige	to	sin;	but	in	anything
not	sinful,	being	taken,	it	binds	to	performance,	although	to	a	man’s	own	hurt.
Nor	is	it	to	be	violated,	although	made	to	heretics,	or	infidels.
5.	A	vow	is	of	the	like	nature	with	a	promissory	oath,	and	ought	to	be	made
with	the	like	religious	care,	and	to	be	performed	with	the	like	faithfulness.
6.	It	is	not	to	be	made	to	any	creature,	but	to	God	alone:	and,	that	it	may	be
accepted,	it	is	to	be	made	voluntarily,	out	of	faith,	and	conscience	of	duty,	in
way	of	thankfulness	for	mercy	received,	or	for	the	obtaining	of	what	we	want,
whereby	we	more	strictly	bind	ourselves	to	necessary	duties;	or,	to	other
things,	so	far	and	so	long	as	they	may	fitly	conduce	thereunto.
7.	No	man	may	vow	to	do	anything	forbidden	in	the	Word	of	God,	or	what
would	hinder	any	duty	therein	commanded,	or	which	is	not	in	his	own	power,
and	for	the	performance	whereof	he	hath	no	promise	of	ability	from	God.	In
which	respects,	popish	monastical	vows	of	perpetual	single	life,	professed
poverty,	and	regular	obedience,	are	so	far	from	being	degrees	of	higher
perfection,	that	they	are	superstitious	and	sinful	snares,	in	which	no	Christian
may	entangle	himself.
Chapter	23:	Of	the	Civil	Magistrate
1.	God,	the	supreme	Lord	and	King	of	all	the	world,	hath	ordained	civil
magistrates,	to	be,	under	him,	over	the	people,	for	his	own	glory,	and	the
public	good:	and,	to	this	end,	hath	armed	them	with	the	power	of	the	sword,
for	the	defense	and	encouragement	of	them	that	are	good,	and	for	the
punishment	of	evil	doers.
2.	It	is	lawful	for	Christians	to	accept	and	execute	the	office	of	a	magistrate,
when	called	thereunto:	in	the	managing	whereof,	as	they	ought	especially	to
maintain	piety,	justice,	and	peace,	according	to	the	wholesome	laws	of	each
commonwealth;	so,	for	that	end,	they	may	lawfully,	now	under	the	New
Testament,	wage	war,	upon	just	and	necessary	occasion.
3.	Civil	magistrates	may	not	assume	to	themselves	the	administration	of	the
Word	and	sacraments;	or	the	power	of	the	keys	of	the	kingdom	of	heaven;	or,
in	the	least,	interfere	in	matters	of	faith.	Yet,	as	nursing	fathers,	it	is	the	duty
of	civil	magistrates	to	protect	the	church	of	our	common	Lord,	without	giving
the	preference	to	any	denomination	of	Christians	above	the	rest,	in	such	a
manner	that	all	ecclesiastical	persons	whatever	shall	enjoy	the	full,	free,	and
unquestioned	liberty	of	discharging	every	part	of	their	sacred	functions,
without	violence	or	danger.	And,	as	Jesus	Christ	hath	appointed	a	regular
government	and	discipline	in	his	church,	no	law	of	any	commonwealth	should
interfere	with,	let,	or	hinder,	the	due	exercise	thereof,	among	the	voluntary
members	of	any	denomination	of	Christians,	according	to	their	own
profession	and	belief.	It	is	the	duty	of	civil	magistrates	to	protect	the	person
and	good	name	of	all	their	people,	in	such	an	effectual	manner	as	that	no
person	be	suffered,	either	upon	pretense	of	religion	or	of	infidelity,	to	offer
any	indignity,	violence,	abuse,	or	injury	to	any	other	person	whatsoever:	and
to	take	order,	that	all	religious	and	ecclesiastical	assemblies	be	held	without
molestation	or	disturbance.
4.	It	is	the	duty	of	people	to	pray	for	magistrates,	to	honor	their	persons,	to
pay	them	tribute	or	other	dues,	to	obey	their	lawful	commands,	and	to	be
subject	to	their	authority,	for	conscience’	sake.	Infidelity,	or	difference	in
religion,	doth	not	make	void	the	magistrates’	just	and	legal	authority,	nor	free
the	people	from	their	due	obedience	to	them:	from	which	ecclesiastical
persons	are	not	exempted,	much	less	hath	the	pope	any	power	and	jurisdiction
over	them	in	their	dominions,	or	over	any	of	their	people;	and,	least	of	all,	to
deprive	them	of	their	dominions,	or	lives,	if	he	shall	judge	them	to	be	heretics,
or	upon	any	other	pretense	whatsoever.
Chapter	24:	Of	Marriage	and	Divorce
1.	Marriage	is	to	be	between	one	man	and	one	woman:	neither	is	it	lawful	for
any	man	to	have	more	than	one	wife,	nor	for	any	woman	to	have	more	than
one	husband,	at	the	same	time.
2.	Marriage	was	ordained	for	the	mutual	help	of	husband	and	wife,	for	the
increase	of	mankind	with	legitimate	issue,	and	of	the	church	with	an	holy
seed;	and	for	preventing	of	uncleanness.
3.	It	is	lawful	for	all	sorts	of	people	to	marry,	who	are	able	with	judgment	to
give	their	consent.	Yet	it	is	the	duty	of	Christians	to	marry	only	in	the	Lord.
And	therefore	such	as	profess	the	true	reformed	religion	should	not	marry
with	infidels,	papists,	or	other	idolaters:	neither	should	such	as	are	godly	be
unequally	yoked,	by	marrying	with	such	as	are	notoriously	wicked	in	their
life,	or	maintain	damnable	heresies.
4.	Marriage	ought	not	to	be	within	the	degrees	of	consanguinity	or	affinity
forbidden	by	the	Word.	Nor	can	such	incestuous	marriages	ever	be	made
lawful	by	any	law	of	man	or	consent	of	parties,	so	as	those	persons	may	live
together	as	man	and	wife.
5.	Adultery	or	fornication	committed	after	a	contract,	being	detected	before
marriage,	giveth	just	occasion	to	the	innocent	party	to	dissolve	that	contract.
In	the	case	of	adultery	after	marriage,	it	is	lawful	for	the	innocent	party	to	sue
out	a	divorce:	and,	after	the	divorce,	to	marry	another,	as	if	the	offending
party	were	dead.
6.	Although	the	corruption	of	man	be	such	as	is	apt	to	study	arguments	unduly
to	put	asunder	those	whom	God	hath	joined	together	in	marriage:	yet,	nothing
but	adultery,	or	such	wilful	desertion	as	can	no	way	be	remedied	by	the
church,	or	civil	magistrate,	is	cause	sufficient	of	dissolving	the	bond	of
marriage:	wherein,	a	public	and	orderly	course	of	proceeding	is	to	be
observed;	and	the	persons	concerned	in	it	not	left	to	their	own	wills,	and
discretion,	in	their	own	case.
Chapter	25:	Of	the	Church
1.	The	catholic	or	universal	church,	which	is	invisible,	consists	of	the	whole
number	of	the	elect,	that	have	been,	are,	or	shall	be	gathered	into	one,	under
Christ	the	head	thereof;	and	is	the	spouse,	the	body,	the	fullness	of	him	that
filleth	all	in	all.
2.	The	visible	church,	which	is	also	catholic	or	universal	under	the	gospel	(not
confined	to	one	nation,	as	before	under	the	law),	consists	of	all	those
throughout	the	world	that	profess	the	true	religion;	and	of	their	children:	and
is	the	kingdom	of	the	Lord	Jesus	Christ,	the	house	and	family	of	God,	out	of
which	there	is	no	ordinary	possibility	of	salvation.
3.	Unto	this	catholic	visible	church	Christ	hath	given	the	ministry,	oracles,
and	ordinances	of	God,	for	the	gathering	and	perfecting	of	the	saints,	in	this
life,	to	the	end	of	the	world:	and	doth,	by	his	own	presence	and	Spirit,
according	to	his	promise,	make	them	effectual	thereunto.
4.	This	catholic	church	hath	been	sometimes	more,	sometimes	less	visible.
And	particular	churches,	which	are	members	thereof,	are	more	or	less	pure,
according	as	the	doctrine	of	the	gospel	is	taught	and	embraced,	ordinances
administered,	and	public	worship	performed	more	or	less	purely	in	them.
5.	The	purest	churches	under	heaven	are	subject	both	to	mixture	and	error;
and	some	have	so	degenerated,	as	to	become	no	churches	of	Christ,	but
synagogues	of	Satan.	Nevertheless,	there	shall	be	always	a	church	on	earth,	to
worship	God	according	to	his	will.
6.	There	is	no	other	head	of	the	church	but	the	Lord	Jesus	Christ.	Nor	can	the
pope	of	Rome,	in	any	sense,	be	head	thereof.
Chapter	26:	Of	Communion	of	Saints
1.	All	saints,	that	are	united	to	Jesus	Christ	their	head,	by	his	Spirit,	and	by
faith,	have	fellowship	with	him	in	his	graces,	sufferings,	death,	resurrection,
and	glory:	and,	being	united	to	one	another	in	love,	they	have	communion	in
each	other’s	gifts	and	graces,	and	are	obliged	to	the	performance	of	such
duties,	public	and	private,	as	do	conduce	to	their	mutual	good,	both	in	the
inward	and	outward	man.
2.	Saints	by	profession	are	bound	to	maintain	an	holy	fellowship	and
communion	in	the	worship	of	God,	and	in	performing	such	other	spiritual
services	as	tend	to	their	mutual	edification;	as	also	in	relieving	each	other	in
outward	things,	according	to	their	several	abilities	and	necessities.	Which
communion,	as	God	offereth	opportunity,	is	to	be	extended	unto	all	those
who,	in	every	place,	call	upon	the	name	of	the	Lord	Jesus.
3.	This	communion	which	the	saints	have	with	Christ,	doth	not	make	them	in
any	wise	partakers	of	the	substance	of	his	Godhead;	or	to	be	equal	with	Christ
in	any	respect:	either	of	which	to	affirm	is	impious	and	blasphemous.	Nor
doth	their	communion	one	with	another,	as	saints,	take	away,	or	infringe	the
title	or	propriety	which	each	man	hath	in	his	goods	and	possessions.
Chapter	27:	Of	the	Sacraments
1.	Sacraments	are	holy	signs	and	seals	of	the	covenant	of	grace,	immediately
instituted	by	God,	to	represent	Christ,	and	his	benefits;	and	to	confirm	our
interest	in	him:	as	also,	to	put	a	visible	difference	between	those	that	belong
unto	the	church,	and	the	rest	of	the	world;	and	solemnly	to	engage	them	to	the
service	of	God	in	Christ,	according	to	his	Word.
2.	There	is,	in	every	sacrament,	a	spiritual	relation,	or	sacramental	union,
between	the	sign	and	the	thing	signified:	whence	it	comes	to	pass,	that	the
names	and	effects	of	the	one	are	attributed	to	the	other.
3.	The	grace	which	is	exhibited	in	or	by	the	sacraments	rightly	used,	is	not
conferred	by	any	power	in	them;	neither	doth	the	efficacy	of	a	sacrament
depend	upon	the	piety	or	intention	of	him	that	doth	administer	it:	but	upon	the
work	of	the	Spirit,	and	the	word	of	institution,	which	contains,	together	with	a
precept	authorizing	the	use	thereof,	a	promise	of	benefit	to	worthy	receivers.
4.	There	be	only	two	sacraments	ordained	by	Christ	our	Lord	in	the	gospel;
that	is	to	say,	Baptism,	and	the	Supper	of	the	Lord:	neither	of	which	may	be
dispensed	by	any,	but	by	a	minister	of	the	Word	lawfully	ordained.
5.	The	sacraments	of	the	Old	Testament,	in	regard	of	the	spiritual	things
thereby	signified	and	exhibited,	were,	for	substance,	the	same	with	those	of
the	New.
Chapter	28:	Of	Baptism
1.	Baptism	is	a	sacrament	of	the	New	Testament,	ordained	by	Jesus	Christ,
not	only	for	the	solemn	admission	of	the	party	baptized	into	the	visible
church;	but	also,	to	be	unto	him	a	sign	and	seal	of	the	covenant	of	grace,	of
his	ingrafting	into	Christ,	of	regeneration,	of	remission	of	sins,	and	of	his
giving	up	unto	God,	through	Jesus	Christ,	to	walk	in	newness	of	life.	Which
sacrament	is,	by	Christ’s	own	appointment,	to	be	continued	in	his	church	until
the	end	of	the	world.
2.	The	outward	element	to	be	used	in	this	sacrament	is	water,	wherewith	the
party	is	to	be	baptized,	in	the	name	of	the	Father,	and	of	the	Son,	and	of	the
Holy	Ghost,	by	a	minister	of	the	gospel,	lawfully	called	thereunto.
3.	Dipping	of	the	person	into	the	water	is	not	necessary;	but	Baptism	is	rightly
administered	by	pouring,	or	sprinkling	water	upon	the	person.
4.	Not	only	those	that	do	actually	profess	faith	in	and	obedience	unto	Christ,
but	also	the	infants	of	one,	or	both,	believing	parents,	are	to	be	baptized.
5.	Although	it	be	a	great	sin	to	contemn	or	neglect	this	ordinance,	yet	grace
and	salvation	are	not	so	inseparably	annexed	unto	it,	as	that	no	person	can	be
regenerated,	or	saved,	without	it;	or,	that	all	that	are	baptized	are	undoubtedly
regenerated.
6.	The	efficacy	of	Baptism	is	not	tied	to	that	moment	of	time	wherein	it	is
administered;	yet,	notwithstanding,	by	the	right	use	of	this	ordinance,	the
grace	promised	is	not	only	offered,	but	really	exhibited,	and	conferred,	by	the
Holy	Ghost,	to	such	(whether	of	age	or	infants)	as	that	grace	belongeth	unto,
according	to	the	counsel	of	God’s	own	will,	in	his	appointed	time.
7.	The	sacrament	of	Baptism	is	but	once	to	be	administered	unto	any	person.
Chapter	29:	Of	the	Lord’s	Supper
1.	Our	Lord	Jesus,	in	the	night	wherein	he	was	betrayed,	instituted	the
sacrament	of	his	body	and	blood,	called	the	Lord’s	Supper,	to	be	observed	in
his	church,	unto	the	end	of	the	world,	for	the	perpetual	remembrance	of	the
sacrifice	of	himself	in	his	death;	the	sealing	all	benefits	thereof	unto	true
believers,	their	spiritual	nourishment	and	growth	in	him,	their	further
engagement	in	and	to	all	duties	which	they	owe	unto	him;	and,	to	be	a	bond
and	pledge	of	their	communion	with	him,	and	with	each	other,	as	members	of
his	mystical	body.
2.	In	this	sacrament,	Christ	is	not	offered	up	to	his	Father;	nor	any	real
sacrifice	made	at	all,	for	remission	of	sins	of	the	quick	or	dead;	but	only	a
commemoration	of	that	one	offering	up	of	himself,	by	himself,	upon	the
cross,	once	for	all:	and	a	spiritual	oblation	of	all	possible	praise	unto	God,	for
the	same:	so	that	the	popish	sacrifice	of	the	mass	(as	they	call	it)is	most
abominably	injurious	to	Christ’s	one,	only	sacrifice,	the	alone	propitiation	for
all	the	sins	of	his	elect.
3.	The	Lord	Jesus	hath,	in	this	ordinance,	appointed	his	ministers	to	declare
his	word	of	institution	to	the	people;	to	pray,	and	bless	the	elements	of	bread
and	wine,	and	thereby	to	set	them	apart	from	a	common	to	an	holy	use;	and	to
take	and	break	the	bread,	to	take	the	cup,	and	(they	communicating	also
themselves)	to	give	both	to	the	communicants;	but	to	none	who	are	not	then
present	in	the	congregation.
4.	Private	masses,	or	receiving	this	sacrament	by	a	priest,	or	any	other,	alone;
as	likewise,	the	denial	of	the	cup	to	the	people,	worshiping	the	elements,	the
lifting	them	up,	or	carrying	them	about,	for	adoration,	and	the	reserving	them
for	any	pretended	religious	use;	are	all	contrary	to	the	nature	of	this
sacrament,	and	to	the	institution	of	Christ.
5.	The	outward	elements	in	this	sacrament,	duly	set	apart	to	the	uses	ordained
by	Christ,	have	such	relation	to	him	crucified,	as	that,	truly,	yet	sacramentally
only,	they	are	sometimes	called	by	the	name	of	the	things	they	represent,	to
wit,	the	body	and	blood	of	Christ;	albeit,	in	substance	and	nature,	they	still
remain	truly	and	only	bread	and	wine,	as	they	were	before.
6.	That	doctrine	which	maintains	a	change	of	the	substance	of	bread	and	wine,
into	the	substance	of	Christ’s	body	and	blood	(commonly	called
transubstantiation)	by	consecration	of	a	priest,	or	by	any	other	way,	is
repugnant,	not	to	Scripture	alone,	but	even	to	common	sense,	and	reason;
overthroweth	the	nature	of	the	sacrament,	and	hath	been,	and	is,	the	cause	of
manifold	superstitions;	yea,	of	gross	idolatries.
7.	Worthy	receivers,	outwardly	partaking	of	the	visible	elements,	in	this
sacrament,	do	then	also,	inwardly	by	faith,	really	and	indeed,	yet	not	carnally
and	corporally	but	spiritually,	receive,	and	feed	upon,	Christ	crucified,	and	all
benefits	of	his	death:	the	body	and	blood	of	Christ	being	then,	not	corporally
or	carnally,	in,	with,	or	under	the	bread	and	wine;	yet,	as	really,	but	spiritually,
present	to	the	faith	of	believers	in	that	ordinance,	as	the	elements	themselves
are	to	their	outward	senses.
8.	Although	ignorant	and	wicked	men	receive	the	outward	elements	in	this
sacrament;	yet,	they	receive	not	the	thing	signified	thereby;	but,	by	their
unworthy	coming	thereunto,	are	guilty	of	the	body	and	blood	of	the	Lord,	to
their	own	damnation.	Wherefore,	all	ignorant	and	ungodly	persons,	as	they
are	unfit	to	enjoy	communion	with	him,	so	are	they	unworthy	of	the	Lord’s
table;	and	cannot,	without	great	sin	against	Christ,	while	they	remain	such,
partake	of	these	holy	mysteries,	or	be	admitted	thereunto.
Chapter	30:	Of	Church	Censures
1.	The	Lord	Jesus,	as	king	and	head	of	his	church,	hath	therein	appointed	a
government,	in	the	hand	of	church	officers,	distinct	from	the	civil	magistrate.
2.	To	these	officers	the	keys	of	the	kingdom	of	heaven	are	committed;	by
virtue	whereof,	they	have	power,	respectively,	to	retain,	and	remit	sins;	to	shut
that	kingdom	against	the	impenitent,	both	by	the	Word,	and	censures;	and	to
open	it	unto	penitent	sinners,	by	the	ministry	of	the	gospel;	and	by	absolution
from	censures,	as	occasion	shall	require.
3.	Church	censures	are	necessary,	for	the	reclaiming	and	gaining	of	offending
brethren,	for	deterring	of	others	from	the	like	offenses,	for	purging	out	of	that
leaven	which	might	infect	the	whole	lump,	for	vindicating	the	honor	of
Christ,	and	the	holy	profession	of	the	gospel,	and	for	preventing	the	wrath	of
God,	which	might	justly	fall	upon	the	church,	if	they	should	suffer	his
covenant,	and	the	seals	thereof,	to	be	profaned	by	notorious	and	obstinate
offenders.
4.	For	the	better	attaining	of	these	ends,	the	officers	of	the	church	are	to
proceed	by	admonition;	suspension	from	the	sacrament	of	the	Lord’s	Supper
for	a	season;	and	by	excommunication	from	the	church;	according	to	the
nature	of	the	crime,	and	demerit	of	the	person.
Chapter	31:	Of	Synods	and	Councils
1.	For	the	better	government,	and	further	edification	of	the	church,	there
ought	to	be	such	assemblies	as	are	commonly	called	synods	or	councils:	and	it
belongeth	to	the	overseers	and	other	rulers	of	the	particular	churches,	by
virtue	of	their	office,	and	the	power	which	Christ	hath	given	them	for
edification	and	not	for	destruction,	to	appoint	such	assemblies;	and	to
convene	together	in	them,	as	often	as	they	shall	judge	it	expedient	for	the
good	of	the	church.
2.	It	belongeth	to	synods	and	councils,	ministerially	to	determine
controversies	of	faith,	and	cases	of	conscience;	to	set	down	rules	and
directions	for	the	better	ordering	of	the	public	worship	of	God,	and
government	of	his	church;	to	receive	complaints	in	cases	of
maladministration,	and	authoritatively	to	determine	the	same:	which	decrees
and	determinations,	if	consonant	to	the	Word	of	God,	are	to	be	received	with
reverence	and	submission;	not	only	for	their	agreement	with	the	Word,	but
also	for	the	power	whereby	they	are	made,	as	being	an	ordinance	of	God
appointed	thereunto	in	his	Word.
3.	All	synods	or	councils,	since	the	apostles’	times,	whether	general	or
particular,	may	err;	and	many	have	erred.	Therefore	they	are	not	to	be	made
the	rule	of	faith,	or	practice;	but	to	be	used	as	a	help	in	both.
4.	Synods	and	councils	are	to	handle,	or	conclude	nothing,	but	that	which	is
ecclesiastical:	and	are	not	to	intermeddle	with	civil	affairs	which	concern	the
commonwealth,	unless	by	way	of	humble	petition	in	cases	extraordinary;	or,
by	way	of	advice,	for	satisfaction	of	conscience,	if	they	be	thereunto	required
by	the	civil	magistrate.
Chapter	32:	Of	the	State	of	Men	After	Death,	and	of	the	Resurrection	of	the	Dead
1.	The	bodies	of	men,	after	death,	return	to	dust,	and	see	corruption:	but	their
souls,	which	neither	die	nor	sleep,	having	an	immortal	subsistence,
immediately	return	to	God	who	gave	them:	the	souls	of	the	righteous,	being
then	made	perfect	in	holiness,	are	received	into	the	highest	heavens,	where
they	behold	the	face	of	God,	in	light	and	glory,	waiting	for	the	full	redemption
of	their	bodies.	And	the	souls	of	the	wicked	are	cast	into	hell,	where	they
remain	in	torments	and	utter	darkness,	reserved	to	the	judgment	of	the	great
day.	Beside	these	two	places,	for	souls	separated	from	their	bodies,	the
Scripture	acknowledgeth	none.
2.	At	the	last	day,	such	as	are	found	alive	shall	not	die,	but	be	changed:	and	all
the	dead	shall	be	raised	up,	with	the	selfsame	bodies,	and	none	other
(although	with	different	qualities),	which	shall	be	united	again	to	their	souls
forever.
3.	The	bodies	of	the	unjust	shall,	by	the	power	of	Christ,	be	raised	to
dishonor:	the	bodies	of	the	just,	by	his	Spirit,	unto	honor;	and	be	made
conformable	to	his	own	glorious	body.
Chapter	33:	Of	the	Last	Judgment
1.	God	hath	appointed	a	day,	wherein	he	will	judge	the	world,	in
righteousness,	by	Jesus	Christ,	to	whom	all	power	and	judgment	is	given	of
the	Father.	In	which	day,	not	only	the	apostate	angels	shall	be	judged,	but
likewise	all	persons	that	have	lived	upon	earth	shall	appear	before	the	tribunal
of	Christ,	to	give	an	account	of	their	thoughts,	words,	and	deeds;	and	to
receive	according	to	what	they	have	done	in	the	body,	whether	good	or	evil.
2.	The	end	of	God’s	appointing	this	day	is	for	the	manifestation	of	the	glory
of	his	mercy,	in	the	eternal	salvation	of	the	elect;	and	of	his	justice,	in	the
damnation	of	the	reprobate,	who	are	wicked	and	disobedient.For	then	shall
the	righteous	go	into	everlasting	life,	and	receive	that	fullness	of	joy	and
refreshing,	which	shall	come	from	the	presence	of	the	Lord;	but	the	wicked
who	know	not	God,	and	obey	not	the	gospel	of	Jesus	Christ,	shall	be	cast	into
eternal	torments,	and	be	punished	with	everlasting	destruction	from	the
presence	of	the	Lord,	and	from	the	glory	of	his	power.
3.	As	Christ	would	have	us	to	be	certainly	persuaded	that	there	shall	be	a	day
of	judgment,	both	to	deter	all	men	from	sin;	and	for	the	greater	consolation	of
the	godly	in	their	adversity:	so	will	he	have	that	day	unknown	to	men,	that
they	may	shake	off	all	carnal	security,	and	be	always	watchful,	because	they
know	not	at	what	hour	the	Lord	will	come;	and	may	be	ever	prepared	to	say,
Come	Lord	Jesus,	come	quickly,	Amen.
*	*	*
THE	NEW	HAMPSHIRE	BAPTIST	CONFESSION	
(1833)
DECLARATION	OF	FAITH
I.	Of	the	Scriptures.
We	believe	that	the	Holy	Bible	was	written	by	men	divinely	inspired,	and	is	a
perfect	treasure	of	heavenly	instruction;	that	it	has	God	for	its	author,
salvation	for	its	end,	and	truth	without	any	mixture	of	error	for	its	matter;	that
it	reveals	the	principles	by	which	God	will	judge	us;	and	therefore	is,	and
shall	remain	to	the	end	of	the	world,	the	true	center	of	Christian	union,	and
the	supreme	standard	by	which	all	human	conduct,	creeds,	and	opinions
should	be	tried.
II.	Of	the	True	God.
We	believe	that	there	is	one,	and	only	one,	living	and	true	God,	an	infinite,
intelligent	Spirit,	whose	name	is	JEHOVAH,	the	Maker	and	Supreme	Ruler	of
heaven	and	earth;	inexpressibly	glorious	in	holiness,	and	worthy	of	all
possible	honor,	confidence,	and	love;	that	in	the	unity	of	the	Godhead	there
are	three	persons,	the	Father,	the	Son	and	the	Holy	Spirit;	equal	in	every
divine	perfection,	and	executing	distinct	and	harmonious	offices	in	the	great
work	of	redemption.
III.	Of	the	Fall	of	Man.
We	believe	that	man	was	created	in	holiness,	under	the	law	of	his	Maker;	but
by	voluntary	transgression	fell	from	that	holy	and	happy	state;	in	consequence
of	which	all	mankind	are	now	sinners,	not	by	constraint,	but	choice;	being	by
nature	utterly	void	of	that	holiness	required	by	the	law	of	God,	positively
inclined	to	evil;	and	therefore	under	just	condemnation	to	eternal	ruin,
without	defense	or	excuse.
IV.	Of	the	Way	of	Salvation.
We	believe	that	the	salvation	of	sinners	is	wholly	of	grace,	through	the
mediatorial	offices	of	the	Son	of	God;	who	by	the	appointment	of	the	Father,
freely	took	upon	him	our	nature,	yet	without	sin;	honored	the	divine	law	by
his	personal	obedience,	and	by	his	death	made	a	full	atonement	for	our	sins;
that	having	risen	from	the	dead,	he	is	now	enthroned	in	heaven;	and	uniting	in
his	wonderful	person	the	tenderest	sympathies	with	divine	perfections,	he	is
every	way	qualified	to	be	a	suitable,	a	compassionate,	and	all-sufficient
Saviour.
V.	Of	Justification.
We	believe	that	the	great	gospel	blessing	which	Christ	secures	to	such	as
believe	in	him	is	Justification;	that	Justification	includes	the	pardon	of	sin,
and	the	promise	of	eternal	life	on	principles	of	righteousness;	that	it	is
bestowed,	not	in	consideration	of	any	works	of	righteousness	which	we	have
done,	but	solely	through	faith	in	the	Redeemer’s	blood;	by	virtue	of	which
faith	his	perfect	righteousness	is	freely	imputed	to	us	of	God;	that	it	brings	us
into	a	state	of	most	blessed	peace	and	favor	with	God,	and	secures	every	other
blessing	needful	for	time	and	eternity.
VI.	Of	the	Freeness	of	Salvation.
We	believe	that	the	blessings	of	salvation	are	made	free	to	all	by	the	gospel;
that	it	is	the	immediate	duty	of	all	to	accept	them	by	a	cordial,	penitent,	and
obedient	faith;	and	that	nothing	prevents	the	salvation	of	the	greatest	sinner
on	earth	but	his	own	inherent	depravity	and	voluntary	rejection	of	the	gospel;
which	rejection	involves	him	in	an	aggravated	condemnation.
VII.	Of	Grace	in	Regeneration.
We	believe	that,	in	order	to	be	saved,	sinners	must	be	regenerated,	or	born
again;	that	regeneration	consists	in	giving	a	holy	disposition	to	the	mind;	that
it	is	effected	in	a	manner	above	our	comprehension	by	the	power	of	the	Holy
Spirit,	in	connection	with	divine	truth,	so	as	to	secure	our	voluntary	obedience
to	the	gospel;	and	that	its	proper	evidence	appears	in	the	holy	fruits	of
repentance,	and	faith,	and	newness	of	life.
VIII.	Of	Repentance	and	Faith.
We	believe	that	Repentance	and	Faith	are	sacred	duties,	and	also	inseparable
graces,	wrought	in	our	souls	by	the	regenerating	Spirit	of	God;	whereby	being
deeply	convinced	of	our	guilt,	danger,	and	helplessness,	and	of	the	way	of
salvation	by	Christ,	we	turn	to	God	with	unfeigned	contrition,	confession,	and
supplication	for	mercy;	at	the	same	time	heartily	receiving	the	Lord	Jesus
Christ	as	our	Prophet,	Priest,	and	King,	and	relying	on	him	as	the	only	and
all-sufficient	Saviour.
IX.	Of	God’s	Purpose	of	Grace.
We	believe	that	Election	is	the	eternal	purpose	of	God,	according	to	which	he
graciously	regenerates,	sanctifies,	and	saves	sinners;	that	being	perfectly
consistent	with	the	free	agency	of	man,	it	comprehends	all	the	means	in
connection	with	the	end;	that	it	is	a	most	glorious	display	of	God’s	sovereign
goodness,	being	infinitely	free,	wise,	holy,	and	unchangeable;	that	it	utterly
excludes	boasting,	and	promotes	humility,	love,	prayer,	praise,	trust	in	God,
and	active	imitation	of	his	free	mercy;	that	it	encourages	the	use	of	means	in
the	highest	degree;	that	it	may	be	ascertained	by	its	effects	in	all	who	truly
believe	the	gospel;	that	it	is	the	foundation	of	Christian	assurance;	and	that	to
ascertain	it	with	regard	to	ourselves	demands	and	deserves	the	utmost
diligence.
X.	Of	Sanctification.
We	believe	that	Sanctification	is	the	process	by	which,	according	to	the	will
of	God,	we	are	made	partakers	of	his	holiness;	that	it	is	a	progressive	work;
that	it	is	begun	in	regeneration;	and	that	it	is	carried	on	in	the	hearts	of
believers	by	the	presence	and	power	of	the	Holy	Spirit,	the	Sealer	and
Comforter,	in	the	continual	use	of	the	appointed	means—especially	the	Word
of	God,	self-examination,	self-denial,	watchfulness,	and	prayer.
XI.	Of	the	Preservation	of	Saints.
We	believe	that	such	only	are	real	believers	as	endure	unto	the	end;	that	their
persevering	attachment	to	Christ	is	the	grand	mark	which	distinguishes	them
from	superficial	professors;	that	a	special	Providence	watches	over	their
welfare;	and	they	are	kept	by	the	power	of	God	through	faith	unto	salvation.
XII.	Of	the	Harmony	of	the	Law	and	the	Gospel.
We	believe	that	the	Law	of	God	is	the	eternal	and	unchangeable	rule	of	his
moral	government;	that	it	is	holy,	just,	and	good;	and	that	the	inability	which
the	Scriptures	ascribe	to	fallen	men	to	fulfill	its	precepts	arises	entirely	from
their	love	of	sin;	to	deliver	them	from	which,	and	to	restore	them	through	a
Mediator	to	unfeigned	obedience	to	the	holy	Law,	is	one	great	end	of	the
Gospel,	and	of	the	means	of	grace	connected	with	the	establishment	of	the
visible	Church.
XIII.	Of	a	Gospel	Church.
We	believe	that	a	visible	Church	of	Christ	is	a	congregation	of	baptized
believers,	associated	by	covenant	in	the	faith	and	fellowship	of	the	gospel;
observing	the	ordinances	of	Christ;	governed	by	his	laws,	and	exercising	the
gifts,	rights,	and	privileges	invested	in	them	by	his	Word;	that	its	only
scriptural	offices	are	Bishops,	or	Pastors,	and	Deacons,	whose	qualifications,
claims,	and	duties	are	defined	in	the	Epistles	to	Timothy	and	Titus.
XIV.	Of	Baptism	and	the	Lord’s	Supper.
We	believe	that	Christian	Baptism	is	the	immersion	in	water	of	a	believer,
into	the	name	of	the	Father,	and	Son,	and	Holy	Spirit;	to	show	forth,	in	a
solemn	and	beautiful	emblem,	our	faith	in	the	crucified,	buried,	and	risen
Savior,	with	its	effect	in	our	death	to	sin	and	resurrection	to	a	new	life;	that	it
is	prerequisite	to	the	privileges	of	a	Church	relation;	and	to	the	Lord’s	Supper,
in	which	the	members	of	the	Church,	by	the	sacred	use	of	bread	and	wine,	are
to	commemorate	together	the	dying	love	of	Christ;	preceeded	always	by
solemn	self-examination.
XV.	Of	the	Christian	Sabbath.
We	believe	that	the	first	day	of	the	week	is	the	Lord’s	Day	or	Christian
Sabbath;	and	is	to	be	kept	sacred	to	religious	purposes,	by	abstaining	from	all
secular	labor	and	sinful	recreations;	by	the	devout	observance	of	all	the	means
of	grace,	both	private	and	public;	and	by	preparation	for	that	rest	that
remaineth	for	the	people	of	God.
XVI.	Of	Civil	Government.
We	believe	that	civil	government	is	of	divine	appointment,	for	the	interests
and	good	order	of	human	society;	and	that	magistrates	are	to	be	prayed	for,
conscientiously	honored	and	obeyed;	except	only	things	opposed	to	the	will
of	our	Lord	Jesus	Christ,	who	is	the	only	Lord	of	the	conscience,	and	the
Prince	of	the	kings	of	the	earth.
XVII.	Of	the	Righteous	and	the	Wicked.
We	believe	that	there	is	a	radical	and	essential	difference	between	the
righteous	and	the	wicked;	that	such	only	as	through	faith	are	justified	in	the
name	of	the	Lord	Jesus,	and	sanctified	by	the	Spirit	of	our	God,	are	truly
righteous	in	his	esteem;	while	all	such	as	continue	in	impenitence	and
unbelief	are	in	his	sight	wicked,	and	under	the	curse;	and	this	distinction
holds	among	men	both	in	and	after	death.
XVIII.	Of	the	World	to	Come.
We	believe	that	the	end	of	the	world	is	approaching;	that	at	the	last	day	Christ
will	descend	from	heaven	and	raise	the	dead	from	the	grave	to	final
retribution;	that	a	solemn	separation	will	then	take	place;	that	the	wicked	will
be	adjudged	to	endless	punishment,	and	the	righteous	to	endless	joy;	and	that
this	judgment	will	fix	forever	the	final	state	of	men	in	heaven	or	hell,	on
principles	of	righteousness.
*	*	*
BAPTIST	FAITH	AND	MESSAGE	
SOUTHERN	BAPTIST	CONVENTION	
(1925,	REVISED	1963)
I.	The	Scriptures
The	Holy	Bible	was	written	by	men	divinely	inspired	and	is	the	record	of
God’s	revelation	of	Himself	to	man.	It	is	a	perfect	treasure	of	divine
instruction.	It	has	God	for	its	author,	salvation	for	its	end,	and	truth,	without
any	mixture	of	error,	for	its	matter.	It	reveals	the	principles	by	which	God
judges	us;	and	therefore	is,	and	will	remain	to	the	end	of	the	world,	the	true
center	of	Christian	union,	and	the	supreme	standard	by	which	all	human
conduct,	creeds,	and	religious	opinions	should	be	tried.	The	criterion	by
which	the	Bible	is	to	be	interpreted	is	Jesus	Christ.
II.	God
There	is	one	and	only	one	living	and	true	God.	He	is	an	intelligent,	spiritual
and	personal	Being,	the	Creator,	Redeemer,	Preserver,	and	Ruler	of	the
universe.	God	is	infinite	in	holiness	and	all	other	perfections.	To	him	we	owe
the	highest	love,	reverence,	and	obedience.	The	eternal	God	reveals	Himself
to	us	as	Father,	Son,	and	Holy	Spirit,	with	distinct	personal	attributes,	but
without	division	of	nature,	essence,	or	being.
1.	God	the	Father
	God	as	Father	reigns	with	providential	care	over	His
universe,	His	creatures,	and	the	flow	of	the	stream	of	human	history
according	to	the	purposes	of	His	grace.	He	is	all	powerful,	all	loving,	and	all
wise.	God	is	Father	in	truth	to	those	who	become	children	of	God	through
faith	in	Jesus	Christ.	He	is	fatherly	in	his	attitude	toward	all	men.
2.	God	the	Son
	Christ	is	the	eternal	Son	of	God.	In	His	incarnation	as	Jesus
Christ	He	was	conceived	of	the	Holy	Spirit	and	born	of	the	virgin	Mary.	Jesus
perfectly	revealed	and	did	the	will	of	God,	taking	upon	Himself	the	demands
and	necessities	of	human	nature	and	identifying	Himself	completely	with
mankind	yet	without	sin.	He	honored	the	divine	law	by	His	personal
obedience,	and	in	His	death	on	the	cross	He	made	provision	for	the
redemption	of	men	from	sin.	He	was	raised	from	the	dead	with	a	glorified
body	and	appeared	to	His	disciples	as	the	person	who	was	with	them	before
His	crucifixion.	He	ascended	into	heaven	and	is	now	exalted	at	the	right	hand
of	God	where	He	is	the	One	Mediator,	partaking	of	the	nature	of	God	and	of
man,	and	in	whose	Person	is	effected	the	reconciliation	between	God	and
man.	He	will	return	in	power	and	glory	to	judge	the	world	and	to	consummate
His	redemptive	mission.	He	now	dwells	in	all	believers	as	the	living	and	ever
present	Lord.
3.	God	the	Holy	Spirit
	The	Holy	Spirit	is	the	Spirit	of	God.	He	inspired	holy
men	of	old	to	write	the	Scriptures.	Through	illumination	He	enables	men	to
understand	truth.	He	exalts	Christ.	He	convicts	of	sin,	of	righteousness	and	of
judgment.	He	calls	men	to	the	Saviour,	and	effects	regeneration.	He	cultivates
Christian	character,	comforts	believers,	and	bestows	the	spiritual	gifts	by
which	they	serve	God	through	His	church.	He	seals	the	believer	unto	the	day
of	final	redemption.	His	presence	in	the	Christian	is	the	assurance	of	God	to
bring	the	believer	into	the	fullness	of	the	stature	of	Christ.	He	enlightens	and
empowers	the	believer	and	the	church	in	worship,	evangelism,	and	service.
III.	Man
Man	was	created	by	the	special	act	of	God,	in	His	own	image,	and	is	the
crowning	work	of	His	creation.	In	the	beginning	man	was	innocent	of	sin	and
was	endowed	by	his	Creator	with	freedom	of	choice.	By	his	free	choice	man
sinned	against	God	and	brought	sin	into	the	human	race.	Through	the
temptation	of	Satan	man	transgressed	the	command	of	God,	and	fell	from	his
original	innocence;	whereby	his	posterity	inherit	a	nature	and	an	environment
inclined	toward	sin,	and	as	soon	as	they	are	capable	of	moral	action	become
transgressors	and	are	under	condemnation.	Only	the	grace	of	God	can	bring
man	into	His	holy	fellowship	and	enable	man	to	fulfill	the	creative	purpose	of
God.	The	sacredness	of	human	personality	is	evident	in	that	God	created	man
in	His	own	image,	and	in	that	Christ	died	for	man;	therefore	every	man
possesses	dignity	and	is	worthy	of	respect	and	Christian	love.
IV.	Salvation
Salvation	involves	the	redemption	of	the	whole	man,	and	is	offered	freely	to
all	who	accept	Jesus	Christ	as	Lord	and	Saviour,	who	by	His	own	blood
obtained	eternal	redemption	for	the	believer.	In	its	broadest	sense	salvation
includes	regeneration,	sanctification,	and	glorification.
1.	Regeneration,	or	the	new	birth,	is	a	work	of	God’s	grace	whereby	believers
become	new	creatures	in	Christ	Jesus.	It	is	a	change	of	heart	wrought	by	the
Holy	Spirit	through	conviction	of	sin,	to	which	the	sinner	responds	in
repentance	toward	God	and	faith	in	the	Lord	Jesus	Christ.
Repentance	and	faith	are	inseparable	experiences	of	grace.	Repentance	is	a
genuine	turning	from	sin	toward	God.	Faith	is	the	acceptance	of	Jesus	Christ
and	commitment	of	the	entire	personality	to	Him	as	Lord	and	Saviour.
Justification	is	God’s	gracious	and	full	acquittal	upon	principles	of	His
righteousness	of	all	sinners	who	repent	and	believe	in	Christ.	Justification
brings	the	believer	into	a	relationship	of	peace	and	favor	with	God.
2.	Sanctification	is	the	experience,	beginning	in	regeneration,	by	which	the
believer	is	set	apart	to	God’s	purposes,	and	is	enabled	to	progress	toward
moral	and	spiritual	perfection	through	the	presence	and	power	of	the	Holy
Spirit	dwelling	in	him.	Growth	in	grace	should	continue	throughout	the
regenerate	person’s	life.
3.	Glorification	is	the	culmination	of	salvation	and	is	the	final	blessed	and
abiding	state	of	the	redeemed.
V.	God’s	Purpose	of	Grace
Election	is	the	gracious	purpose	of	God,	according	to	which	He	regenerates,
sanctifies,	and	glorifies	sinners.	It	is	consistent	with	the	free	agency	of	man
and	comprehends	all	the	means	in	connection	with	the	end.	It	is	a	glorious
display	of	God’s	sovereign	goodness,	and	is	infinitely	wise,	holy,	and
unchangeable.	It	excludes	boasting	and	promotes	humility.
All	true	believers	endure	to	the	end.	Those	whom	God	has	accepted	in	Christ,
and	sanctified	by	His	Spirit,	will	never	fall	away	from	the	state	of	grace,	but
shall	persevere	to	the	end.	Believers	may	fall	into	sin	through	neglect	and
temptation,	whereby	they	grieve	the	Spirit,	impair	their	graces	and	comforts,
bring	reproach	on	the	cause	of	Christ,	and	temporal	judgments	on	themselves,
yet	they	shall	be	kept	by	the	power	of	God	through	faith	unto	salvation.
VI.	The	Church
A	New	Testament	church	of	the	Lord	Jesus	Christ	is	a	local	body	of	baptized
believers	who	are	associated	by	covenant	in	the	faith	and	fellowship	of	the
gospel,	observing	the	two	ordinances	of	Christ,	committed	to	His	teachings,
exercising	the	gifts,	rights,	and	privileges	invested	in	them	by	His	Word,	and
seeking	to	extend	the	gospel	to	the	ends	of	the	earth.
This	church	is	an	autonomous	body,	operating	through	democratic	processes
under	the	Lordship	of	Jesus	Christ.	In	such	a	congregation,	members	are
equally	responsible.	Its	Scriptural	officers	are	pastors	and	deacons.
The	New	Testament	speaks	also	of	the	church	as	the	body	of	Christ	which
includes	all	of	the	redeemed	of	all	the	ages.
VII.	Baptism	and	the	Lord’s	Supper
Christian	baptism	is	the	immersion	of	a	believer	in	water	in	the	name	of	the
Father,	the	Son,	and	the	Holy	Spirit.	It	is	an	act	of	obedience	symbolizing	the
believer’s	faith	in	a	crucified,	buried,	and	risen	Saviour,	the	believer’s	death
to	sin,	the	burial	of	the	old	life,	and	the	resurrection	to	walk	in	newness	of	life
in	Christ	Jesus.	It	is	a	testimony	to	his	faith	in	the	final	resurrection	of	the
dead.	Being	a	church	ordinance,	it	is	prerequisite	to	the	privileges	of	church
membership	and	to	the	Lord’s	Supper.
The	Lord’s	Supper	is	a	symbolic	act	of	obedience	whereby	members	of	the
church,	through	partaking	of	the	bread	and	the	fruit	of	the	vine,	memorialize
the	death	of	the	Redeemer	and	anticipate	His	second	coming.
VIII.	The	Lord’s	Day
The	first	day	of	the	week	is	the	Lord’s	Day.	It	is	a	Christian	institution	for
regular	observance.	It	commemorates	the	resurrection	of	Christ	from	the	dead
and	should	be	employed	in	the	exercises	of	worship	and	spiritual	devotion,
both	public	and	private,	and	by	refraining	from	worldly	amusements,	and
resting	from	secular	employments,	work	of	necessity	and	mercy	only	being
excepted.
IX.	The	Kingdom
The	kingdom	of	God	includes	both	His	general	sovereignty	over	the	universe
and	His	particular	kingship	over	men	who	willfully	acknowledge	Him	as
King.	Particularly	the	kingdom	is	the	realm	of	salvation	into	which	men	enter
by	trustful,	childlike	commitment	to	Jesus	Christ.	Christians	ought	to	pray	and
to	labor	that	the	kingdom	may	come	and	God’s	will	be	done	on	earth.	The	full
consummation	of	the	kingdom	awaits	the	return	of	Jesus	Christ	and	the	end	of
this	age.
X.	Last	Things
God	in	His	own	time	and	in	His	own	way,	will	bring	the	world	to	its
appropriate	end.	According	to	His	promise,	Jesus	Christ	will	return	personally
and	visibly	in	glory	to	the	earth;	the	dead	will	be	raised;	and	Christ	will	judge
all	men	in	righteousness.	The	unrighteous	will	be	consigned	to	hell,	the	place
of	everlasting	punishment.	The	righteous	in	their	resurrected	and	glorified
bodies	will	receive	their	reward	and	will	dwell	forever	in	heaven	with	the
Lord.
XI.	Evangelism	and	Missions
It	is	the	duty	and	privilege	of	every	follower	of	Christ	and	of	every	church	of
the	Lord	Jesus	Christ	to	endeavor	to	make	disciples	of	all	nations.	The	new
birth	of	man’s	spirit	by	God’s	Holy	Spirit	means	the	birth	of	love	for	others.
Missionary	effort	on	the	part	of	all	rests	thus	upon	a	spiritual	necessity	of	the
regenerate	life,	and	is	expressly	and	repeatedly	commanded	in	the	teachings
of	Christ.	It	is	the	duty	of	every	child	of	God	to	seek	constantly	to	win	the	lost
to	Christ	by	personal	effort	and	by	all	other	methods	in	harmony	with	the
gospel	of	Christ.
XII.	Education
The	cause	of	education	in	the	kingdom	of	Christ	is	co-ordinate	with	the
causes	of	missions	and	general	benevolence	and	should	receive	along	with
these	the	liberal	support	of	the	churches.	An	adequate	system	of	Christian
schools	is	necessary	to	a	complete	spiritual	program	for	Christ’s	people.
In	Christian	education	there	should	be	a	proper	balance	between	academic
freedom	and	academic	responsibility.	Freedom	in	any	orderly	relationship	of
human	life	is	always	limited	and	never	absolute.	The	freedom	of	a	teacher	in	a
Christian	school,	college,	or	seminary	is	limited	by	the	pre-eminence	of	Jesus
Christ,	by	the	authoritative	nature	of	the	Scriptures,	and	by	the	distinct
purpose	for	which	the	school	exists.
XIII.	Stewardship
God	is	the	source	of	all	blessings,	temporal	and	spiritual;	all	that	we	have	and
are	we	owe	to	Him.	Christians	have	a	spiritual	debtorship	to	the	whole	world,
a	holy	trusteeship	in	the	gospel,	and	a	binding	stewardship	in	their
possessions.	They	are	therefore	under	obligation	to	serve	Him	with	their	time,
talents,	and	material	possessions;	and	should	recognize	all	these	as	entrusted
to	them	to	use	for	the	glory	of	God	and	for	helping	others.	According	to	the
Scriptures,	Christians	should	contribute	of	their	means	cheerfully,	regularly,
systematically,	proportionately,	and	liberally	for	the	advancement	of	the
Redeemer’s	cause	on	earth.
XIV.	Co-Operation
Christ’s	people	should,	as	occasion	requires,	organize	such	associations	and
conventions	as	may	best	secure	co-operation	for	the	great	objects	of	the
kingdom	of	God.	Such	organizations	have	no	authority	over	one	another	or
over	the	churches.	They	are	voluntary	and	advisory	bodies	designed	to	elicit,
combine,	and	direct	the	energies	of	our	people	in	the	most	effective	manner.
Members	of	New	Testament	churches	should	cooperate	with	one	another	in
carrying	forward	the	missionary,	educational,	and	benevolent	ministries	for
the	extension	of	Christ’s	kingdom.	Christian	unity	in	the	New	Testament
sense	is	spiritual	harmony	and	voluntary	co-operation	for	common	ends	by
various	groups	of	Christ’s	people.	Co-operation	is	desirable	between	the
various	Christian	denominations,	when	the	end	to	be	attained	is	itself
justified,	and	when	such	co-operation	involves	no	violation	of	conscience	or
compromise	of	loyalty	to	Christ	and	his	Word	as	revealed	in	the	New
Testament.
XV.	The	Christian	and	the	Social	Order
Every	Christian	is	under	obligation	to	seek	to	make	the	will	of	Christ	supreme
in	his	own	life	and	in	human	society.	Means	and	methods	used	for	the
improvement	of	society	and	the	establishment	of	righteousness	among	men
can	be	truly	and	permanently	helpful	only	when	they	are	rooted	in	the
regeneration	of	the	individual	by	the	saving	grace	of	God	in	Christ	Jesus.	The
Christian	should	oppose	in	the	spirit	of	Christ	every	form	of	greed,
selfishness,	and	vice.	He	should	work	to	provide	for	the	orphaned,	the	needy,
the	aged,	the	helpless,	and	the	sick.	Every	Christian	should	seek	to	bring
industry,	government,	and	society	as	a	whole	under	the	sway	of	the	principles
of	righteousness,	truth,	and	brotherly	love.	In	order	to	promote	these	ends
Christians	should	be	ready	to	work	with	all	men	of	good	will	in	any	good
cause,	always	being	careful	to	act	in	the	spirit	of	love	without	compromising
their	loyalty	to	Christ	and	his	truth.
XVI.	Peace	and	War
It	is	the	duty	of	Christians	to	seek	peace	with	all	men	on	principles	of
righteousness.	In	accordance	with	the	spirit	and	teachings	of	Christ	they
should	do	all	in	their	power	to	put	an	end	to	war.
The	true	remedy	for	the	war	spirit	is	the	gospel	of	our	Lord.	The	supreme
need	of	the	world	is	the	acceptance	of	His	teachings	in	all	the	affairs	of	men
and	nations,	and	the	practical	application	of	His	law	of	love.
XVII.	Religious	Liberty
God	alone	is	Lord	of	the	conscience,	and	He	has	left	it	free	from	the	doctrines
and	commandments	of	men	which	are	contrary	to	His	Word	or	not	contained
in	it.	Church	and	state	should	be	separate.	The	state	owes	to	every	church
protection	and	full	freedom	in	the	pursuit	of	its	spiritual	ends.	In	providing	for
such	freedom	no	ecclesiastical	group	or	denomination	should	be	favored	by
the	state	more	than	others.	Civil	government	being	ordained	of	God,	it	is	the
duty	of	Christians	to	render	loyal	obedience	thereto	in	all	things	not	contrary
to	the	revealed	will	of	God.	The	church	should	not	resort	to	the	civil	power	to
carry	on	its	work.	The	gospel	of	Christ	contemplates	spiritual	means	alone	for
the	pursuit	of	its	ends.	The	state	has	no	right	to	impose	penalties	for	religious
opinions	of	any	kind.	The	state	has	no	right	to	impose	taxes	for	the	support	of
any	form	of	religion.	A	free	church	in	a	free	state	is	the	Christian	ideal,	and
this	implies	the	right	of	free	and	unhindered	access	to	God	on	the	part	of	all
men	and	the	right	to	form	and	propagate	opinions	in	the	sphere	of	religion
without	interference	by	the	civil	power.
*	*	*
THE	CHICAGO	STATEMENT	ON	
BIBLICAL	INERRANCY	
(1978)
PREFACE
The	authority	of	Scripture	is	a	key	issue	for	the	Christian	Church	in	this	and
every	age.	Those	who	profess	faith	in	Jesus	Christ	as	Lord	and	Savior	are
called	to	show	the	reality	of	their	discipleship	by	humbly	and	faithfully
obeying	God’s	written	Word.	To	stray	from	Scripture	in	faith	or	conduct	is
disloyalty	to	our	Master.	Recognition	of	the	total	truth	and	trustworthiness	of
Holy	Scripture	is	essential	to	a	full	grasp	and	adequate	confession	of	its
authority.
The	following	Statement	affirms	this	inerrancy	of	Scripture	afresh,	making
clear	our	understanding	of	it	and	warning	against	its	denial.	We	are	persuaded
that	to	deny	it	is	to	set	aside	the	witness	of	Jesus	Christ	and	of	Holy	Spirit	and
to	refuse	that	submission	to	the	claims	of	God’s	own	word	which	marks	true
Christian	faith.	We	see	it	as	our	timely	duty	to	make	this	affirmation	in	the
face	of	current	lapses	from	the	truth	of	inerrancy	among	our	fellow	Christians
and	misunderstanding	of	this	doctrine	in	the	world	at	large.
This	Statement	consists	of	three	parts:	a	Summary	Statement,	Articles	of
Affirmation	and	Denial,	and	an	accompanying	Exposition.	It	has	been
prepared	in	the	course	of	a	three-day	consultation	in	Chicago.	Those	who
have	signed	the	Summary	Statement	and	the	Articles	wish	to	affirm	their	own
conviction	as	to	the	inerrancy	of	Scripture	and	to	encourage	and	challenge
one	another	and	all	Christians	to	growing	appreciation	and	understanding	of
this	doctrine.	We	acknowledge	the	limitations	of	a	document	prepared	in	a
brief,	intensive	conference	and	do	not	propose	that	this	Statement	be	given
creedal	weight.	Yet	we	rejoice	in	the	deepening	of	our	own	convictions
through	our	discussions	together,	and	we	pray	that	the	Statement	we	have
signed	may	be	used	to	the	glory	of	our	God	toward	a	new	reformation	of	the
Church	in	its	faith,	life,	and	mission.
We	offer	this	Statement	in	a	spirit,	not	of	contention,	but	of	humility	and	love,
which	we	purpose	by	God’s	grace	to	maintain	in	any	future	dialogue	arising
out	of	what	we	have	said.	We	gladly	acknowledge	that	many	who	deny	the
inerrancy	of	Scripture	do	not	display	the	consequences	of	this	denial	in	the
rest	of	their	belief	and	behavior,	and	we	are	conscious	that	we	who	confess
this	doctrine	often	deny	it	in	life	by	failing	to	bring	our	thoughts	and	deeds,
our	traditions	and	habits,	into	true	subjection	to	the	divine	Word.
We	invite	responses	to	this	statement	from	any	who	see	reason	to	amend	its
affirmations	about	Scripture	by	the	light	of	Scripture	itself,	under	whose
infallible	authority	we	stand	as	we	speak.	We	claim	no	personal	infallibility
for	the	witness	we	bear,	and	for	any	help	which	enables	us	to	strengthen	this
testimony	to	God’s	Word	we	shall	be	grateful.
A	SHORT	STATEMENT
1.	God,	who	is	Himself	Truth	and	speaks	truth	only,	has	inspired	Holy
Scripture	in	order	thereby	to	reveal	Himself	to	lost	mankind	through	Jesus
Christ	as	Creator	and	Lord,	Redeemer	and	Judge.	Holy	Scripture	is	God’s
witness	to	Himself.
2.	Holy	Scripture,	being	God’s	own	Word,	written	by	men	prepared	and
superintended	by	His	Spirit,	is	of	infallible	divine	authority	in	all	matters
upon	which	it	touches:	it	is	to	be	believed,	as	God’s	instruction,	in	all	that	it
affirms;	obeyed,	as	God’s	command,	in	all	that	it	requires;	embraced,	as
God’s	pledge,	in	all	that	it	promises.
3.	The	Holy	Spirit,	Scripture’s	divine	Author,	both	authenticates	it	to	us	by
His	inward	witness	and	opens	our	minds	to	understand	its	meaning.
4.	Being	wholly	and	verbally	God-given,	Scripture	is	without	error	or	fault	in
all	its	teaching,	no	less	in	what	it	states	about	God’s	acts	in	creation,	about	the
events	of	world	history,	and	about	its	own	literary	origins	under	God,	than	in
its	witness	to	God’s	saving	grace	in	individual	lives.
5.	The	authority	of	Scripture	is	inescapably	impaired	if	this	total	divine
inerrancy	is	in	any	way	limited	or	disregarded,	or	made	relative	to	a	view	of
truth	contrary	to	the	Bible’s	own;	and	such	lapses	bring	serious	loss	to	both
the	individual	and	the	Church.
ARTICLES	OF	AFFIRMATION	AND	DENIAL
Article	I
We	affirm	that	the	Holy	Scriptures	are	to	be	received	as	the	authoritative
Word	of	God.
We	deny	that	the	Scriptures	receive	their	authority	from	the	Church,	tradition,
or	any	other	human	source.
Article	II
We	affirm	that	the	Scriptures	are	the	supreme	written	norm	by	which	God
binds	the	conscience,	and	that	the	authority	of	the	Church	is	subordinate	to
that	of	Scripture.
We	deny	that	Church	creeds,	councils,	or	declarations	have	authority	greater
than	or	equal	to	the	authority	of	the	Bible.
Article	III
We	affirm	that	the	written	Word	in	its	entirety	is	revelation	given	by	God.
We	deny	that	the	Bible	is	merely	a	witness	to	revelation,	or	only	becomes
revelation	in	encounter,	or	depends	on	the	responses	of	men	for	its	validity.
Article	IV
We	affirm	that	God	who	made	mankind	in	His	image	has	used	language	as	a
means	of	revelation.
We	deny	that	human	language	is	so	limited	by	our	creatureliness	that	it	is
rendered	inadequate	as	a	vehicle	for	divine	revelation.	We	further	deny	that
the	corruption	of	human	culture	and	language	through	sin	has	thwarted	God’s
work	of	inspiration.
Article	V
We	affirm	that	God’s	revelation	in	the	Holy	Scriptures	was	progressive.
We	deny	that	later	revelation,	which	may	fulfill	earlier	revelation,	ever
corrects	or	contradicts	it.	We	further	deny	that	any	normative	revelation	has
been	given	since	the	completion	of	the	New	Testament	writings.
Article	VI
We	affirm	that	the	whole	of	Scripture	and	all	its	parts,	down	to	the	very	words
of	the	original,	were	given	by	divine	inspiration.
We	deny	that	the	inspiration	of	Scripture	can	rightly	be	affirmed	of	the	whole
without	the	parts,	or	of	some	parts	but	not	the	whole.
Article	VII
We	affirm	that	inspiration	was	the	work	in	which	God	by	His	Spirit,	through
human	writers,	gave	us	His	Word.	The	origin	of	Scripture	is	divine.	The	mode
of	divine	inspiration	remains	largely	a	mystery	to	us.
We	deny	that	inspiration	can	be	reduced	to	human	insight,	or	to	heightened
states	of	consciousness	of	any	kind.
Article	VIII
We	affirm	that	God	in	His	work	of	inspiration	utilized	the	distinctive
personalities	and	literary	styles	of	the	writers	whom	He	had	chosen	and
prepared.
We	deny	that	God,	in	causing	these	writers	to	use	the	very	words	that	He
chose,	overrode	their	personalities.
Article	IX
We	affirm	that	inspiration,	though	not	conferring	omniscience,	guaranteed
true	and	trustworthy	utterance	on	all	matters	of	which	the	Bible	authors	were
moved	to	speak	and	write.
We	deny	that	the	finitude	or	fallenness	of	these	writers,	by	necessity	or
otherwise,	introduced	distortion	or	falsehood	into	God’s	Word.
Article	X
We	affirm	that	inspiration,	strictly	speaking,	applies	to	the	autographic	text	of
Scripture,	which	in	the	providence	of	God	can	be	ascertained	from	available
manuscripts	with	great	accuracy.	We	further	affirm	that	copies	and
translations	of	Scripture	are	the	Word	of	God	to	the	extent	that	they	faithfully
represent	the	original.
We	deny	that	any	essential	element	of	the	Christian	faith	is	affected	by	the
absence	of	the	autographs.	We	further	deny	that	this	absence	renders	the
assertion	of	Biblical	inerrancy	invalid	or	irrelevant.
Article	XI
We	affirm	that	Scripture,	having	been	given	by	divine	inspiration,	is	infallible,
so	that,	far	from	misleading	us,	it	is	true	and	reliable	in	all	matters	it
addresses.
We	deny	that	it	is	possible	for	the	Bible	to	be	at	the	same	time	infallible	and
errant	in	its	assertions.	Infallibility	and	inerrancy	may	be	distinguished,	but
not	separated.
Article	XII
We	affirm	that	Scripture	in	its	entirety	is	inerrant,	being	free	from	all
falsehood,	fraud,	or	deceit.
We	deny	that	Biblical	infallibility	and	inerrancy	are	limited	to	spiritual,
religious	or	redemptive	themes,	exclusive	of	assertions	in	the	fields	of	history
and	science.	We	further	deny	that	scientific	hypotheses	about	earth	history
may	properly	be	used	to	overturn	the	teaching	of	Scripture	on	creation	and	the
flood.
Article	XIII
We	affirm	the	propriety	of	using	inerrancy	as	a	theological	term	with
reference	to	the	complete	truthfulness	of	Scripture.
We	deny	that	it	is	proper	to	evaluate	Scripture	according	to	standards	of	truth
and	error	that	are	alien	to	its	usage	or	purpose.	We	further	deny	that	inerrancy
is	negated	by	Biblical	phenomena	such	as	a	lack	of	modern	technical
precision,	irregularities	of	grammar	or	spelling,	observational	descriptions	of
nature,	the	reporting	of	falsehoods,	the	use	of	hyperbole	and	round	numbers,
the	topical	arrangement	of	material,	variant	selections	of	material	in	parallel
accounts,	or	the	use	of	free	citations.
Article	XIV
We	affirm	the	unity	and	internal	consistency	of	Scripture.
We	deny	that	alleged	errors	and	discrepancies	that	have	not	yet	been	resolved
vitiate	the	truth	of	claims	of	the	Bible.
Article	XV
We	affirm	that	the	doctrine	of	inerrancy	is	grounded	in	the	teaching	of	the
Bible	about	inspiration.
We	deny	that	Jesus’	teaching	about	Scripture	may	be	dismissed	by	appeals	to
accommodation	or	to	any	natural	limitation	of	His	humanity.
Article	XVI
We	affirm	that	the	doctrine	of	inerrancy	has	been	integral	to	the	Church’s	faith
throughout	its	history.
We	deny	that	inerrancy	is	a	doctrine	invented	by	Scholastic	Protestantism,	or
is	a	reactionary	position	postulated	in	response	to	negative	higher	criticism.
Article	XVII
We	affirm	that	the	Holy	Spirit	bears	witness	to	the	Scriptures,	assuring
believers	of	the	truthfulness	of	God’s	written	Word.
We	deny	that	this	witness	of	the	Holy	Spirit	operates	in	isolation	from	or
against	Scripture.
Article	XVIII
We	affirm	that	the	text	of	Scripture	is	to	be	interpreted	by	grammatico-
historical	exegesis,	taking	account	of	its	literary	forms	and	devices,	and	that
Scripture	is	to	interpret	Scripture.
We	deny	the	legitimacy	of	any	treatment	of	the	text	or	quest	for	sources	lying
behind	it	that	leads	to	relativizing,	dehistoricizing,	or	discounting	its	teaching,
or	rejecting	its	claims	to	authorship.
Article	XIX
We	affirm	that	a	confession	of	the	full	authority,	infallibility,	and	inerrancy	of
Scripture	is	vital	to	a	sound	understanding	of	the	whole	of	the	Christian	faith.
We	further	affirm	that	such	confession	should	lead	to	increasing	conformity	to
the	image	of	Christ.
We	deny	that	such	confession	is	necessary	for	salvation.	However,	we	further
deny	that	inerrancy	can	be	rejected	without	grave	consequences,	both	to	the
individual	and	to	the	Church.
NOTES
1
	Lutheran	confessions	may	conveniently	be	found	in	Philip	Schaff,	
The	Creeds	of	Christendom,	
3	vols.	(Grand	Rapids:	Baker,
1983,	reprint	of	1931	edition),	3:3–73,	93–180.
2
	have	used	the	modern	translation	“Holy	Spirit”	instead	of	the	archaic	name	“Holy	Ghost”	throughout	the	ancient	creeds.	(But	I
have	not	made	such	a	change	in	the	Westminster	Confession,	which	is	still	used	today	in	its	original	wording	and	which
sometimes	uses	“Holy	Ghost.”)
3
	have	not	included	the	phrase,	“he	descended	into	hell,”	because	it	is	not	attested	in	the	earliest	versions	of	the	Apostles’	Creed,
and	because	of	the	doctrinal	difficulties	associated	with	it	(see	further	discussion	in	
chapter	27
).
4
	phrase	“and	the	Son”	was	added	after	the	Council	of	Constantinople	in	381	but	is	commonly	included	in	the	text	of	the	Nicene
Creed	as	used	by	Protestant	and	Roman	Catholic	churches	today.	The	phrase	is	not	included	in	the	text	used	by	Orthodox
churches.	(See	discussion	in	
Chapter	14
.)	The	phrase	“God	of	God”	was	not	in	the	version	of	381	but	was	in	the	version	of	325
and	is	commonly	included	today.
	
OceanofPDF.com
Appendix	2:
Scripture	Memory	Passages	
From	the	NIV	and	NASB
The	Scripture	memory	passages	quoted	at	the	end	of	each	chapter	are	taken
from	the	
Revised	Standard	Version.	
This	appendix	includes	all	the	Scripture
memory	passages	from	two	other	common	versions,	the	
New	International
Version
®	(NIV®)	and	the	
New	American	Standard	Bible	
(NASB).	(NASB
passages	begin	on	p.	
1507.)
*	*	*
NIV	PASSAGES
Chapter	
1
:	Matt.	28:
1
8–20:
Then	Jesus	came	to	them	and	said,	“All	authority	in	heaven	and	on	earth	has
been	given	to	me.	Therefore	go	and	make	disciples	of	all	nations,	baptizing
them	in	the	name	of	Father	and	of	the	Son	and	of	the	Holy	Spirit,	and
teaching	them	to	obey	everything	I	have	commanded	you.	And	surely	I	am
with	you	always,	to	the	very	end	of	the	age.”
CHAPTER	2:	Ps.	
1:1
–2:
Blessed	is	the	man	who	does	not	walk	in	the	counsel	of	the	wicked	or	stand	in
the	way	of	sinners	or	sit	in	the	seat	of	mockers.	But	his	delight	is	in	the	law	of
the	L
ORD
,	and	on	his	law	he	meditates	day	and	night.
CHAPTER	3:	Heb.	
1:1
–2:
In	the	past	God	spoke	to	our	forefathers	through	the	prophets	at	many	times
and	in	various	ways,	but	in	these	last	days	he	has	spoken	to	us	by	his	Son,
whom	he	appointed	heir	of	all	things,	and	through	whom	he	made	the
universe.
CHAPTER	4:	2	Tim.	3:
1
6–
1
7:
All	Scripture	is	God-breathed	and	is	useful	for	teaching,	rebuking,	correcting
and	training	in	righteousness,	so	that	the	man	of	God	may	be	thoroughly
equipped	for	every	good	work.
CHAPTER	5:	Ps.	
1
2:6:
And	the	words	of	the	L
ORD
	are	flawless,	like	silver	refined	in	a	furnace	of
clay,	purified	seven	times.
CHAPTER	6:	Deut.	6:6–7:
These	commandments	that	I	give	you	today	are	to	be	upon	your	hearts.
Impress	them	on	your	children.	Talk	about	them	when	you	sit	at	home	and
when	you	walk	along	the	road,	when	you	lie	down	and	when	you	get	up.
CHAPTER	7:	Matt.	4:4:
Jesus	answered,	“It	is	written:	‘Man	does	not	live	on	bread	alone,	but	on
every	word	that	comes	from	the	mouth	of	God.’	”
CHAPTER	8:	Ps.	119:
1
:
Blessed	are	they	whose	ways	are	blameless,	who	walk	according	to	the	law	of
the	L
ORD
.
CHAPTER	9:	Rom.	
1:18–20:
The	wrath	of	God	is	being	revealed	from	heaven	against	all	the	godlessness
and	wickedness	of	men	who	suppress	the	truth	by	their	wickedness,	since
what	may	be	known	about	God	is	plain	to	them,	because	God	has	made	it
plain	to	them.	For	since	the	creation	of	the	world	God’s	invisible	qualities—
his	eternal	power	and	divine	nature—have	been	clearly	seen,	being
understood	from	what	has	been	made,	so	that	men	are	without	excuse.
Chapter	
1
0:	Ps.	145:
1
–3:
I	will	exalt	you,	my	God	the	King;	I	will	praise	your	name	for	ever	and	ever.
Every	day	I	will	praise	you	and	extol	your	name	for	ever	and	ever.	Great	is
the	L
ORD
	and	most	worthy	of	praise;	his	greatness	no	one	can	fathom.
Chapter	
11
:	Ps.	102:25–27:
In	the	beginning	you	laid	the	foundations	of	the	earth,	and	the	heavens	are	the
work	of	your	hands.	They	will	perish,	but	you	remain;	they	will	all	wear	out
like	a	garment.	Like	clothing	you	will	change	them	and	they	will	be
discarded.	But	you	remain	the	same,	and	your	years	will	never	end.
Chapter	
1
2:	Ex.	34:6–7:
And	he	passed	in	front	of	Moses,	proclaiming,	“The	L
ORD
,	the	L
ORD
,	the
compassionate	and	gracious	God,	slow	to	anger,	abounding	in	love	and
faithfulness,	maintaining	love	to	thousands,	and	forgiving	wickedness,
rebellion	and	sin.	Yet	he	does	not	leave	the	guilty	unpunished;	he	punishes	the
children	and	their	children	for	the	sin	of	fathers	to	the	third	and	fourth
generation.”
Chapter	
1
3:	Ps.	73:25–26:
Whom	have	I	in	heaven	but	you?	And	earth	has	nothing	I	desire	besides	you.
My	flesh	and	my	heart	may	fail,	but	God	is	the	strength	of	my	heart	and	my
portion	forever.
Chapter	
1
4:	Matt.	3:
1
6–
1
7:
As	soon	as	Jesus	was	baptized,	he	went	up	out	of	the	water.	At	that	moment
heaven	was	opened,	and	he	saw	the	Spirit	of	God	descending	like	a	dove	and
lighting	on	him.	And	a	voice	from	heaven	said,	“This	is	my	Son,	whom	I
love;	with	him	I	am	well	pleased.”
Chapter	
1
5:	Neh.	9:6:
You	alone	are	the	L
ORD
.	You	made	the	heavens,	even	the	highest	heavens,	and
all	their	starry	host,	the	earth	and	all	that	is	on	it,	the	seas	and	all	that	is	in
them.	You	give	life	to	everything,	and	the	multitudes	of	heaven	worship	you.
Chapter	
1
6:	Rom.	8:28:
And	we	know	that	in	all	things	God	works	for	the	good	of	those	who	love
him,	who	have	been	called	according	to	his	purpose.
Chapter	
1
7:	Heb.	2:3–4:
How	shall	we	escape	if	we	ignore	such	a	great	salvation?	This	salvation,
which	was	first	announced	by	the	Lord,	was	confirmed	to	us	by	those	who
heard	him.	God	also	testified	to	it	by	signs,	wonders	and	various	miracles,	and
gifts	of	the	Holy	Spirit	distributed	according	to	his	will.
Chapter	
1
8:	Heb.	4:
1
4–
1
6:
Therefore,	since	we	have	a	great	high	priest	who	has	gone	through	the
heavens,	Jesus	the	Son	of	God,	let	us	hold	firmly	to	the	faith	we	profess.	For
we	do	not	have	a	high	priest	who	is	unable	to	sympathize	with	our
weaknesses,	but	we	have	one	who	has	been	tempted	in	every	way,	just	as	we
are—yet	was	without	sin.	Let	us	then	approach	the	throne	of	grace	with
confidence,	so	that	we	may	receive	mercy	and	find	grace	to	help	us	in	our
time	of	need.
Chapter	
1
9:	Rev.	5:
11
–
1
2:
Then	I	looked	and	heard	the	voice	of	many	angels,	numbering	thousands	upon
thousands,	and	ten	thousand	times	ten	thousand.	They	encircled	the	throne
and	the	living	creatures	and	the	elders.	In	a	loud	voice	they	sang:	“Worthy	is
the	Lamb,	who	was	slain,	to	receive	power	and	wealth	and	wisdom	and
strength	and	honor	and	glory	and	praise!”
CHAPTER	20:	James	4:7–8:
Submit	yourselves,	then,	to	God.	Resist	the	devil,	and	he	will	flee	from	you.
Come	near	to	God	and	he	will	come	near	to	you.	Wash	your	hands,	you
sinners,	and	purify	your	hearts,	you	double-minded.
CHAPTER	2
1
:	Gen.	
1
:26–27:
Then	God	said,	“Let	us	make	man	in	our	image,	in	our	likeness,	and	let	them
rule	over	the	fish	of	the	sea	and	the	birds	of	the	air,	over	the	livestock,	over	all
the	earth,	and	over	all	the	creatures	that	move	along	the	ground.”	So	God
created	man	in	his	own	image,	in	the	image	of	God	he	created	him;	male	and
female	he	created	them.
CHAPTER	22:	Col.	3:
1
8–
1
9:
Wives,	submit	to	your	husbands,	as	is	fitting	in	the	Lord.	Husbands,	love	your
wives	and	do	not	be	harsh	with	them.
CHAPTER	23:	2	Cor.	7:
1
:
Since	we	have	these	promises,	dear	friends,	let	us	purify	ourselves	from
everything	that	contaminates	body	and	spirit,	perfecting	holiness	out	of
reverence	for	God.
CHAPTER	24:	Ps.	5
1
:
1
–4:
Have	mercy	on	me,	O	God,	according	to	your	unfailing	love;	according	to
your	great	compassion	blot	out	my	transgressions.	Wash	away	all	my	iniquity
and	cleanse	me	from	my	sin.	For	I	know	my	transgressions,	and	my	sin	is
always	before	me.	Against	you,	you	only,	have	I	sinned	and	done	what	is	evil
in	your	sight,	so	that	you	are	proved	right	when	you	speak	and	justified	when
you	judge.
CHAPTER	25:	Heb.	8:
1
0:
This	is	the	covenant	I	will	make	with	the	house	of	Israel	after	that	time,
declares	the	Lord.	I	will	put	my	laws	in	their	minds	and	write	them	on	their
hearts.	I	will	be	their	God	and	they	will	be	my	people.
CHAPTER	26:	John	
1:1
4:
The	Word	became	flesh	and	made	his	dwelling	among	us.	We	have	seen	his
glory,	the	glory	of	the	One	and	Only	Son,	who	came	from	the	Father,	full	of
grace	and	truth.
CHAPTER	27:	Rom.	3:23–26:
For	all	have	sinned	and	fall	short	of	the	glory	of	God,	and	are	justified	freely
by	his	grace	through	the	redemption	that	came	by	Christ	Jesus.	God	presented
him	as	a	sacrifice	of	atonement,	through	faith	in	his	blood.	He	did	this	to
demonstrate	his	justice,	because	in	his	forbearance	he	had	left	the	sins
committed	beforehand	unpunished—he	did	it	to	demonstrate	his	justice	at	the
present	time,	so	as	to	be	just	and	the	one	who	justifies	those	who	have	faith	in
Jesus.
CHAPTER	28:	
1
	Cor.	
1
5:20–23:
But	Christ	has	indeed	been	raised	from	the	dead,	the	firstfruits	of	those	who
have	fallen	asleep.	For	since	death	came	through	a	man,	the	resurrection	of
the	dead	comes	also	through	a	man.	For	as	in	Adam	all	die,	so	in	Christ	all
will	be	made	alive.	But	each	in	his	own	turn:	Christ,	the	firstfruits;	then,	when
he	comes,	those	who	belong	to	him.
CHAPTER	29:	
1
	Peter	2:9–
1
0:
But	you	are	a	chosen	people,	a	royal	priesthood,	a	holy	nation,	a	people
belonging	to	God,	that	you	may	declare	the	praises	of	him	who	called	you	out
of	darkness	into	his	wonderful	light.	Once	you	were	not	a	people,	but	now
you	are	the	people	of	God;	once	you	had	not	received	mercy,	but	now	you
have	received	mercy.
CHAPTER	30:	Rom.	8:
1
2–
1
4:
Therefore,	brothers,	we	have	an	obligation—but	it	is	not	to	the	sinful	nature,
to	live	according	to	it.	For	if	you	live	according	to	the	sinful	nature,	you	will
die;	but	if	by	the	Spirit	you	put	to	death	the	misdeeds	of	the	body,	you	will
live,	because	those	who	are	led	by	the	Spirit	of	God	are	sons	of	God.
CHAPTER	3
1
:	Luke	6:35–36:
But	love	your	enemies,	do	good	to	them,	and	lend	to	them	without	expecting
to	get	anything	back.	Then	your	reward	will	be	great,	and	you	will	be	sons	of
the	Most	High,	because	he	is	kind	to	the	ungrateful	and	wicked.	Be	merciful,
just	as	your	Father	is	merciful.
CHAPTER	32:	Eph.	
1
:3–6:
Praise	be	to	the	God	and	Father	of	our	Lord	Jesus	Christ,	who	has	blessed	us
in	the	heavenly	realms	with	every	spiritual	blessing	in	Christ.	For	he	chose	us
in	him	before	the	creation	of	the	world	to	be	holy	and	blameless	in	his	sight.
In	love	he	predestined	us	to	be	adopted	as	his	sons	through	Jesus	Christ,	in
accordance	with	his	pleasure	and	will—to	the	praise	of	his	glorious	grace,
which	he	has	freely	given	us	in	the	One	he	loves.
CHAPTER	33:	Matt.	
11
:28–30:
“Come	to	me,	all	you	who	are	weary	and	burdened,	and	I	will	give	you	rest.
Take	my	yoke	upon	you	and	learn	from	me,	for	I	am	gentle	and	humble	in
heart,	and	you	will	find	rest	for	your	souls.	For	my	yoke	is	easy	and	my
burden	is	light.”
CHAPTER	34:	John	3:5–8:
Jesus	answered,	“I	tell	you	the	truth,	no	one	can	enter	the	Kingdom	of	God
unless	he	is	born	of	water	and	the	Spirit.	Flesh	gives	birth	to	flesh,	but	the
Spirit	gives	birth	to	spirit.	You	should	not	be	surprised	at	my	saying,	‘You
must	be	born	again.’	The	wind	blows	wherever	it	pleases.	You	hear	its	sound,
but	you	cannot	tell	where	it	comes	from	or	where	it	is	going.	So	it	is	with
everyone	born	of	the	Spirit.”
CHAPTER	35:	John	3:
1
6:
For	God	so	loved	the	world	that	he	gave	his	one	and	only	Son,	that	whoever
believes	in	him	shall	not	perish	but	have	eternal	life.
CHAPTER	36:	Rom.	3:27–28:
Where,	then,	is	boasting?	It	is	excluded.	On	what	principle?	On	that	of
observing	the	law?	No,	but	on	that	of	faith.	For	we	maintain	that	a	man	is
justified	by	faith	apart	from	observing	the	law.
CHAPTER	37:	Rom.	8:
1
4–
1
7:
Because	those	who	are	led	by	the	Spirit	of	God	are	sons	of	God.	For	you	did
not	receive	a	spirit	that	makes	you	a	slave	again	to	fear,	but	you	received	the
Spirit	of	sonship.	And	by	him	we	cry,	“Abba,	Father.”	The	Spirit	himself
testifies	with	our	spirit	that	we	are	God’s	children.	Now	if	we	are	children,
then	we	are	heirs—heirs	of	God	and	co-heirs	with	Christ,	if	indeed	we	share
in	his	sufferings	in	order	that	we	may	also	share	in	his	glory.
CHAPTER	38:	Rom.	6:
11
–
1
4:
In	the	same	way,	count	yourselves	dead	to	sin	but	alive	to	God	in	Christ	Jesus.
Therefore	do	not	let	sin	reign	in	your	mortal	body	so	that	you	obey	its	evil
desires.	Do	not	offer	the	parts	of	your	body	to	sin,	as	instruments	of
wickedness,	but	rather	offer	yourselves	to	God,	as	those	who	have	been
brought	from	death	to	life;	and	offer	the	parts	of	your	body	to	him	as
instruments	of	righteousness.	For	sin	shall	not	be	your	master,	because	you
are	not	under	law,	but	under	grace.
CHAPTER	39:	
1
	Cor.	
1
2:
1
2–
1
3:
The	body	is	a	unit,	though	it	is	made	up	of	many	parts;	and	though	all	its	parts
are	many,	they	form	one	body.	So	it	is	with	Christ.	For	we	were	all	baptized
by	one	Spirit	into	one	body—whether	Jews	or	Greeks,	slave	or	free—and	we
were	all	given	the	one	Spirit	to	drink.
CHAPTER	40:	John	
1
0:27–28:
My	sheep	listen	to	my	voice;	I	know	them,	and	they	follow	me.	I	give	them
eternal	life,	and	they	shall	never	perish;	no	one	can	snatch	them	out	of	my
hand.
CHAPTER	4
1
:	Phil.	
1
:20–24:
I	eagerly	expect	and	hope	that	I	will	in	no	way	be	ashamed,	but	will	have
sufficient	courage	so	that	now	as	always	Christ	will	be	exalted	in	my	body,
whether	by	life	or	by	death.	For	to	me,	to	live	is	Christ	and	to	die	is	gain.	If	I
am	to	go	on	living	in	the	body,	this	will	mean	fruitful	labor	for	me.	Yet	what
shall	I	choose?	I	do	not	know!	I	am	torn	between	the	two:	I	desire	to	depart
and	be	with	Christ,	which	is	better	by	far;	but	it	is	more	necessary	for	you	that
I	remain	in	the	body.
CHAPTER	42:	
1
	Cor.	
1
5:42–44:
So	will	it	be	with	the	resurrection	of	the	dead.	The	body	that	is	sown	is
perishable,	it	is	raised	imperishable;	it	is	sown	in	dishonor,	it	is	raised	in
glory;	it	is	sown	in	weakness,	it	is	raised	in	power;	it	is	sown	a	natural	body,	it
is	raised	a	spiritual	body.	If	there	is	a	natural	body,	there	is	also	a	spiritual
body.
CHAPTER	43:	Gal.	2:20:
I	have	been	crucified	with	Christ	and	I	no	longer	live,	but	Christ	lives	in	me.
The	life	I	live	in	the	body,	I	live	by	faith	in	the	Son	of	God,	who	loved	me	and
gave	himself	for	me.
CHAPTER	44:	Eph.	4:
11
–
1
3:
It	was	he	who	gave	some	to	be	apostles,	some	to	be	prophets,	some	to	be
evangelists,	and	some	to	be	pastors	and	teachers,	to	prepare	God’s	people	for
works	of	service,	so	that	the	body	of	Christ	may	be	built	up	until	we	all	reach
unity	in	the	faith	and	in	the	knowledge	of	the	Son	of	God	and	become	mature,
attaining	to	the	whole	measure	of	the	fullness	of	Christ.
CHAPTER	45:	Eph.	4:
1
4–
1
6:
Then	we	will	no	longer	be	infants,	tossed	back	and	forth	by	the	waves,	and
blown	here	and	there	by	every	wind	of	teaching	and	by	the	cunning	and
craftiness	of	men	in	their	deceitful	scheming.	Instead,	speaking	the	truth	in
love,	we	will	in	all	things	grow	up	into	him	who	is	the	Head,	that	is,	Christ.
From	him	the	whole	body,	joined	and	held	together	by	every	supporting
ligament,	grows	and	builds	itself	up	in	love,	as	each	part	does	its	work.
CHAPTER	46:	2	Cor.	
1
0:3–4:
For	though	we	live	in	the	world,	we	do	not	wage	war	as	the	world	does.	The
weapons	we	fight	with	are	not	the	weapons	of	the	world.	On	the	contrary,
they	have	divine	power	to	demolish	strongholds.
CHAPTER	47:	
1
	Peter	5:
1
–4:
To	the	elders	among	you,	I	appeal	as	a	fellow	elder,	a	witness	of	Christ’s
sufferings	and	one	who	also	will	share	in	the	glory	to	be	revealed:	Be
shepherds	of	God’s	flock	that	is	under	your	care,	serving	as	overseers—not
because	you	must,	but	because	you	are	willing,	as	God	wants	you	to	be;	not
greedy	for	money,	but	eager	to	serve;	not	lording	it	over	those	entrusted	to
you,	but	being	examples	to	the	flock.	And	when	the	Chief	Shepherd	appears,
you	will	receive	the	crown	of	glory	that	will	never	fade	away.
CHAPTER	48:	Acts	2:4
1
–42:
Those	who	accepted	his	message	were	baptized,	and	about	three	thousand
were	added	to	their	number	that	day.	They	devoted	themselves	to	the	apostles’
teaching	and	to	the	fellowship,	to	the	breaking	of	bread	and	to	prayer.
CHAPTER	49:	Rom.	6:3–4:
Or	don’t	you	know	that	all	of	us	who	were	baptized	into	Christ	Jesus	were
baptized	into	his	death?	We	were	therefore	buried	with	him	through	baptism
into	death	in	order	that,	just	as	Christ	was	raised	from	the	dead	through	the
glory	of	the	Father,	we	too	may	live	a	new	life.
CHAPTER	50:	
1
	Cor.	
11
:23–26:
For	I	received	from	the	Lord	what	I	also	passed	on	to	you:	The	Lord	Jesus,	on
the	night	he	was	betrayed,	took	bread,	and	when	he	had	given	thanks,	he
broke	it	and	said,	“This	is	my	body,	which	is	for	you;	do	this	in	remembrance
of	me.”	In	the	same	way,	after	supper	he	took	the	cup,	saying,	“This	cup	is	the
new	covenant	in	my	blood;	do	this,	whenever	you	drink	it,	in	remembrance	of
me.”	For	whenever	you	eat	this	bread	and	drink	this	cup,	you	proclaim	the
Lord’s	death	until	he	comes.
CHAPTER	5
1
:	Rev.	4:
11
:
You	are	worthy,	our	Lord	and	God,	to	receive	glory	and	honor	and	power,	for
you	created	all	things,	and	by	your	will	they	were	created	and	have	their
being.
CHAPTER	52:	
1
	Peter	4:
1
0–
11
:
Each	one	should	use	whatever	gift	he	has	received	to	serve	others,	faithfully
administering	God’s	grace	in	its	various	forms.	If	anyone	speaks,	he	should
do	it	as	one	speaking	the	very	words	of	God.	If	anyone	serves,	he	should	do	it
with	the	strength	God	provides,	so	that	in	all	things	God	may	be	praised
through	Jesus	Christ.	To	him	be	the	glory	and	the	power	for	ever	and	ever.
Amen.
CHAPTER	53:	
1
	Cor.	
1
2:7–
11
:
Now	to	each	one	the	manifestation	of	the	Spirit	is	given	for	the	common
good.	To	one	there	is	given	through	the	Spirit	the	message	of	wisdom,	to
another	the	message	of	knowledge	by	means	of	the	same	Spirit,	to	another
faith	by	the	same	Spirit,	to	another	gifts	of	healing	by	that	one	Spirit,	to
another	miraculous	powers,	to	another	prophecy,	to	another	distinguishing
between	spirits,	to	another	speaking	in	different	kinds	of	tongues,	and	to	still
another	the	interpretation	of	tongues.	All	these	are	the	work	of	one	and	the
same	Spirit,	and	he	gives	them	to	each	one,	just	as	he	determines.
CHAPTER	54:	
1
	Thess.	4:	
1
5–
1
8:
According	to	the	Lord’s	own	word,	we	tell	you	that	we	who	are	still	alive,
who	are	left	till	the	coming	of	the	Lord,	will	certainly	not	precede	those	who
have	fallen	asleep.	For	the	Lord	himself	will	come	down	from	heaven,	with	a
loud	command,	with	the	voice	of	the	archangel	and	with	the	trumpet	call	of
God,	and	the	dead	in	Christ	will	rise	first.	After	that,	we	who	are	still	alive
and	are	left	will	be	caught	up	together	with	them	in	the	clouds	to	meet	the
Lord	in	the	air.	And	so	we	will	be	with	the	Lord	forever.	Therefore	encourage
each	other	with	these	words.
CHAPTER	55:	Rev.	20:4–6:
I	saw	thrones	on	which	were	seated	those	who	had	been	given	authority	to
judge.	And	I	saw	the	souls	of	those	who	had	been	beheaded	because	of	their
testimony	for	Jesus	and	because	of	the	word	of	God.	They	had	not	worshiped
the	beast	or	his	image	and	had	not	received	his	mark	on	their	foreheads	or
their	hands.	They	came	to	life	and	reigned	with	Christ	a	thousand	years.	(The
rest	of	the	dead	did	not	come	to	life	until	the	thousand	years	were	ended.)
This	is	the	first	resurrection.	Blessed	and	holy	are	those	who	have	part	in	the
first	resurrection.	The	second	death	has	no	power	over	them,	but	they	will	be
priests	of	God	and	of	Christ	and	will	reign	with	him	for	a	thousand	years.
CHAPTER	56:	Rev.	20:
11
–
1
3:
Then	I	saw	a	great	white	throne	and	him	who	was	seated	on	it.	Earth	and	sky
fled	from	his	presence,	and	there	was	no	place	for	them.	And	I	saw	the	dead,
great	and	small,	standing	before	the	throne,	and	books	were	opened.	Another
book	was	opened,	which	is	the	book	of	life.	The	dead	were	judged	according
to	what	they	had	done	as	recorded	in	the	books.	The	sea	gave	up	the	dead	that
were	in	it,	and	death	and	Hades	gave	up	the	dead	that	were	in	them,	and	each
person	was	judged	according	to	what	he	had	done.
CHAPTER	57:	Rev.	2
1
:3–4:
And	I	heard	a	loud	voice	from	the	throne	saying,	“Now	the	dwelling	of	God	is
with	men,	and	he	will	live	with	them.	They	will	be	his	people,	and	God
himself	will	be	with	them	and	be	their	God.	He	will	wipe	every	tear	from
their	eyes.	There	will	be	no	more	death	or	mourning	or	crying	or	pain,	for	the
old	order	of	things	has	passed	away.”
*	*	*
NASB	PASSAGES
Chapter	
1
:	Matt.	28:
1
8–20:
And	Jesus	came	up	and	spoke	to	them,	saying,	“All	authority	has	been	given
to	Me	in	heaven	and	on	earth.	Go	therefore	and	make	disciples	of	all	the
nations,	baptizing	them	in	the	name	of	the	Father	and	the	Son	and	the	Holy
Spirit,	teaching	them	to	observe	all	that	I	commanded	you;	and	lo,	I	am	with
you	always,	even	to	the	end	of	the	age.”
CHAPTER	2:	Ps.	
1
:
1
–2:
How	blessed	is	the	man	who	does	not	walk	in	the	counsel	of	the	wicked,	nor
stand	in	the	path	of	sinners,	nor	sit	in	the	seat	of	scoffers!	But	his	delight	is	in
the	law	of	the	L
ORD
,	and	in	His	law	he	meditates	day	and	night.
CHAPTER	3:	Heb.	
1
:
1
–2:
God,	after	He	spoke	long	ago	to	the	fathers	in	the	prophets	in	many	portions
and	in	many	ways,	in	these	last	days	has	spoken	to	us	in	His	Son,	whom	He
appointed	heir	of	all	things,	through	whom	also	He	made	the	world.
CHAPTER	4:	2	Tim.	3:
1
6–
1
7
All	Scripture	is	inspired	by	God	and	profitable	for	teaching,	for	reproof,	for
correction,	for	training	in	righteousness;	that	the	man	of	God	may	be
adequate,	equipped	for	every	good	work.
CHAPTER	5:	Ps.	
1
2:6:
The	words	of	the	L
ORD
	are	pure	words;	as	silver	tried	in	a	furnace	on	the
earth,	refined	seven	times.
CHAPTER	6:	Deut.	6:6–7:
And	these	words,	which	I	am	commanding	you	today,	shall	be	on	your	heart;
and	you	shall	teach	them	diligently	to	your	sons	and	shall	talk	of	them	when
you	sit	in	your	house	and	when	you	walk	by	the	way	and	when	you	lie	down
and	when	you	rise	up.
CHAPTER	7:	Matt.	4:4:
But	He	answered	and	said,	“It	is	written,	‘Man	shall	not	live	on	bread	alone,
but	on	every	word	that	proceeds	out	of	the	mouth	of	God.’	”
CHAPTER	8:	Ps.	
11
9:
1
:
How	blessed	are	those	whose	way	is	blameless,	who	walk	in	the	law	of	the
L
ORD
.
CHAPTER	9:	Rom.	
1
:
1
8–20:
For	the	wrath	of	God	is	revealed	from	heaven	against	all	ungodliness	and
unrighteousness	of	men,	who	suppress	the	truth	in	unrighteousness,	because
that	which	is	known	about	God	is	evident	within	them;	for	God	made	it
evident	to	them.	For	since	the	creation	of	the	world	His	invisible	attributes,
His	eternal	power	and	divine	nature,	have	been	clearly	seen,	being	understood
through	what	has	been	made,	so	that	they	are	without	excuse.
Chapter	
1
0:	Ps.	
1
45:
1
–3:
I	will	extol	Thee,	my	God,	O	King;	and	I	will	bless	Thy	name	forever	and
ever.	Every	day	I	will	bless	Thee,	and	I	will	praise	Thy	name	forever	and
ever.	Great	is	the	Lord,	and	highly	to	be	praised;	and	His	greatness	is
unsearchable.
Chapter	
11
:	Ps.	
1
02:25–27:
Of	old	Thou	didst	found	the	earth;	and	the	heavens	are	the	work	of	Thy
hands.	Even	they	will	perish,	but	Thou	dost	endure;	And	all	of	them	will	wear
out	like	a	garment;	like	clothing	Thou	wilt	change	them,	and	they	will	be
changed.	But	Thou	art	the	same,	and	Thy	years	will	not	come	to	an	end.
Chapter	
1
2:	Ex.	34:6–7:
Then	the	L
ORD
	passed	by	in	front	of	him	and	proclaimed,	“The	L
ORD
,	the
L
ORD
	God,	compassionate	and	gracious,	slow	to	anger,	and	abounding	in
lovingkindness	and	truth;	who	keeps	lovingkindness	for	thousands,	who
forgives	iniquity,	transgression	and	sin;	yet	He	will	by	no	means	leave	the
guilty	unpunished,	visiting	the	iniquity	of	fathers	on	the	children	and	on	the
grandchildren	to	the	third	and	fourth	generations.”
Chapter	
1
3:	Ps.	73:25–26:
Whom	have	I	in	heaven	but	Thee?	And	besides	Thee,	I	desire	nothing	on
earth.	My	flesh	and	my	heart	may	fail,	but	God	is	the	strength	of	my	heart	and
my	portion	forever.
Chapter	
1
4:	Matt.	3:
1
6–
1
7:
And	after	being	baptized,	Jesus	went	up	immediately	from	the	water;	and
behold,	the	heavens	were	opened,	and	he	saw	the	Spirit	of	God	descending	as
a	dove,	and	coming	upon	Him,	and	behold,	a	voice	out	of	the	heavens,	saying,
“This	is	My	beloved	Son,	in	whom	I	am	well-pleased.”
Chapter	
1
5:	Neh.	9:6:
Thou	alone	art	the	L
ORD
.	Thou	hast	made	the	heavens,	the	heaven	of	heavens
with	all	their	host,	the	earth	and	all	that	is	on	it,	the	seas	and	all	that	is	in
them.	Thou	dost	give	life	to	all	of	them	and	the	heavenly	host	bows	down
before	Thee.
Chapter	
1
6:	Rom.	8:28:
And	we	know	that	God	causes	all	things	to	work	together	for	good	to	those
who	love	God,	to	those	who	are	called	according	to	His	purpose.
Chapter	
1
7:	Heb.	2:3–4:
How	shall	we	escape	if	we	neglect	so	great	a	salvation?	After	it	was	at	the
first	spoken	through	the	Lord,	it	was	confirmed	to	us	by	those	who	heard,
God	also	bearing	witness	with	them,	both	by	signs	and	wonders	and	by
various	miracles	and	by	gifts	of	the	Holy	Spirit	according	to	His	own	will.
Chapter	
1
8:	Heb.	4:
1
4–
1
6:
Since	then	we	have	a	great	high	priest	who	has	passed	through	the	heavens,
Jesus	the	Son	of	God,	let	us	hold	fast	our	confession.	For	we	do	not	have	a
high	priest	who	cannot	sympathize	with	our	weaknesses,	but	one	who	has
been	tempted	in	all	things	as	we	are,	yet	without	sin.	Let	us	therefore	draw
near	with	confidence	to	the	throne	of	grace,	that	we	may	receive	mercy	and
may	find	grace	to	help	in	time	of	need.
Chapter	
1
9:	Rev.	5:
11
–
1
2:
And	I	looked,	and	I	heard	the	voice	of	many	angels	around	the	throne	and	the
living	creatures	and	the	elders;	and	the	number	of	them	was	myriads	of
myriads,	and	thousands	of	thousands,	saying	with	a	loud	voice,	“Worthy	is	the
Lamb	that	was	slain	to	receive	power	and	riches	and	wisdom	and	might	and
honor	and	glory	and	blessing.”
CHAPTER	20:	James	4:7–8:
Submit	therefore	to	God.	Resist	the	devil	and	he	will	flee	from	you.	Draw
near	to	God	and	He	will	draw	near	to	you.	Cleanse	your	hands,	you	sinners;
and	purify	your	hearts,	you	double-minded.
CHAPTER	2
1
:	Gen.	
1
:26–27:
Then	God	said,	“Let	Us	make	man	in	Our	image,	according	to	Our	likeness;
and	let	them	rule	over	the	fish	of	the	sea	and	over	the	birds	of	the	sky	and
over	the	cattle	and	over	all	the	earth,	and	over	every	creeping	thing	that	creeps
on	the	earth.”	And	God	created	man	in	His	own	image,	in	the	image	of	God
He	created	him;	male	and	female	He	created	them.
CHAPTER	22:	Col.	3:
1
8–
1
9:
Wives,	be	subject	to	your	husbands,	as	is	fitting	in	the	Lord.	Husbands,	love
your	wives,	and	do	not	be	embittered	against	them.
CHAPTER	23:	2	Cor.	7:
1
:
Therefore,	having	these	promises,	beloved,	let	us	cleanse	ourselves	from	all
defilement	of	flesh	and	spirit,	perfecting	holiness	in	the	fear	of	God.
CHAPTER	24:	Ps.	5
1
:
1
–4:
Be	gracious	to	me,	O	God,	according	to	Thy	lovingkindness;	according	to	the
greatness	of	Thy	compassion	blot	out	my	transgressions.	Wash	me	thoroughly
from	my	iniquity,	and	cleanse	me	from	my	sin.	For	I	know	my	transgressions,
and	my	sin	is	ever	before	me.	Against	Thee,	Thee	only,	I	have	sinned,	and
done	what	is	evil	in	Thy	sight,	so	that	Thou	art	justified	when	Thou	dost
speak,	and	blameless	when	Thou	dost	judge.
CHAPTER	25:	Heb.	8:
1
0:
For	this	is	the	covenant	that	I	will	make	with	the	house	of	Israel	after	those
days,	says	the	Lord:	I	will	put	my	laws	into	their	minds,	and	I	will	write	them
upon	their	hearts.	And	I	will	be	their	God,	and	they	shall	be	My	people.
CHAPTER	26:	John	
1
:
1
4:
And	the	Word	became	flesh,	and	dwelt	among	us,	and	we	beheld	His	glory,
glory	as	of	the	only	begotten	from	the	Father,	full	of	grace	and	truth.
CHAPTER	27:	Rom.	3:23–26:
For	all	have	sinned	and	fall	short	of	the	glory	of	God,	being	justified	as	a	gift
by	His	grace	through	the	redemption	which	is	in	Christ	Jesus;	whom	God
displayed	publicly	as	a	propitiation	in	His	blood	through	faith.	This	was	to
demonstrate	His	righteousness,	because	in	the	forbearance	of	God	He	passed
over	the	sins	previously	committed;	for	the	demonstration,	I	say,	of	His
righteousness	at	the	present	time,	that	He	might	be	just	and	the	justifier	of	the
one	who	has	faith	in	Jesus.
CHAPTER	28:	
1
	Cor.	
1
5:20–23:
But	now	Christ	has	been	raised	from	the	dead,	the	first	fruits	of	those	who	are
asleep.	For	since	by	a	man	came	death,	by	a	man	also	came	the	resurrection	of
the	dead.	For	as	in	Adam	all	die,	so	also	in	Christ	all	shall	be	made	alive.	But
each	in	his	own	order:	Christ	the	first	fruits,	after	that	those	who	are	Christ’s
at	His	coming.
CHAPTER	29:	
1
	Peter	2:9–
1
0:
But	you	are	a	chosen	race,	a	royal	priesthood,	a	holy	nation,	a	people	for
God’s	own	possession,	that	you	may	proclaim	the	excellencies	of	Him	who
has	called	you	out	of	darkness	into	His	marvelous	light;	for	you	once	were	not
a	people,	but	now	you	are	the	people	of	God;	you	had	not	received	mercy,	but
now	you	have	received	mercy.
CHAPTER	30:	Rom.	8:
1
2–
1
4:
So	then	brethren,	we	are	under	obligation,	not	to	the	flesh,	to	live	according	to
the	flesh—for	if	you	are	living	according	to	the	flesh,	you	must	die;	but	if	by
the	Spirit	you	are	putting	to	death	the	deeds	of	the	body,	you	will	live.	For	all
who	are	being	led	by	the	Spirit	of	God,	these	are	sons	of	God.
CHAPTER	3
1
:	Luke	6:35–36:
But	love	your	enemies,	and	do	good,	and	lend,	expecting	nothing	in	return;
and	your	reward	will	be	great,	and	you	will	be	sons	of	the	Most	High;	for	He
Himself	is	kind	to	ungrateful	and	evil	men.	Be	merciful,	just	as	your	Father	is
merciful.
CHAPTER	32:	Eph.	
1
:3–6:
Blessed	be	the	God	and	Father	of	our	Lord	Jesus	Christ,	who	has	blessed	us
with	every	spiritual	blessing	in	the	heavenly	places	in	Christ,	just	as	He	chose
us	in	Him	before	the	foundation	of	the	world,	that	we	should	be	holy	and
blameless	before	Him.	In	love	He	predestined	us	to	adoption	as	sons	through
Jesus	Christ	to	Himself,	according	to	the	kind	intention	of	His	will,	to	the
praise	of	the	glory	of	His	grace,	which	He	freely	bestowed	on	us	in	the
Beloved.
CHAPTER	33:	Matt.	
11
:28–30:
Come	to	Me,	all	who	are	weary	and	heavy-laden,	and	I	will	give	you	rest.
Take	My	yoke	upon	you,	and	learn	from	Me,	for	I	am	gentle	and	humble	in
heart;	and	You	shall	find	rest	for	your	souls.	For	My	yoke	is	easy,	and	My
load	is	light.
CHAPTER	34:	John	3:5–8:
Jesus	answered,	“Truly,	truly,	I	say	to	you,	unless	one	is	born	of	water	and	the
Spirit,	he	cannot	enter	into	the	kingdom	of	God.	That	which	is	born	of	the
flesh	is	flesh,	and	that	which	is	born	of	the	Spirit	is	spirit.	Do	not	marvel	that	I
said	to	you,	‘You	must	be	born	again.’	The	wind	blows	where	it	wishes	and
you	hear	the	sound	of	it,	but	do	not	know	where	it	comes	from	and	where	it	is
going;	so	is	everyone	who	is	born	of	the	Spirit.”
CHAPTER	35:	John	3:
1
6:
For	God	so	loved	the	world,	that	He	gave	His	only	begotten	Son,	that
whoever	believes	in	Him	should	not	perish,	but	have	eternal	life.
CHAPTER	36:	Rom.	3:27–28:
Where	then	is	boasting?	It	is	excluded.	By	what	kind	of	law?	Of	works?	No,
but	by	a	law	of	faith.	For	we	maintain	that	a	man	is	justified	by	faith	apart
from	works	of	the	Law.
CHAPTER	37:	Rom.	8:
1
4–
1
7:
For	all	who	are	being	led	by	the	Spirit	of	God,	these	are	sons	of	God.	For	you
have	not	received	a	spirit	of	slavery	leading	to	fear	again,	but	you	have
received	a	spirit	of	adoption	as	sons	by	which	we	cry	out,	“Abba!	Father!”
The	Spirit	Himself	bears	witness	with	our	spirit	that	we	are	children	of	God,
and	if	children,	heirs	also,	heirs	of	God	and	fellow-heirs	with	Christ,	if	indeed
we	suffer	with	Him	in	order	that	we	may	also	be	glorified	with	Him.
CHAPTER	38:	Rom.	6:
11
–
1
4:
Even	so	consider	yourselves	to	be	dead	to	sin,	but	alive	to	God	in	Christ
Jesus.	Therefore	do	not	let	sin	reign	in	your	mortal	body	that	you	should	obey
its	lusts,	and	do	not	go	on	presenting	the	members	of	your	body	to	sin	as
instruments	of	unrighteousness;	but	present	yourselves	to	God	as	those	alive
from	the	dead,	and	your	members	as	instruments	of	righteousness	to	God.	For
sin	shall	not	be	master	over	you,	for	you	are	not	under	law,	but	under	grace.
CHAPTER	39:	
1
	Cor.	
1
2:
1
2–
1
3:
For	even	as	the	body	is	one	and	yet	has	many	members,	and	all	the	members
of	the	body,	though	they	are	many,	are	one	body,	so	also	is	Christ.	For	by	one
Spirit	we	were	all	baptized	into	one	body,	whether	Jews	or	Greeks,	whether
slaves	or	free,	and	we	were	all	made	to	drink	of	one	Spirit.
CHAPTER	40:	John	
1
0:27–28:
My	sheep	hear	My	voice,	and	I	know	them,	and	they	follow	Me;	and	I	give
eternal	life	to	them;	and	they	shall	never	perish,	and	no	one	shall	snatch	them
out	of	My	hand.
CHAPTER	4
1
:	Phil.	
1
:20–24:
According	to	my	earnest	expectation	and	hope,	that	I	shall	not	be	put	to
shame	in	anything,	but	that	with	all	boldness,	Christ	shall	even	now,	as
always,	be	exalted	in	my	body,	whether	by	life	or	by	death.	For	to	me,	to	live
is	Christ,	and	to	die	is	gain.	But	if	I	am	to	live	on	in	the	flesh,	this	will	mean
fruitful	labor	for	me;	and	I	do	not	know	which	to	choose.	But	I	am	hard
pressed	from	both	directions,	having	the	desire	to	depart	and	be	with	Christ,
for	that	is	very	much	better;	yet	to	remain	on	in	the	flesh	is	more	necessary
for	your	sake.
CHAPTER	42:	
1
	Cor.	
1
5:42–44:
So	also	is	the	resurrection	of	the	dead.	It	is	sown	a	perishable	body,	it	is	raised
an	imperishable	body;	it	is	sown	in	dishonor,	it	is	raised	in	glory;	it	is	sown	in
weakness,	it	is	raised	in	power;	it	is	sown	a	natural	body,	it	is	raised	a	spiritual
body.	If	there	is	a	natural	body,	there	is	also	a	spiritual	body.
CHAPTER	43:	Gal.	2:20:
I	have	been	crucified	with	Christ;	and	it	is	no	longer	I	who	live,	but	Christ
lives	in	me;	and	the	life	which	I	now	live	in	the	flesh	I	live	by	faith	in	the	Son
of	God,	who	loved	me,	and	delivered	Himself	up	for	me.
CHAPTER	44:	Eph.	4:
11
–
1
3:
And	He	gave	some	as	apostles,	and	some	as	prophets,	and	some	as
evangelists,	and	some	as	pastors	and	teachers,	for	the	equipping	of	the	saints
for	the	work	of	service,	to	the	building	up	of	the	body	of	Christ;	until	we	all
attain	to	the	unity	of	the	faith,	and	of	the	knowledge	of	the	Son	of	God,	to	a
mature	man,	to	the	measure	of	the	stature	which	belongs	to	the	fullness	of
Christ.
CHAPTER	45:	Eph.	4:
1
4–
1
6:
As	a	result,	we	are	no	longer	to	be	children,	tossed	here	and	there	by	waves,
and	carried	about	by	every	wind	of	doctrine,	by	the	trickery	of	men,	by
craftiness	in	deceitful	scheming;	but	speaking	the	truth	in	love,	we	are	to
grow	up	in	all	aspects	into	Him,	who	is	the	head,	even	Christ,	from	whom	the
whole	body,	being	fitted	and	held	together	by	that	which	every	joint	supplies,
according	to	the	proper	working	of	each	individual	part,	causes	the	growth	of
the	body	for	the	building	up	of	itself	in	love.
CHAPTER	46:	2	Cor.	
1
0:3–4:
For	though	we	walk	in	the	flesh,	we	do	not	war	according	to	the	flesh,	for	the
weapons	of	our	warfare	are	not	of	the	flesh,	but	divinely	powerful	for	the
destruction	of	fortresses.
CHAPTER	47:	
1
	Peter	5:
1
–4:
Therefore,	I	exhort	the	elders	among	you,	as	your	fellow-elder	and	witness	of
the	sufferings	of	Christ,	and	a	partaker	also	of	the	glory	that	is	to	be	revealed,
shepherd	the	flock	of	God	among	you,	not	under	compulsion,	but	voluntarily,
according	to	the	will	of	God;	and	not	for	sordid	gain,	but	with	eagerness;	nor
yet	as	lording	it	over	those	allotted	to	your	charge,	but	proving	to	be	examples
to	the	flock.	And	when	the	Chief	Shepherd	appears,	you	will	receive	the
unfading	crown	of	glory.
CHAPTER	48:	Acts	2:4
1
–42:
So	then,	those	who	had	received	his	word	were	baptized;	and	there	were
added	that	day	about	three	thousand	souls.	And	they	were	continually
devoting	themselves	to	the	apostles’	teaching	and	to	fellowship,	to	the
breaking	of	bread	and	to	prayer.
CHAPTER	49:	Rom.	6:3–4:
Or	do	you	not	know	that	all	of	us	who	have	been	baptized	into	Christ	Jesus
have	been	baptized	into	His	death?	Therefore	we	have	been	buried	with	Him
through	baptism	into	death,	in	order	that	as	Christ	was	raised	from	the	dead
through	the	glory	of	the	Father,	so	we	too	might	walk	in	newness	of	life.
CHAPTER	50:	
1
	Cor.	
11
:23–26:
For	I	received	from	the	Lord	that	which	I	also	delivered	to	you,	that	the	Lord
Jesus	in	the	night	in	which	He	was	betrayed	took	bread;	and	when	he	had
given	thanks,	He	broke	it,	and	said,	“This	is	My	body,	which	is	for	you;	do
this	in	remembrance	of	Me.”	In	the	same	way	the	cup	also,	after	supper,
saying,	‘This	cup	is	the	new	covenant	in	My	blood;	do	this,	as	often	as	you
drink	it,	in	remembrance	of	Me.”	For	as	often	as	you	eat	this	bread	and	drink
the	cup,	you	proclaim	the	Lord’s	death	until	He	comes.
CHAPTER	5
1
:	Rev.	4:
11
:
Worthy	art	Thou,	our	Lord	and	our	God,	to	receive	glory	and	honor	and
power;	for	Thou	didst	create	all	things,	and	because	of	Thy	will	they	existed,
and	were	created.
CHAPTER	52:	
1
	Peter	4:
1
0–
11
:
As	each	one	has	received	a	special	gift,	employ	it	in	serving	one	another,	as
good	stewards	of	the	manifold	grace	of	God.	Whoever	speaks,	let	him	speak,
as	it	were,	the	utterances	of	God;	whoever	serves,	let	him	do	so	as	by	the
strength	which	God	supplies;	so	that	in	all	things	God	may	be	glorified
through	Jesus	Christ,	to	whom	belongs	the	glory	and	dominion	forever	and
ever.	Amen.
CHAPTER	53:	
1
	Cor.	
1
2:7–
11
:
But	to	each	one	is	given	the	manifestation	of	the	Spirit	for	the	common	good.
For	to	one	is	given	the	word	of	wisdom	through	the	Spirit,	and	to	another	the
word	of	knowledge	according	to	the	same	Spirit;	to	another	faith	by	the	same
Spirit,	and	to	another	gifts	of	healing	by	the	one	Spirit,	and	to	another	the
effecting	of	miracles,	and	to	another	prophecy,	and	to	another	the
distinguishing	of	spirits,	to	another	various	kinds	of	tongues,	to	another	the
interpretation	of	tongues.	But	one	and	the	same	Spirit	works	all	these	things,
distributing	to	each	one	individually	just	as	He	wills.
CHAPTER	54:	
1
	Thess.	4:
1
5–
1
8:
For	this	we	say	to	you	by	the	word	of	the	Lord,	that	we	who	are	alive,	and
remain	until	the	coming	of	the	Lord,	shall	not	precede	those	who	have	fallen
asleep.	For	the	Lord	Himself	will	descend	from	heaven	with	a	shout,	with	the
voice	of	the	archangel,	and	with	the	trumpet	of	God;	and	the	dead	in	Christ
shall	rise	first.	Then	we	who	are	alive	and	remain	shall	be	caught	up	together
with	them	in	the	clouds	to	meet	the	Lord	in	the	air,	and	thus	we	shall	always
be	with	the	Lord.	Therefore	comfort	one	another	with	these	words.
CHAPTER	55:	Rev.	20:4–6:
And	I	saw	thrones,	and	they	sat	upon	them,	and	judgment	was	given	to	them.
And	I	saw	the	souls	of	those	who	had	been	beheaded	because	of	the	testimony
of	Jesus	and	because	of	the	word	of	God,	and	those	who	had	not	worshiped
the	beast	or	his	image,	and	had	not	received	the	mark	upon	their	forehead	and
upon	their	hand;	and	they	came	to	life	and	reigned	with	Christ	for	a	thousand
years.	The	rest	of	the	dead	did	not	come	to	life	until	the	thousand	years	were
completed.	This	is	the	first	resurrection.	Blessed	and	holy	is	the	one	who	has
a	part	in	the	first	resurrection;	over	these	the	second	death	has	no	power,	but
they	will	be	priests	of	God	and	of	Christ	and	will	reign	with	Him	for	a
thousand	years.
CHAPTER	56:	Rev.	20:
11
–
1
3:
And	I	saw	a	great	white	throne	and	Him	who	sat	upon	it,	from	whose
presence	earth	and	heaven	fled	away,	and	no	place	was	found	for	them.	And	I
saw	the	dead,	the	great	and	the	small,	standing	before	the	throne,	and	books
were	opened;	and	another	book	was	opened,	which	is	the	book	of	life;	and	the
dead	were	judged	from	the	things	which	were	written	in	the	books,	according
to	their	deeds.	And	the	sea	gave	up	the	dead	which	were	in	it,	and	death	and
Hades	gave	up	the	dead	which	were	in	them;	and	they	were	judged,	every	one
of	them	according	to	their	deeds.
CHAPTER	57:	Rev.	2
1
:3–4:
And	I	heard	a	loud	voice	from	the	throne,	saying,	“Behold,	the	tabernacle	of
God	is	among	men,	and	He	shall	dwell	among	them,	and	they	shall	be	His
people,	and	God	Himself	shall	be	among	them,	and	He	shall	wipe	away	every
tear	from	their	eyes;	and	there	shall	no	longer	be	any	death;	there	shall	no
longer	be	any	mourning,	or	crying,	or	pain;	the	first	things	have	passed
away.”
	
	
OceanofPDF.com
Appendix	3:
Contemporary	Worship	Songs	Classified	by	Chapter
Each	chapter	in	this	book	includes	a	hymn	related	to	the	subject	treated	in	the
chapter.	In	addition,	I	was	able	to	find	contemporary	worship	songs	that
correspond	to	the	subjects	of	twenty-six	of	the	fifty-seven	chapters	in	the
book.	I	have	listed	the	songs	here	according	to	chapter	and	have	given	the
first	line	and	the	location	in	the	songbook	
Praise	Chorus	Book	
(Nashville:
Maranatha	Music,	1990).	(Perhaps	this	list	may	serve	as	an	encouragement	to
song	writers	to	compose	contemporary	worship	songs	related	to	the	subjects
of	the	other	chapters	of	the	book.)
Chapter
	
	
First	Line	of	Song
7
	
	
Seek	ye	first	the	kingdom	of	God
10
	
	
Father,	we	love	you,	we	worship	and	adore	you
11
	
	
For	Thou,	O	Lord,	art	high	(I	exalt	Thee)
12	or	13
	
	
Great	is	the	Lord,	he	is	holy	and	just
12	or	13
	
	
I	will	sing	of	the	mercies	of	the	Lord	forever
12	or	13
	
	
Lord,	the	light	of	Your	love	is	shining
12	or	13
	
	
O	Lord,	You’re	beautiful
12	or	13
	
	
The	steadfast	love	of	the	Lord	never	ceases
12	or	13
	
	
Thy	loving	kindness	is	better	than	life
14
	
	
Holy	holy;	holy	holy
15
	
	
Thou	art	worthy
18
	
	
Seek	ye	first	the	kingdom	of	God
20
	
	
Mighty	Warrior,	dressed	for	battle
21
	
	
For	Thou,	O	Lord,	art	high	(I	exalt	Thee)
21
	
	
In	my	life,	Lord,	be	glorified
24
	
	
Create	in	me	a	clean	heart,	O	God
24
	
	
Search	me,	O	God,	and	know	my	heart	today
26
	
	
All	hail,	King	Jesus
26
	
	
Isn’t	he	beautiful?
26
	
	
Jesus,	name	above	all	names
26
	
	
Open	our	eyes,	Lord,	we	want	to	see	Jesus
26
	
	
Praise	the	name	of	Jesus
26
	
	
Son	of	God,	this	is	our	praise	song
26
	
	
There	is	a	Redeemer
27
	
	
There	is	a	Redeemer
28
	
	
All	hail,	King	Jesus
28
	
	
All	heaven	declares	the	glory	of	the	risen	Lord
28
	
	
He	is	Lord,	He	is	Lord
29
	
	
Come	and	praise	Him,	royal	priesthood
30
	
	
Not	by	might,	nor	by	power
30
	
	
Spirit	of	the	living	God,	fall	afresh	on	me
33
	
	
God	forgave	my	sin	in	Jesus’	name
35
	
	
O	let	the	Son	of	God	enfold	you
37
	
	
Behold,	what	manner	of	love
38
	
	
Change	my	heart,	O	God
38
	
	
Lord,	the	light	of	Your	love	is	shining
38
	
	
O	let	the	Son	of	God	enfold	you
45
	
	
Bind	us	together,	Lord
45
	
	
Here	we	are,	gathered	together	as	a	family
46
	
	
In	heavenly	armor	we’ll	enter	the	land
48
	
	
This	is	holy	ground
51
	
	
As	the	deer	panteth	for	the	water
51
	
	
Bless	the	Lord,	O	my	soul
51
	
	
For	Thou,	O	Lord,	art	high	(I	exalt	Thee)
51
	
	
Hosanna,	Hosanna
51
	
	
I	love	you,	Lord,	and	I	lift	my	voice
51
	
	
Let	our	praise	to	You	be	as	incense
51
	
	
Thou	art	worthy,	Great	Jehovah
51
	
	
We	bring	the	sacrifice	of	praise
51
	
	
We	will	glorify	the	King	of	kings
51
	
	
When	I	look	into	your	holiness
54
	
	
All	hail,	King	Jesus
54
	
	
Majesty,	worship	His	majesty!
57
	
	
All	hail,	King	Jesus
57
	
	
Therefore	the	redeemed	of	the	Lord	shall	return
	
	
OceanofPDF.com
Appendix	4:
Annotated	Bibliography	
of	Evangelical	Systematic	Theologies
This	bibliography	lists	most	of	the	major	evangelical	systematic	theologies
available	in	English	and	a	few	shorter	guides	to	Christian	doctrine.	With	the
exception	of	the	two	Roman	Catholic	theologies	(by	McBrien	and	Ott)	which
are	included	because	I	have	cross-referenced	them	at	the	end	of	each	chapter,
all	of	the	authors	on	this	list	fall	generally	within	a	“conservative	evangelical”
theological	position.
1
In	the	appendix	following	this	bibliography	I	have	added	a	master	list	of	the
thirty-four	Protestant	and	two	Roman	Catholic	theologies	which	I	cross-
referenced	at	the	end	of	each	chapter.
Arminius,	James.	
The	Writings	of	James	Arminius.	
3	vols.	Vols.	1	and	2
trans.	by	James	Nichols.	Vol.	
3	translated	by	W.	R.	Bagnell.	Grand
Rapids:	Baker,	1956.
Arminius	(1560–1609)	was	a	Reformed	pastor	in	Amsterdam	and
later	professor	of	theology	at	the	University	of	Leyden.	His
disagreement	with	some	of	the	central	tenets	of	Calvinism	led	to	a
great	controversy	in	the	Netherlands	which	continued	long	after	his
death.	His	ideas	became	the	foundation	of	a	system	of	thought	now
known	as	Arminianism,	which	continues	today	in	conservative
Wesleyan	and	Methodist	churches,	and	in	many	other	Protestant
groups.	This	collection	of	writings,	assembled	after	his	death,	is	not
strictly	organized	as	a	systematic	theology,	but	does	contain
discussions	of	most	important	theological	topics.
Bavinck,	Herman.	
The	Doctrine	of	God.	
Trans.	by	William	Hendriksen.
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1951.	Reprint	edition:	Carlisle,	Pa.:	Banner	of
Truth,	1977.
_____.	
Our	Reasonable	Faith.	
Trans.	by	Henry	Zylstra.	Grand	Rapids:
Eerdmans,	1956.	Reprint	edition:	Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1977.
_____.	
The	Philosophy	of	Revelation.	
Trans.	by	Geerhardus	Vos,	Nikolas
Steffens,	and	Henry	Dosker.	Reprint	edition	Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1979.
First	published	1909	by	Longmans,	Green,	and	Co.
Bavinck	(1854–1921)	was	a	Dutch	theologian	and	one	of	this
century’s	most	brilliant	spokesmen	for	a	Reformed	theological
position.	His	great	four-volume	systematic	theology,	
Gereformeerde
Dogmatiek,	
still	awaits	translation	into	English	(only	volume	2,	
The
Doctrine	of	God,	
has	been	translated).
Berkhof,	Louis.	
Introduction	to	Systematic	Theology.	
Reprint	edition:
Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1979.	First	published	by	Eerdmans,	1932.
_____.	
Systematic	Theology.	
Fourth	edition,	Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,
1939.
The	standard	Reformed	textbook	for	systematic	theology	by	a	former
president	of	Calvin	Seminary	in	Grand	Rapids,	Michigan.	This	book
is	a	great	treasure-house	of	information	and	analysis,	and	is	probably
the	most	useful	one-volume	systematic	theology	available	from	any
theological	perspective.	Berkhof	lived	from	1873	to	1957.
Berkouwer,	G.	C.	
Studies	in	Dogmatics.	
14	vols.	(1952–1976).
_____.	
The	Church.	
Trans.	by	James	E.	Davidson.	Grand	Rapids:
Eerdmans,	1976.
_____.	
Divine	Election.	
Trans.	by	Hugo	Bekker.	Grand	Rapids:
Eerdmans,	1960.
_____.	
Faith	and	Justification.	
Trans.	by	Lewis	B.	Smedes.	Grand
Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1954.
_____.	
Faith	and	Perseverance.	
Trans.	by	Robert	D.	Knudsen.	Grand
Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1958.
_____.	
Faith	and	Sanctification.	
Trans.	by	John	Vriend.	Grand	Rapids:
Eerdmans,	1952.
_____.	
General	Revelation.	
(No	translator	named.)	Grand	Rapids:
Eerdmans,	1955.
_____.	
Man:	The	Image	of	God.	
Trans.	by	Dirk	W.	Jellma.	Grand
Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1962.
_____.	
Holy	Scripture.	
Trans.	and	edited	by	Jack	B.	Rogers.	Grand
Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1975.
_____.	
The	Person	of	Christ.	
Trans.	by	John	Vriend.	Grand	Rapids:
Eerdmans,	1954.
_____.	
The	Providence	of	God.	
Trans.	by	Louis	B.	Smedes.	Grand
Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1952.
_____.	
The	Return	of	Christ.	
Trans.	by	James	Van	Oosterom.	Ed.	by
Marlin	J.	Van	Elderen.	Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1972.
_____.	
The	Sacraments.	
Trans.	by	Hugo	Bekker.	Grand	Rapids:
Eerdmans,	1969.
_____.	
Sin.	
Trans.	by	Philip	C.	Holtrop.	Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1971.
_____.	
The	Work	of	Christ.	
Trans.	by	Cornelius	Lambregtse.	Grand
Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1965.
Major	contemporary	studies	by	a	Reformed	theologian	who	was
professor	of	systematic	theology	at	the	Free	University	of	Amsterdam.
Bloesch,	Donald	G.	
Essentials	of	Evangelical	Theology.	
2	vols.,	New
York:	Harper	&	Row,	1978–79.
A	work	by	a	contemporary	theologian	who	is	broadly	in	the	Reformed
tradition,	but	much	less	clear	on	the	doctrines	of	election	and	the
authority	of	Scripture,	for	example,	than	other	writers	classified	as
“Reformed”	in	this	bibliography.	(More	recently,	Bloesch	has	begun
to	publish	a	multi-volume	systematic	theology.)
Boice,	James	Montgomery.	
Foundations	of	the	Christian	Faith.	
Revised
one-volume	edition.	Downers	Grove,	Ill.:	InterVarsity	Press,	1986.
A	recent	Reformed	guide	to	systematic	theology	written	by	the
theologian-pastor	of	Tenth	Presbyterian	Church,	Philadelphia.	This
work	is	written	in	a	popular,	readable	style,	with	helpful	application	of
doctrines	to	life.	It	was	previously	published	in	four	separate	volumes:
The	Sovereign	God	
(1978),	
God	the	Redeemer	
(1978),	
Awakening	to
God	
(1979),	and	
God	and	History	
(1981).
Boyce,	James	Pettigru.	
Abstract	of	Systematic	Theology.	
Reprint	edition:
Christian	Gospel	Foundation,	n.d.	First	published	1887.
A	Baptist	systematic	theology	that	is	also	Reformed	in	doctrinal
orientation	by	a	former	president	and	professor	of	systematic	theology
in	the	Southern	Baptist	Seminary,	Louisville,	Kentucky.	Boyce	lived
from	1827	to	1888.
Buswell,	James	Oliver,	Jr.	
A	Systematic	Theology	of	the	Christian
Religion.	
2	vols.	Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1962–63.
A	Reformed	systematic	theology	by	the	former	dean	of	the	graduate
faculty	at	Covenant	College	and	Seminary	in	St.	Louis,	Missouri.
Calvin,	John.	
Institutes	of	the	Christian	Religion.	
2	vols.	Ed.	by	John	T.
McNeill.	Trans.	and	indexed	by	Ford	Lewis	Battles.	The	Library	of
Christian	Classics,	Vols.	20–21.	Philadelphia:	Westminster,	1960.	Trans.
from	the	1559	text	and	collated	with	earlier	versions.
This	is	the	best	available	English	translation	of	Calvin’s	systematic
exposition	of	the	Christian	faith.	Calvin	(1509–64)	was	a	French
reformer	who	became	the	greatest	theologian	of	the	Reformation	and,
according	to	many	estimates,	the	greatest	theologian	in	the	history	of
the	church.	Reformed	in	doctrinal	perspective.
Carter,	Charles	W.,	ed.	
A	Contemporary	Wesleyan	Theology:	Biblical,
Systematic,	and	Practical.	
2	vols.	Grand	Rapids:	Francis	Asbury	Press
(Zondervan),	1983.
This	is	a	collection	of	24	essays	on	major	doctrinal	themes	by	several
scholars	representing	a	wide	range	of	conservative	Wesleyan
denominations	and	institutions.	The	set	also	includes	some	essays	on
practical	theology	and	ethics.	Charles	Carter,	who	contributed	four	of
the	chapters,	is	Professor	of	Religion	and	Missions	at	Marion	College,
Marion,	Indiana.	The	advisory	committee	for	the	volumes	includes
representatives	of	United	Methodist,	Free	Methodist,	Church	of	the
Nazarene,	Missionary	Church,	Salvation	Army,	Wesleyan	Church,
and	other	groups.
Chafer,	Lewis	Sperry.	
Systematic	Theology.	
7	vols.	plus	index	vol.
Dallas:	Dallas	Seminary	Press,	1947–48.
_____.	
Systematic	Theology:	Abridged	edition.	
2	vols.	Ed.	by	John	F.
Walvoord,	Donald	K.	Campbell,	and	Roy	B.	Zuck.	Wheaton:	Victor,
1988.
Chafer	(1871–1952)	was	the	first	president	of	Dallas	Theological
Seminary.	The	seven-volume	edition	is	the	most	extensive
dispensational	systematic	theology	ever	written.	The	two	volume
edition	is	a	condensation	of	the	earlier	work.
Cottrell,	Jack.	
What	the	Bible	Says	About	God	the	Creator.	
Joplin,	Mo.:
College	Press,	1983.
_____.	
What	the	Bible	Says	About	God	the	Ruler.	
Joplin,	Mo.:	College
Press,	1984.
_____.	
What	the	Bible	Says	About	God	the	Redeemer.	
Joplin,	Mo.:
College	Press,	1987.
Cottrell	is	an	articulate	and	thoughtful	Arminian	theologian	who
teaches	at	Cincinnati	Bible	Seminary	(Christian	Church/Churches	of
Christ).	I	have	indexed	these	volumes	as	1	(
God	the	Creator
),	2	(
God
the	Ruler
),	and	3	(
God	the	Redeemer
).
Dabney,	Robert	L.	
Discussions:	Evangelical	and	Theological.	
London:
Banner	of	Truth,	1967.	Reprint	of	1890	edition.
_____.	
Systematic	Theology.	
Edinburgh:	Banner	of	Truth,	1985.	Reprint
of	1878	edition.
A	Southern	Presbyterian	who	represented	a	strongly	Reformed
position,	Dabney	(1820–98)	was	professor	of	theology	at	Union
Seminary	in	Virginia.	He	was	also	chaplain	and	later	chief	of	staff	for
General	Stonewall	Jackson	during	the	American	Civil	War.
Edwards,	Jonathan.	
The	Works	of	Jonathan	Edwards.	
2	vols.	Revised	and
corrected	by	Edward	Hickman.	Edinburgh:	Banner	of	Truth,	1974.
Reprint	of	1834	edition.
Edwards	(1703–1758)	was	a	pastor	in	Northampton,	Massachusetts,
and,	for	one	month	before	his	death	from	a	smallpox	injection,
president	of	Princeton.	Some	consider	him	the	greatest	American
philosopher-theologian.	He	did	not	write	an	entire	systematic
theology,	but	his	works	contain	writings	on	most	theological	topics.
He	is	strongly	Reformed	in	outlook,	and	combines	profound	thought
with	warm-hearted	devotion	to	Christ.	(A	new	edition	of	Edwards’
works	is	in	process	of	publication	from	Yale	University	Press.)
Erickson,	Millard.	
Christian	Theology.	
Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1985.
A	clear	and	very	thorough	recent	textbook	in	systematic	theology
from	a	Baptist	perspective.	Erickson,	who	was	Academic	Dean	at
Bethel	Theological	Seminary	in	St.	Paul,	Minn.,	now	teaches	at
Southwestern	Baptist	Seminary	in	Ft.	Worth,	Texas.	This	book
includes	interaction	with	all	the	major	trends	in	contemporary
nonevangelical	theology,	as	well	as	helpful	material	for	personal
application.
Finney,	Charles	G.	
Finney’s	Lectures	on	Systematic	Theology.	
Ed.	by	J.
H.	Fairchild.	Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1953.	Reprint	of	1878	edition.
Finney	(1792–1875)	was	a	revivalist	and	president	of	Oberlin	College
1851–66.	Not	representative	of	any	one	theological	position,	but
articulated	some	strong	Arminian	arguments.	Emphasis	on	personal
holiness	and	perfectionism.	Not	really	a	complete	systematic
theology,	because	many	topics	are	not	covered.
Gill,	John.	
Complete	Body	of	Doctrinal	and	Practical	Divinity.	
2	vols.
Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1978.	First	published	as	
A	Body	of	Doctrinal
Divinity	
(1767)	and	
A	Body	of	Practical	Divinity	
(1770).
Gill	(1697–1771)	was	a	highly	influential	Baptist	pastor,	a	prolific
writer,	and	a	respected	theologian	in	18th	century	England.	He	was
also	Reformed	(or	Calvinistic)	in	his	view	of	God’s	sovereignty.	His
book,	
The	Cause	of	God	and	Truth	
(1735–38;	reprinted	Grand	Rapids:
Baker,	1981)	is	one	of	the	most	thorough	defenses	of	Calvinistic
theology	ever	written.
Henry,	Carl	F.	H.	
God,	Revelation,	and	Authority.	
6	vols.	Waco,	Tex.:
Word,	1976–83.
A	major	work	containing	detailed	interaction	with	hundreds	of	other
scholarly	positions.	Henry	is	a	leading	evangelical	theologian	with
great	strengths	especially	in	the	areas	of	apologetics	and	philosophical
theology.
Heppe,	Heinrich.	
Reformed	Dogmatics:	Set	Out	and	Illustrated	From	the
Sources.	
Rev.	and	ed.	by	Ernst	Bizer.	Trans.	by	G.	T.	Thompson.	Reprint
edition.	Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1978.	First	published	1861.	English
translation	first	published	1950.
Heppe	(1820–79)	was	a	German	scholar	who	collected	and	quoted
extensively	from	many	earlier	Reformed	theologians.	Because	the
quotations	are	arranged	according	to	the	topics	of	systematic	theology,
this	book	is	a	valuable	sourcebook.
Hodge,	Charles.	
Systematic	Theology.	
3	vols.	Reprint	edition:	Grand
Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1970.	First	published	1871–73.
A	major	Reformed	systematic	theology	which	is	still	widely	used
today.	Hodge	(1797–1878)	was	professor	of	systematic	theology	at
Princeton	Theological	Seminary.
Lewis,	Gordon	R.,	and	Bruce	Demarest.	
Integrative	Theology.	
3	vols.
Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1987–94.
Lewis	and	Demarest	are	both	professors	of	systematic	theology	at
Denver	Seminary	in	Colorado	(a	Conservative	Baptist	seminary).	This
is	an	excellent	contemporary	work	that	integrates	historical,	biblical,
apologetic,	and	practical	material	with	systematic	theology.
Litton,	Edward	Arthur.	
Introduction	to	Dogmatic	Theology.	
New	edition,
ed.	by	Philip	E.	Hughes.	London:	James	Clarke,	1960.	First	published
1882–92.
A	standard	Anglican	(or	Episcopalian)	systematic	theology	by	an
evangelical	British	theologian	of	the	19th	century.	Litton	lived	from
1813	to	1897.
McBrien,	Richard	P.	
Catholicism.	
2	vols.	Minneapolis:	Winston	Press,
1980.
A	responsible	and	extensive	explanation	of	Catholic	teachings	as	they
have	been	affected	by	the	period	since	Vatican	II.	Contains
bibliographies	with	each	chapter.
Miley,	John.	
Systematic	Theology.	
2	vols.	Library	of	Biblical	and
Theological	Literature,	Vols.	5–6.	New	York:	Eaton	and	Mains,	1892–94.
Reprint:	Peabody,	Mass.:	Hendriksen,	1989.
This	is	probably	the	most	scholarly	and	extensive	Arminian
systematic	theology	ever	written.	Miley	was	a	professor	at	Drew
Theological	Seminary,	Madison,	New	Jersey.
Milne,	Bruce.	
Know	the	Truth.	
Leicester:	InterVarsity	Press,	1982.
A	thoughtful,	clearly-written	evangelical	guide	to	Christian	doctrine
which	has	found	wide	use	among	students.	Milne	lectures	in	biblical
and	historical	theology	at	Spurgeon’s	College,	London.
Mueller,	John	Theodore.	
Christian	Dogmatics.	
St.	Louis:	Concordia,
1934.
A	condensation	and	translation	of	Francis	Pieper’s	
Christliche
Dogmatik	
(Christian	Dogmatics)	by	a	professor	of	systematic
theology	at	Concordia	Seminary	in	St.	Louis,	a	Missouri	Synod
Lutheran	seminary.	An	excellent	statement	of	conservative	Lutheran
theology.
Mullins,	Edgar	Young.	
The	Christian	Religion	in	Its	Doctrinal
Expression.	
Philadelphia:	Judson	Press,	1917.
An	evangelical	systematic	theology	by	a	former	president	of	the
Southern	Baptist	Seminary	in	Louisville,	Kentucky.	Mullins	lived
from	1860	to	1928.
Murray,	John.	
Collected	Writings	of	John	Murray.	
4	vols.	Carlisle,	Pa.:
Banner	of	Truth,	1976–82.
_____.	
The	Imputation	of	Adam’s	Sin.	
Reprint	edition:	Nutley,	N.J.:
Presbyterian	and	Reformed,	1977.	First	published	Grand	Rapids:
Eerdmans,	1959.
_____.	
Principles	of	Conduct.	
Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1957.
_____.	
Redemption	Accomplished	and	Applied.	
Grand	Rapids:
Eerdmans,	1955.
Murray	(1898–1975)	was	professor	of	systematic	theology	at
Westminster	Seminary	in	Philadelphia	and	one	of	the	most	articulate
modern	defenders	of	Reformed	theology.
Oden,	Thomas.	
The	Living	God.	
Systematic	Theology,	Vol.	
1.	San
Francisco:	Harper	&	Row,	1987.
Oden	is	a	Methodist	theologian	who	has	moved	from	his	previous
liberal	theological	convictions	to	a	conservative	evangelical	position.
He	interacts	extensively	with	theologians	from	the	early	history	of	the
church.
Olson,	Arnold	T.	
This	We	Believe:	The	Background	and	Exposition	of	the
Doctrinal	Statement	of	The	Evangelical	Free	Church	of	America.
Minneapolis,	Minn.:	Free	Church	Publications,	1961.
A	guide	to	Christian	doctrine	based	on	the	widely-used	statement	of
faith	of	the	Evangelical	Free	Church	of	America.	Olson	was	the	first
president	of	the	Evangelical	Free	Church.
Ott,	Ludwig.	
Fundamentals	of	Catholic	Dogma.	
Ed.	by	James	Canon
Bastible.	Trans.	by	Patrick	Lynch.	St	Louis:	Herder,	1955.	First	published
in	German	in	1952.
A	standard	textbook	of	traditional	Roman	Catholic	theology.
Packer,	J.	I.	
Concise	Theology:	A	Guide	to	Historic	Christian	Beliefs.
Wheaton,	Ill.:	Tyndale	House,	1993.
This	readable	volume	lives	up	to	its	name,	because	Packer,	an
Anglican	with	strong	Reformed	convictions,	is	a	master	of	saying
much	in	a	few	words.	He	is	a	professor	of	theology	at	Regent	College
in	Vancouver,	British	Columbia,	and	one	of	the	most	widely-respected
evangelical	theologians	today.
Pieper,	Francis.	
Christian	Dogmatics.	
4	vols.	Trans.	by	Theodore
Engelder	et	al.	St.	Louis:	Concordia,	1950–57.	First	published	in
German,	1917–24.
This	is	standard	systematic	theology	of	conservative	Lutheranism.
Pieper	(1852–1931)	was	a	Missouri	Synod	theologian	and	professor
and	president	of	Concordia	Seminary	in	St.	Louis.
Pope,	William	Burt.	
A	Compendium	of	Christian	Theology.	
2d	ed.	3	vols.
New	York:	Phillips	and	Hunt,	n.d.
This	work,	first	published	in	1875–76,	is	one	of	the	greatest
systematic	theologies	written	from	a	Wesleyan	or	Arminian
perspective.
Purkiser,	W.	T.,	ed.	
Exploring	our	Christian	Faith.	
Kansas	City,	Mo.:
Beacon	Hill	Press,	1960.
A	more	popular	Arminian	systematic	theology	with	contributions
from	several	authors.
Ryrie,	Charles.	
Basic	Theology.	
Wheaton,	Ill.:	Victor,	1986.
A	very	clearly	written	introduction	to	systematic	theology	from	a
dispensationalist	perspective,	by	a	former	professor	of	systematic
theology	at	Dallas	Theological	Seminary.
Shedd,	William	G.	T.	
Dogmatic	Theology.	
3	vols.	in	4.	Reprint	edition:
Minneapolis:	Klock	and	Klock,	1979.	Originally	published	by	Charles
Scribner’s	Sons,	1889.
A	useful	Reformed	systematic	theology	by	a	former	professor	at
Union	Theological	Seminary	in	New	York.	(Note	that	the	entire	range
of	systematic	theology	is	treated	in	Vols.	I	and	II,	and	that	Vol.	
III
contains	supplementary	material	for	every	part	of	Vols.	I	and	II.	Vol.
III	is	not	well	indexed.)	Shedd	lived	from	1820	to	1894.
Strong,	Augustus	H.	
Systematic	Theology.	
Valley	Forge,	Pa.:	Judson
Press,	1907.
Strong	(1836–1921)	was	president	and	professor	of	theology	at
Rochester	Theological	Seminary,	and,	from	1905	to	1910,	was	the
first	president	of	the	Northern	Baptist	Convention.	This	text	was
widely	used	in	Baptist	circles	for	most	of	the	twentieth	century,	until
it	was	largely	replaced	by	Millard	Erickson’s	
Christian	Theology
(1983–85).
Thiessen,	Henry	Clarence.	
Introductory	Lectures	in	Systematic	Theology.
Rev.	by	Vernon	D.	Doerksen.	Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1977.	First
published	1949.
An	evangelical	systematic	theology	textbook	by	a	former	chairman	of
the	faculty	of	the	graduate	school	at	Wheaton	College.	Thiessen	is
Baptistic	and	Dispensational	in	theological	perspective.
Thomas,	W.	H.	Griffith.	
The	Principles	of	Theology:	An	Introduction	to
the	Thirty-Nine	Articles.	
Fifth	edition,	revised.	London:	Church	Book
Room	Press,	1956.	(First	published	1930.)
Although	this	book	is	structured	around	the	Anglican	Thirty-Nine
Articles,	it	functions	well	as	a	thoughtful	introductory	text	in
Christian	doctrine	even	for	those	outside	the	Anglican	tradition.	It	has
been	widely	used	in	British	evangelical	circles	for	many	years.
Thomas	(1861–1924)	was	principal	of	Wycliffe	Hall,	Oxford,	and
then	professor	of	Old	Testament	at	Wycliffe	College,	Toronto.	He	also
played	a	role	in	founding	Dallas	Seminary	just	before	his	death.
Thornwell,	James	Henley.	
The	Collected	Writings	of	James	Henley
Thornwell.	
4	vols.	Ed.	by	John	B.	Adger.	New	York:	Robert	Carter	and
Brothers,	1871–73.	Reprint	edition:	Edinburgh	and	Carlisle,	Pa.:	Banner
of	Truth,	1974.
Thornwell	(1812–62)	was	a	Reformed	theologian	who	was	professor
of	theology	in	the	Presbyterian	Theological	Seminary	at	Columbia,
South	Carolina.
Turretin,	Francis.	
Institutes	of	Elenctic	Theology.	
3	vols.	Trans.	by
George	Musgrave	Giger.	Ed.	by	James	T.	Dennison,	Jr.	Phillipsburg,
N.J.:	Presbyterian	and	Reformed,	1992–.	(Two	volumes	published	to
date.)
Turretin	(1623–87)	taught	theology	for	over	thirty	years	at	the
Academy	in	Geneva.	His	work,	written	in	Latin,	is	said	to	be	one	of
the	fullest	expressions	of	Calvinistic	theology	ever	published.	It	was
reprinted	(in	Latin)	in	1847	and	widely	used	as	a	theological	textbook
for	American	Presbyterians,	most	notably	by	Charles	Hodge	at
Princeton.	George	Giger	translated	Turretin’s	
Institutes	
in	the	mid-
nineteenth	century,	but	the	translation	lay	unpublished	for	over	a
century.	James	Dennison	of	Westminster	Seminary	has	done	extensive
editorial	work	to	make	this	great	theology	text	finally	available	to
English	readers.
Van	Til,	Cornelius.	
In	Defense	of	the	Faith,	
Vol.	5:	
An	Introduction	to
Systematic	Theology.	
N.p.:	Presbyterian	and	Reformed,	1976.
This	volume	contains	Van	Til’s	discussions	of	the	nature	of	systematic
theology,	of	revelation,	and	of	the	doctrine	of	God.	Van	Til	was	a
Reformed	theologian	and	philosopher	who	taught	at	Westminster
Theological	Seminary	in	Philadelphia	and	is	best	known	for	his
“presuppositional”	system	of	apologetics.
Warfield,	Benjamin	B.	
Biblical	and	Theological	Studies.	
Philadelphia:
Presbyterian	and	Reformed,	1976.
_____.	
Christology	and	Criticism.	
London	and	New	York:	Oxford
University	Press,	1929.
_____.	
The	Inspiration	and	Authority	of	the	Bible.	
Ed.	by	Samuel	G.
Craig.	Introduction	by	Cornelius	Van	Til.	Philadelphia:	Presbyterian	and
Reformed,	1967.
_____.	
The	Lord	of	Glory.	
New	York:	American	Tract	Society,	1907.
_____.	
Perfectionism.	
Philadelphia:	Presbyterian	and	Reformed,	1958.
A	condensation	of	Warfield’s	earlier	2-vol.	work	on	perfectionism
published	by	OUP,	omitting	extensive	interaction	with	particular
German	theologians.
_____.	
The	Person	and	Work	of	Christ.	
Philadelphia:	Presbyterian	and
Reformed,	1950.
Contains	reprints	of	2	articles	from	
ST,	
5	from	
BD,	
6	from	
CC,	
and	1
other	article.
_____.	
The	Plan	of	Salvation.	
Rev.	ed.	Grand	Rapids:	Eerdmans,	1942.
_____.	
Selected	Shorter	Writings	of	Benjamin	B.	Warfield.	
2	vols.
Nuttley,	N.J.:	Presbyterian	and	Reformed,	1970–73.
_____.	
Studies	in	Theology.	
New	York:	Oxford	University	Press,	1932.
Warfield	(1851–1921)	was	a	Reformed	theologian	who	taught	New
Testament	and	then	systematic	theology	at	Princeton	Theological
Seminary	from	1887–1921.	In	the	estimate	of	many	people,	he	was
one	of	the	greatest	American	theologians.
Watson,	Richard.	
Theological	Institutes.	
2	vols.	New	York:	G.	Lane	and
P.	Sandford,	1843.	First	published	1823.
This	is	the	earliest	systematic	theology	by	a	Methodist.	Watson
(1781–1833)	was	Arminian	in	theological	perspective.
Wiley,	H.	Orton.	
Christian	Theology.	
Three	vols.	Kansas	City,	Mo.:
Nazarene	Publishing	House,	1940–43.
A	recent	Arminian	systematic	theology	by	a	respected	theologian	in
the	Church	of	the	Nazarene.	Probably	the	best	Arminian	systematic
theology	published	in	the	twentieth	century,	but	it	does	not	match
Miley	in	scholarly	depth.
Williams,	J.	Rodman.	
Renewal	Theology:	Systematic	Theology	From	a
Charismatic	Perspective.	
3	vols.	Grand	Rapids:	Zondervan,	1988–92.
Williams	is	a	charismatic	scholar	who	teaches	at	Regent	University
(formerly	CBN	University).	This	clearly	written	theology	interacts
extensively	with	the	biblical	text	and	with	other	literature.	It	is	the
first	published	from	an	explicitly	charismatic	perspective.
NOTES
1
	very	helpful	and	more	broadly-based	annotated	bibliography,	including	notes	on	works	from	several	prominent	liberal	scholars,
may	be	found	in	John	Jefferson	Davis,	
Theology	Primer	
(Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1981),	pp.	74–79;	see	also	his	“Brief	Guide	to
Modern	Theologians”	on	pp.	39–55.	In	addition,	valuable	brief	notes	on	dozens	of	important	theologians	from	all	theological
traditions	may	be	found	in	Millard	Erickson,	
Concise	Dictionary	of	Christian	Theology	
(Grand	Rapids:	Baker,	1986).
	
OceanofPDF.com
Appendix	5:
Master	List	of	Systematic	Theologies	Indexed	at	the	End	of	Each
Chapter
Full	bibliographical	data	for	these	works	may	be	found	in	the	bibliography	in
Appendix	4.	If	one	of	these	works	is	not	listed	at	the	end	of	a	chapter,	it
means	that	I	was	unable	to	find	a	treatment	of	that	chapter’s	topic	in	that
specific	work.
SECTIONS	IN	EVANGELICAL	SYSTEMATIC	THEOLOGIES
1.			Anglican	(Episcopalian)
1882–92			Litton
1930			Thomas
2.			Arminian	(Wesleyan	or	Methodist)
1847			Finney
1875–76			Pope
1892–94			Miley
1940			Wiley
1960			Purkiser
1983			Carter
1983–			Cottrell
1987–90			Oden
3.			Baptist
1767			Gill
1887			Boyce
1907			Strong
1917			Mullins
1976–83			Henry
1983–85			Erickson
1987–94			Lewis/Demarest
4.			Dispensational
1947			Chafer
1949			Thiessen
1986			Ryrie
5.			Lutheran
1917–24			Pieper
1934			Mueller
6.			Reformed	(or	Presbyterian)
1559			Calvin
1724–58			Edwards
1861			Heppe
1871–73			Hodge
1878			Dabney
1887–1921			Warfield
1889			Shedd
1909			Bavinck
1937–66			Murray
1938			Berkhof
1962			Buswell
7.			Renewal	(or	charismatic/Pentecostal)
1988–92			Williams
SECTIONS	IN	REPRESENTATIVE	ROMAN	CATHOLIC	SYSTEMATIC	THEOLOGIES
1.			Roman	Catholic:	Traditional
1955			Ott
2.			Roman	Catholic:	Post-Vatican	II
1980			McBrien
	
OceanofPDF.com
Appendix	6:
The	
Monogenēs
	Controversy:
“Only”	or	“Only	Begotten”?
(See	
Chapter	14
,	“God	in	Three	Persons:	The	Trinity,”	especially	C.2.a,	“The
Arian	Controversy,”	in	
Chapter	12
.	See	also	the	Nicene	Creed	in	the
beginning	of	
chapter	48
.)
The	controversy	over	the	term	“only	begotten”	was	unnecessary	because	it
was	based	on	a	misunderstanding	of	the	meaning	of	the	Greek	word
monogenems	(used	of	Jesus	in	John	1:14,	18;	3:16,	18;	and	1	John	4:9).
For	many	years	it	was	thought	to	be	derived	from	two	Greek	terms:	mono,
meaning	“only,”	and	
gennaō
,	meaning	“beget”	or	“bear.”	Even	the	received
version	of	the	Nicene	Creed	understands	it	that	way,	since	the	explanatory
phrases	“
begotten
	of	the	Father	before	all	worlds”	and	“
begotten
,	not	made”
both	use	the	verb	
gennaō
	(beget)	to	explain	
monogenēs
.	But	linguistic	study
in	the	twentieth	century	has	shown	that	the	second	half	of	the	word	is	not
closely	related	to	the	verb	
gennaō
	(beget,	bear),	but	rather	to	the	term	
genos
(class,	kind).	Thus	the	word	means	rather	the	“one-of-a-kind”	Son	or	the
“unique”	Son.	(See	
BAGD
,	527;	D.	Moody,	“The	Translation	of	John	3:16	in
the	Revised	Standard	Version,”	
JBL
	72	[1953],	213–19.)	The	idea	of	“only-
begotten”	in	Greek	would	have	been,	not	
monogenēs
,	but	
monogennētos
.
However,	it	is	not	impossible	that	the	Nicene	fathers	in	A.D.	325	and	381
would	have	understood	
monogenēs
	to	include	the	idea	of	“begetting,”	since
the	word	is	used	several	times	elsewhere	to	refer	to	someone	who	is	an	“only”
child,	and	the	idea	of	begetting	could	commonly	be	assumed	to	be	present.
The	fact	that	the	word	does	not	mean	“the	only	son	that	someone	has
begotten”	can	be	confirmed	by	noticing	its	use	in	Hebrews	11:17,	where	Isaac
is	called	Abraham’s	
monogenēs
—but	certainly	Isaac	was	not	the	only	son
Abraham	had	begotten,	for	he	had	also	begotten	Ishmael.	The	term	there
means	rather	that	Isaac	was	Abraham’s	“unique”	son,	that	there	was	none
other	like	him.	(The	word	elsewhere	means	“unique”	with	no	idea	of
begetting	in	view,	in	the	LXX	in	Psalms	21[22]:20;	34[35]:17;	Wisdom	7:22;
1	Clement	25:2.)	Thus	the	NIV	translates	John	3:16,	“he	gave	his	
one	and
only
	Son,”	and	the	NASB	margin	reads	“or,	
unique
,	only	one	of	His	kind.”
The	RSV	translates,	“he	gave	his	
only
	Son.”	All	of	these	versions	have	rightly
omitted	any	idea	of	“begetting”	from	the	translation.
It	is	reassuring,	however,	to	see	that	even	though	the	early	church	had	a
misunderstanding	of	one	biblical	word,	the	rest	of	Scripture	came	to	the
defense	of	doctrinal	purity	and	prevented	the	church	from	falling	into	the
error	of	Arianism	(although	the	struggle	consumed	most	of	the	fourth	century
A.D.).
If	the	phrases	“begotten	of	the	Father	before	all	worlds”	and	“begotten,	not
made”	were	not	in	the	Nicene	Creed,	the	phrase	would	only	be	of	historical
interest	to	us	now,	and	there	would	be	no	need	to	talk	of	any	doctrine	of	the
“eternal	begetting	of	the	Son.”	But	since	the	phrase	remains	in	a	creed	that	is
still	commonly	used,	we	perpetuate	the	unfortunate	necessity	of	having	to
explain	to	every	new	generation	of	Christians	that	“begotten	of	the	Father”
has	nothing	to	do	with	any	other	English	sense	of	the	word	
beget
.	It	would
seem	more	helpful	if	the	language	of	“eternal	begetting	of	the	Son”	(also
called	the	“eternal	generation	of	the	Son”)	were	not	retained	in	any	modern
theological	formulations.	Similarly,	to	refer	to	Jesus	as	God’s	“only	begotten”
Son—language	that	derives	from	the	King	James	translation—seems	to	be
more	confusing	than	helpful.	What	is	needed	is	simply	that	we	insist	on
eternal	personal	differences
	in	the	relationship	between	Father,	Son,	and	Holy
Spirit,	and	that	the	Son	eternally	relates	to	the	Father	as	a	son	does	to	his
father.
(The	fact	that	Jesus	is	said	to	be	“born	of	God”	in	1	John	5:18	is	probably	not
a	reference	to	an	eternal	relationship,	but	rather	refers	to	the	incarnation	when
Christ	was	born	as	a	man;	compare	Acts	13:33;	Hebrews	1:5.)
Finally,	in	previous	discussions	of	what	this	“eternal	begetting”	might	have
meant,	it	has	been	suggested	that	the	Father	has	eternally	been	in	some	sense
the	source	of	the	distinctions	in	role	among	the	Father,	Son,	and	Holy	Spirit
(e.g.,	Louis	Berkhof,	
Systematic	Theology
,	93–94).	So	long	as	we	do	not
assume	that	these	personal	distinctions	had	a	beginning	at	some	point	in	time,
nothing	in	Scripture	would	seem	to	contradict	this	idea,	but	nothing	in
Scripture	would	indicate	that	we	should	affirm	it,	either.	Perhaps	there	is	no
meaningful	sense	in	which	we	should	speak	about	any	one	of	the	persons
being	a	“source”	of	these	personal	distinctions,	for	they	have	always	existed
and	are	essential	to	the	nature	of	God	himself.
	
OceanofPDF.com
Glossary
by	Jeff	Purswell
(Numbers	in	parentheses	at	the	end	of	each	entry	refer	to	chapters	and
sections	in	this	book.)
absolute	authority:	
The	highest	authority	in	one’s	life;	an	authority	that	cannot	be	disproved	by	appeal	to	any	higher
authority.	(4A.4)
accommodation:	
The	theory	that	the	biblical	writers	at	times	incidentally	affirmed	falsehoods	believed	by	the	people	of	their
time	so	as	not	to	obscure	the	larger	points	they	were	trying	to	make.	(5B.4)
active	obedience:	
A	term	referring	to	Christ’s	perfect	obedience	to	God	during	his	earthly	life	that	earned	the	righteousness
that	God	credits	to	those	who	place	their	faith	in	Christ.	(27C.1)
adoption:	
An	act	of	God	whereby	he	makes	us	members	of	his	family.	(37A)
adoptionism:	
The	false	teaching	that	Jesus	lived	as	an	ordinary	man	until	his	baptism,	at	which	time	God	“adopted”	him	as
his	“Son”	and	conferred	on	him	supernatural	powers;	this	teaching	thus	denies	Jesus’	preexistence	and	divine	nature.
(14C.2.c)
age	of	accountability:	
The	term	used	by	some	theologians	to	indicate	a	point	in	a	person’s	life	before	which	(according	to
their	view)	he	is	not	held	responsible	for	sin	and	is	not	counted	guilty	before	God.	(24D.3)
amillennialism:	The	view	that	there	will	be	no	literal	thousand-year	bodily	reign	of	Christ	on	earth	prior	to	the	final	judgment
and	the	eternal	state;	on	this	view,	scriptural	references	to	the	millennium	in	Revelation	20	actually	describe	the	present
church	age.	(55A.1)
angel:	
A	created,	spiritual	being	with	moral	judgment	and	high	intelligence,	but	without	a	physical	body.	(19A)
Angel	of	the	Lord:	
A	form	that	God	took	on	at	various	times	in	Scripture	in	order	to	appear	to	human	beings.	(19A.11)
annihilationism:	
The	teaching	that	after	death	unbelievers	suffer	the	penalty	of	God’s	wrath	for	a	time,	and	then	are
“annihilated,”	or	destroyed,	so	that	they	no	longer	exist.	Some	forms	of	this	teaching	hold	that	annihilation	occurs
immediately	upon	death.	(41C.2)
anthropomorphic	language:	
Language	that	speaks	of	God	in	human	terms.	(11A.2)
antichrist:	
The	“man	of	lawlessness”	who	will	appear	prior	to	the	second	coming	of	Christ	and	will	cause	great	suffering
and	persecution,	only	to	be	destroyed	by	Jesus.	The	term	is	also	used	to	describe	other	figures	who	embody	such	an
opposition	to	Christ	and	are	precursors	of	the	final	antichrist.	(54F.3.e)
Apocrypha:	
The	collection	of	books	included	in	the	canon	of	Scripture	by	the	Roman	Catholic	Church	but	not	included	in
the	canon	by	Protestants	(from	the	Greek	word	
apocrypha
,	“things	that	are	hidden”).	(3A)
Apollinarianism:	
The	fourth-century	heresy	which	held	that	Christ	had	a	human	body	but	not	a	human	mind	or	spirit,	and
that	the	mind	and	spirit	of	Christ	were	from	the	divine	nature	of	the	Son	of	God.	(26C.1.a)
apologetics:
	The	discipline	that	seeks	to	provide	a	defense	of	the	truthfulness	of	the	Christian	faith	for	the	purpose	of
convincing	unbelievers.	(1A.1)
apostle:	
A	recognized	office	of	the	early	church.	Apostles	are	in	several	ways	the	New	Testament	counterpart	to	the	Old
Testament	prophet	and	as	such	had	the	authority	to	write	words	of	Scripture.	(47A.1)
archangel:	
An	angel	with	authority	over	other	angels.	(19A.4)
Arianism:	
The	erroneous	doctrine	that	denies	the	full	deity	of	the	Jesus	Christ	and	the	Holy	Spirit.	(14C.2.a)
Arminianism:	
A	theological	tradition	that	seeks	to	preserve	the	free	choices	of	human	beings	and	denies	God’s	providential
control	over	the	details	of	all	events.	(16G)
ascension:	
The	rising	of	Jesus	from	the	earth	into	heaven	forty	days	after	his	resurrection.	(28B.1)
asceticism:	
An	approach	to	living	that	renounces	the	comforts	of	the	material	world.	(15D)
aseity:	
Another	name	for	the	attribute	of	God’s	independence	or	self-existence.	(11B.1)
assurance	of	salvation:	
The	internal	sense	we	may	have	based	upon	certain	evidences	in	our	lives	that	we	are	truly	“born
again”	and	will	persevere	as	Christians	until	the	end	of	our	lives.	(40D)
atonement:	
The	work	Christ	did	in	his	life	and	death	to	earn	our	salvation.	(27)
attributes	of	being:	
Aspects	of	God’s	character	that	describe	his	essential	mode	of	existence.	(12A)
attributes	of	purpose:	
Aspects	of	God’s	character	that	pertain	to	making	and	carrying	out	decisions.	(13D)
authority	of	Scripture:	
The	idea	that	all	the	words	in	Scripture	are	God’s	in	such	a	way	that	to	disbelieve	or	disobey	any
word	of	Scripture	is	to	disbelieve	or	disobey	God.	(4)
autograph:	
The	original	copy	of	a	biblical	document	(from	
auto-
,	“self,”	and	
graph
,	“writing”).	(5B.3)
baptism	by	the	Holy	Spirit:	
A	rendering	of	a	phrase	also	translated	“baptism	in/with	the	Holy	Spirit.”	The	translation	of	the
Greek	preposition	
en
	with	the	word	“by”	can	seem	to	indicate	that	the	Holy	Spirit	is	the	agent	doing	the	baptizing,	but	the
phrase	more	accurately	refers	to	the	Spirit	as	the	element	“in”	which	(or	“with”	which)	believers	are	“baptized”	at
conversion.	(39B)
baptism	in/with	the	Holy	Spirit:
	A	phrase	the	New	Testament	authors	use	to	speak	of	coming	into	the	new	covenant	power
of	the	Holy	Spirit.	This	would	include	the	impartation	of	new	spiritual	life	(in	regeneration),	cleansing	from	sin,	a	break	with
the	power	and	love	of	sin,	and	empowering	for	ministry.	(39B)
beatific	vision:	
The	true	and	real,	though	not	exhaustive,	seeing	of	God	that	will	occur	in	heaven	(lit.,	“the	vision	that	makes
blessed	or	happy”).	(12A.2)
beauty:	
That	attribute	of	God	whereby	he	is	the	sum	of	all	desirable	qualities.	(13E.19)
being	filled	with	the	Holy	Spirit:
	See	“filled	with	the	Holy	Spirit.”
being	raised	with	Christ:	
See	“raised	with	Christ.”
belief:	
In	contemporary	culture	this	term	usually	refers	to	the	acceptance	of	the	truth	of	something,	such	as	facts	about
Christ,	with	no	necessary	element	of	personal	commitment	or	dependence	involved
.	
In	the	New	Testament	this	term	often
involves	this	sense	of	commitment	(cf.	John	3:16;	see	also	“faith”).	(35A.1–3)
believable	profession	of	faith:	
A	central	component	of	the	“baptistic”	view	of	baptism,	which	holds	that	only	those	who
have	given	reasonable	evidence	of	believing	in	Christ	should	be	baptized.	(49B)
believers’	baptism:	
The	view	that	baptism	is	appropriately	administered	only	to	those	who	give	a	believable	profession	of
faith	in	Jesus	Christ.	(49B)
biblical	theology:
	The	study	of	the	teaching	of	the	individual	authors	and	sections	of	the	Bible	and	of	the	place	of	each
teaching	in	the	historical	development	of	the	Bible.	(1A.1)
“binding	and	loosing”:	
Words	of	Jesus	that	refer	to	the	actions	of	placing	under	and	releasing	from	church	discipline	(Matt.
18:17–18;	16:19).	(46B)
bishop:	
Translation	of	the	Greek	
episkopos
,	a	term	used	interchangeably	with	“pastor,”	“overseer,”	and	“elder”	to	refer	to	the
main	governing	office	of	a	local	church	in	the	New	Testament.	The	term	also	refers	to	a	priest	who	has	authority	over	a
group	of	churches	in	an	episcopalian	form	of	church	government.	(47A.2.b;	47C.1)
blameless:	
Morally	perfect	in	God’s	sight,	a	characteristic	of	those	who	follow	God’s	word	completely	(Ps.	119:1).	(8A)
blasphemy	against	the	Holy	Spirit:	
The	unusually	malicious,	willful	rejection	and	slander	against	the	Holy	Spirit’s	work
attesting	to	Christ,	and	attributing	that	work	to	Satan	(also	see	“unpardonable	sin”).	(24D.6)
blessedness:	
The	doctrine	that	God	delights	fully	in	himself	and	in	all	that	reflects	his	character.	(13E.18)
blood	of	Christ:	
A	phrase	referring	to	Christ’s	death	in	its	saving	aspects,	since	the	blood	he	shed	on	the	cross	was	the	clear
outward	evidence	that	his	life	blood	was	poured	out	when	he	died	a	sacrificial	death	to	pay	for	our	redemption.	(27C.2.c.(3))
body	of	Christ:	
A	scriptural	metaphor	for	the	church.	This	metaphor	is	used	in	two	different	ways,	one	to	stress	the
interdependence	of	the	members	of	the	body,	and	one	to	stress	Christ’s	headship	of	the	church.	(44A.4)
born	again:	
A	scriptural	term	(John	3:3–8)	referring	to	God’s	work	of	regeneration	by	which	he	imparts	new	spiritual	life	to
us.	(34A)
born	of	the	Spirit:	
Another	term	for	“regeneration”	that	indicates	the	special	role	played	by	the	Holy	Spirit	in	imparting	new
spiritual	life	to	us.	(34A)
born	of	water:	
A	phrase	used	by	Jesus	in	John	3:5	that	refers	to	the	spiritual	cleansing	from	sin	that	accompanies	God’s
work	of	regeneration	(cf.	Ezek.	36:25–26).	(34C)
Calvinism:	
A	theological	tradition	named	after	the	sixteenth-century	French	reformer	John	Calvin	(1509–64)	that
emphasizes	the	sovereignty	of	God	in	all	things,	man’s	inability	to	do	spiritual	good	before	God,	and	the	glory	of	God	as	the
highest	end	of	all	that	occurs.	(16)
canon:	
The	list	of	all	the	books	that	belong	in	the	Bible	(from	the	Greek	
kanōn
,	“reed;	measuring	rod;	standard	of	measure”).
(3)
canonical:
	A	term	describing	preserved	writings	that	are	deemed	to	have	divine	authorship	and	therefore	which	are	to	be
included	in	the	canon	of	Scripture	as	God’s	authoritative	words	in	written	form.	(3)
certain	knowledge:	
Knowledge	that	is	established	beyond	doubt	or	question.	Because	God	knows	all	the	facts	of	the
universe	and	never	lies,	the	only	absolutely	certain	knowledge	we	can	have	is	found	in	God’s	words	in	Scripture.	(3C)
cessationist:	
Someone	who	thinks	that	certain	miraculous	spiritual	gifts	ceased	when	the	apostles	died	and	Scripture	was
complete.	(17D.2;	52B)
Chalcedonian	definition:	
The	statement	produced	by	the	Council	of	Chalcedon	in	A.D.	451	that	has	been	regarded	by	most
branches	of	Christianity	as	the	orthodox	definition	of	the	biblical	teaching	on	the	person	of	Christ
.	
(26C.2)
charismatic:	
A	term	referring	to	any	groups	or	people	that	trace	their	historical	origin	to	the	charismatic	renewal	movement
of	the	1960s	and	1970s.	Such	groups	seek	to	practice	all	the	spiritual	gifts	mentioned	in	the	New	Testament	but,	unlike	many
Pentecostal	denominations,	allow	differing	viewpoints	on	whether	baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit	is	subsequent	to	conversion	and
whether	tongues	is	a	sign	of	baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit.	(39)
cherubim:
	A	class	of	created	spiritual	beings	who,	among	other	things,	guarded	the	entrance	to	the	Garden	of	Eden.
(19A.3.a)
Christian	ethics:	
Any	study	that	answers	the	question,	“What	does	God	require	us	to	do	and	what	attitudes	does	he	require
us	to	have	today?”	with	regard	to	any	given	situation.	(1A.4)
church:	
The	community	of	all	true	believers	for	all	time.	(44A.1)
circular	argument:	
An	argument	that	seeks	to	prove	its	conclusion	by	appealing	to	a	claim	that	depends	on	the	truth	of	the
conclusion.	(4A.5)
clarity	of	Scripture:	
The	idea	that	the	Bible	is	written	in	such	a	way	that	its	teachings	are	able	to	be	understood	by	all	who
will	read	it	seeking	God’s	help	and	being	willing	to	follow	it.	(6C)
classis:	
The	term	for	a	regional	governing	body	within	the	Christian	Reformed	Church	(similar	to	a	presbytery	in	a
presbyterian	system).	(47C.2)
common	grace:	
The	grace	of	God	by	which	he	gives	people	innumerable	blessings	that	are	not	part	of	salvation.	(31A)
communicable	attributes:	
Aspects	of	God’s	character	that	he	shares	or	“communicates”	with	us.	(11A.1)
communication	of	attributes:	
A	term	referring	to	the	giving	of	certain	attributes	from	Jesus’	divine	nature	to	his	human
nature	(and	vice	versa)	that	resulted	from	the	uniting	of	the	two	natures	in	one	person,	each	nature	retaining	its	respective
unique	properties.	(26C.3.e)
communion:	
A	term	commonly	used	to	refer	to	the	Lord’s	Supper.	(50C.1)
communion	of	saints:	
A	term	in	the	Apostles’	Creed	referring	to	the	fellowship	that	believers	on	earth	have	with	believers	in
heaven	by	virtue	of	a	common	worship.	(41C.1.b)
compatibilism:	
Another	term	for	the	Reformed	view	of	providence.	The	term	indicates	that	absolute	divine	sovereignty	is
compatible	with	human	significance	and	real	human	choices.	(16A)
complementarian:	
The	view	that	men	and	women	are	equal	in	value	before	God	but	that	some	governing	and	teaching	roles
in	the	church	are	reserved	for	men.	(Preface,	2;	47D)
concordist	theory:	
Another	term	for	the	day-age	theory	of	creation,	so	named	because	it	seeks	agreement	or	“concord”
between	the	Bible	and	scientific	conclusions	about	the	age	of	the	earth.	(15E.4.a.(1))
concurrence:	
An	aspect	of	God’s	providence	whereby	he	cooperates	with	created	things	in	every	action,	directing	their
distinctive	properties	to	cause	them	to	act	as	they	do.	(16B)
conditional	immortality:	
The	teaching	that	God	has	created	people	so	that	they	only	have	immortality	(the	power	to	live
forever)	if	they	accept	Christ	as	Savior.	Under	this	view,	those	who	do	not	become	Christians	will	simply	cease	to	exist	at
death	or	at	the	time	of	the	final	judgment.	(56G)
congregational	government:	
The	form	of	church	government	in	which	final	governing	authority	rests	with	the	local
congregation.	(47C)
consequent	absolute	necessity:	
The	view	that	the	atonement	was	not	absolutely	necessary,	but,	as	a	“consequence”	of	God’s
decision	to	save	some	human	beings,	the	atonement	was	absolutely	necessary.	(27B)
consistory:	
The	term	for	a	local	board	of	elders	in	the	Christian	Reformed	Church	(similar	to	a	“session”	in	a	presbyterian
system).	(47C.2)
contradiction:
	A	set	of	two	statements,	one	of	which	denies	the	other.	(1E.3)
conversion:	
Our	willing	response	to	the	gospel	call,	in	which	we	sincerely	repent	of	sins	and	place	our	trust	in	Christ	for
salvation.	(35)
cosmological	argument:	
An	argument	for	the	existence	of	God	based	on	the	observation	that,	since	every	known	thing	in
the	universe	has	a	cause,	the	universe	itself	must	also	have	a	cause,	which	can	only	be	God.	(9C)
covenant:	
An	unchangeable,	divinely	imposed	legal	agreement	between	God	and	man	that	stipulates	the	conditions	of	their
relationship.	(25)
covenant	community:	
The	community	of	God’s	people.	Protestant	proponents	of	infant	baptism	view	baptism	as	a	sign	of
entrance	into	the	“covenant	community”	of	God’s	people.	(49B.4)
covenant	of	grace:	
The	legal	agreement	between	God	and	man,	established	by	God	after	the	fall	of	Adam,	whereby	man
could	be	saved.	Although	the	specific	provisions	of	this	covenant	varied	at	different	times	during	redemptive	history,	the
essential	condition	of	requiring	faith	in	Christ	the	redeemer	remained	the	same.	(25C)
covenant	of	redemption:	
The	agreement	between	the	members	of	the	Trinity	in	which	each	agreed	to	fulfill	his	respective
role	to	accomplish	the	salvation	of	human	beings.	(25B)
covenant	of	works:	
The	legal	agreement	between	God	and	Adam	and	Eve	in	the	Garden	of	Eden	whereby	participation	in
the	blessings	of	the	covenant	depended	on	the	obedience,	or	“works,”	of	Adam	and	Eve.	(25A)
creation:	
The	doctrine	that	God	created	the	entire	universe	out	of	nothing.	The	universe	was	originally	very	good;	and	he
created	it	to	glorify	himself.	(15)
creationism:	
The	view	that	God	creates	a	new	soul	for	each	person	and	sends	it	to	that	person’s	body	sometime	between
conception	and	birth.	(23F)
Cro-Magnon	man:	
An	early	example	of	man,	believed	to	have	lived	between	9000	B.C.	and	35,000	B.C.	(15E.3.b)
Darwinian	evolution:	
The	general	theory	of	evolution	(see	also	“macro-evolution”)	named	after	Charles	Darwin,	the	British
naturalist	who	expounded	this	theory	in	1859	in	his	
Origin	of	Species	by	Means	of	Natural	Selection.	
(15E.2.c.1)
day-age	theory:	
An	“old	earth”	theory	of	creation	that	views	the	days	of	Genesis	1	as	extremely	long	“ages”	of	time.
(15E.4.a.(1)).
deacon:	
A	translation	of	the	Greek	
diakonos
	(“servant”).	In	certain	contexts	the	term	refers	to	a	church	officer	whose
responsibilities	involves	various	forms	of	service,	including	financial	oversight,	administrative	responsibilities,	and	caring
for	the	physical	needs	of	the	congregation.	(47A.3)
death:	
The	termination	of	life	brought	about	by	the	entrance	of	sin	into	the	world.	(For	the	Christian,	death	brings	us	into	the
presence	of	God	because	of	Christ’s	payment	of	the	penalty	for	our	sins.)	(41A)
decrees	of	God:	
The	eternal	plans	of	God	whereby,	before	the	creation	of	the	world,	he	determined	to	bring	about	everything
that	happens.	(2B.1;	16D)
deism:	
The	view	that	God	created	the	universe	but	is	not	now	directly	involved	in	the	creation.	(15B)
demonized:	
To	be	under	demonic	influence	(Greek	
daimonizomai
).	The	term	often	suggests	more	extreme	cases	of	demonic
influence.	(20D.3)
demon	possession:	
A	misleading	phrase	found	in	some	English	translations	of	the	Bible	that	seems	to	suggest	that	a	person’s
will	is	completely	dominated	by	a	demon.	The	Greek	term	
daimonizomai	
is	better	translated	“under	demonic	influence,”
which	could	range	from	mild	to	strong	influence	or	attack.	(20D.3)
demons:
	Evil	angels	who	sinned	against	God	and	who	now	continually	work	evil	in	the	world.	(20)
depravity:	
Another	term	for	“inherited	corruption.”	(24C.2.a)
determinism:	
The	idea	that	acts,	events,	and	decisions	are	the	inevitable	results	of	some	condition	or	decision	prior	to	them
that	is	independent	of	the	human	will.	(32C.2.d)
dichotomy:
	The	view	that	man	is	made	up	of	two	parts,	body	and	soul/spirit.	(23A)
dictation:	
The	idea	that	God	expressly	spoke	every	word	of	Scripture	to	the	human	authors.	(4A.6)
difference	in	role:	
The	idea	that	men	and	women	have	been	given	by	God	different	primary	functions	in	the	family	and	the
church.	(22C)
diocese:	
In	an	episcopalian	system	of	church	government,	the	churches	under	the	jurisdiction	of	a	bishop.	(47C.1)
dispensationalism:	
A	theological	system	that	began	in	the	nineteenth	century	with	the	writings	of	J.	N.	Darby.	Among	the
general	doctrines	of	this	system	are	the	distinction	between	Israel	and	the	church	as	two	groups	in	God’s	overall	plan,	the
pretribulational	rapture	of	the	church,	a	future	literal	fulfillment	of	Old	Testament	prophecies	concerning	Israel,	and	the
dividing	of	biblical	history	into	seven	periods,	or	“dispensations,”	of	God’s	ways	of	relating	to	his	people.	(55A.3.b)
dispensational	premillennialism:
	Another	term	for	“pretribulational	premillennialism.”	The	term	“dispensational”	is	used
because	most	proponents	of	this	view	wish	to	maintain	a	clear	distinction	between	the	church	and	Israel,	with	whom	God
deals	under	different	arrangements,	or	“dispensations.”	(55A.3.b)
distinguishing	between	spirits:	
A	special	ability	to	recognize	the	influence	of	the	Holy	Spirit	or	of	demonic	spirits	in	a
person.	(20D.4;	53G)
distortion	of	roles:	
The	idea	that	in	the	punishments	God	gave	to	Adam	and	Eve	after	their	sin,	he	did	not	introduce	new
roles	or	functions	but	simply	introduced	pain	and	distortion	into	the	functions	they	previously	had.	(22C.2.h)
docetism:	
The	heretical	teaching	that	Jesus	was	not	really	a	man	but	only	seemed	to	be	one	(from	the	Greek	verb	
dokeō
,	“to
seem,	to	appear	to	be”).	(26A.5)
doctrine:	
What	the	whole	Bible	teaches	us	today	about	some	particular	topic.	(1A.4)
dogma:	
Another	term	for	“doctrine.”	The	word	is	often	used	to	refer	more	specifically	to	doctrines	that	have	official	church
endorsement.	(1A.4)
dogmatic	theology:	
Another	term	for	“systematic	theology.”	(1A.4)
dualism:	
The	idea	that	both	God	and	the	material	universe	have	eternally	existed	side	by	side	as	two	ultimate	forces	in	the
universe.	It	implies	that	there	is	an	eternal	conflict	between	God	and	the	evil	aspects	of	the	material	universe.	(15B;	24B)
dying	with	Christ:	
A	phrase	that	describes	a	person’s	break	with	his	old	way	of	life	by	virtue	of	his	being	united	with	Christ
through	faith.	(43A.3.a)
Eastern	church:	
A	major	segment	of	the	church,	now	known	as	the	Orthodox	church,	that	separated	from	the	Western
(Roman	Catholic)	church	in	A.D.	1054.	(45E)
economic	subordination:	
The	teaching	that	certain	members	of	the	Trinity	have	roles	or	functions	that	are	subject	to	the
control	or	authority	of	other	members.	(14D.2)
effective	calling:	
An	act	of	God	the	Father,	speaking	through	the	human	proclamation	of	the	gospel,	in	which	he	summons
people	to	himself	in	such	a	way	that	they	respond	in	saving	faith.	(33A)
egalitarian:	
The	view	that	all	functions	and	roles	in	the	church	are	open	to	men	and	women	alike.	(Preface,	2;	47D)
ekklēsia
:	
A	Greek	term	translated	“church”	in	the	New	Testament.	The	word	literally	means	“assembly”	and	in	the	Bible
indicates	the	assembly	or	congregation	of	the	people	of	God.	(44A.1)
elder:	
The	main	governing	group	in	a	church	in	the	New	Testament	(Greek	
presbyteros
).	(47A.2.a)
election:	
An	act	of	God	before	creation	in	which	he	chooses	some	people	to	be	saved,	not	on	account	of	any	foreseen	merit
in	them,	but	only	because	of	his	sovereign	good	pleasure.	(32)
empowerment	for	service:	
A	primary	aspect	of	the	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	to	bring	evidence	of	God’s	presence	and	to
bless.	(30A.2)
episcopalian	government:	
A	hierarchical	form	of	church	government	in	which	bishops	have	governing	authority	over
groups	of	churches	(from	the	Greek	
episkopos,
	“overseer,”	“bishop”).	(47C.1)
equality	in	personhood:	
The	idea	that	men	and	women	are	created	equally	in	God’s	image	and	therefore	are	equally
important	to	God	and	equally	valuable	to	him.	(22B)
eschatology:	
The	study	of	“the	last	things,”	or	future	events	(from	the	Greek	
eschatos
,	“last”).	(54)
eternal	begetting	of	the	Son:	
Description	of	the	eternal	relationship	that	has	existed	within	the	Trinity	between	the	Father
and	the	Son	in	which	the	Son	has	eternally	related	to	the	Father	as	a	Son.	(14C.1.2.a)
eternal	conscious	punishment:	
A	description	of	the	nature	of	punishment	in	hell,	which	will	be	unending	and	of	which	the
unbeliever	will	be	fully	aware.	(56G)
eternal	security:	
Another	term	for	“perseverance	of	the	saints.”	However,	this	term	can	be	misunderstood	to	mean	that	all
who	have	once	made	a	profession	of	faith	are	“eternally	secure”	in	their	salvation	when	they	may	not	have	been	genuinely
converted	at	all.	(40D.3)
eternity:	
When	used	of	God,	the	doctrine	that	God	has	no	beginning,	end,	or	succession	of	moments	in	his	own	being,	and
he	sees	all	time	equally	vividly,	yet	God	sees	events	in	time	and	acts	in	time.	(11B.3)
ethics:	
See	“Christian	ethics.”
Eucharist:	
Another	term	for	the	Lord’s	Supper	(from	the	Greek	
eucharistia
,	“giving	of	thanks”).	(50C.1)
Eutychianism:	
Another	term	for	monophysitism,	named	after	the	fifth-century	monk	Eutyches.	(26C.1.c)
evangelism:	
The	proclamation	of	the	gospel	to	unbelievers	(from	the	Greek	
euangelizō
,	“to	announce	good	news”).	(44C.3;
also	48B.10)
exaltation	of	Christ:	
One	of	the	two	“states”	of	Christ,	the	other	being	humiliation.	The	state	of	exaltation	includes	four
aspects	of	his	work:	his	resurrection,	ascension	into	heaven,	session	at	the	right	hand	of	God,	and	return	in	glory	and	power.
(28C)
example	theory:	
The	view	that	in	the	atonement	Christ	did	not	bear	the	just	penalty	of	God	for	our	sins	but	that	he	simply
provided	us	with	an	example	of	how	we	should	trust	and	obey	God	perfectly,	even	if	this	leads	to	death.	(27C.2.d.(3))
excommunication:	
The	final	step	of	church	discipline	in	which	a	person	is	put	out	of	the	fellowship,	or	“communion,”	of	the
church.	(46D.1.a)
exegesis:
	The	process	of	interpreting	a	text	of	Scripture.	(6D)
ex	nihilo
:	
A	Latin	phrase	meaning	“out	of	nothing,”	referring	to	God’s	creation	of	the	universe	without	the	use	of	any
previously	existing	materials.	(15A.1)
ex	opere	operato:	
A	Latin	phrase	meaning	“by	the	work	performed.”	In	Roman	Catholic	teaching	the	phrase	is	used	to
indicate	that	the	sacraments,	such	as	baptism,	work	in	virtue	of	the	actual	activity	done	independent	of	the	subjective	attitude
of	faith	in	the	participants.	(50B.3)
exorcism:	
The	action	of	driving	out	an	evil	spirit	by	a	spoken	command.	(20D.6)
external	calling:	
The	general	gospel	invitation	offered	to	all	people	that	comes	through	human	proclamation	of	the	gospel.
Also	referred	to	as	“general	calling”	or	“the	gospel	call,”	this	call	can	be	rejected	by	people.	(33A)
extreme	unction:	
One	of	the	seven	sacraments	in	Roman	Catholic	teaching,	the	anointing	with	oil	that	is	administered	to	a
dying	person	(also	known	as	“last	rites”).	(48A)
faith:	
Trust	or	dependence	on	God	based	on	the	fact	that	we	take	him	at	his	word	and	believe	what	he	has	said.	(See	also
“saving	faith.”)	(18C.2;	also	35A.3)
faith	and	practice:	
A	term	used	by	some	people	who,	denying	the	inerrancy	of	the	Bible,	claim	that	the	Bible’s	purpose	is
only	to	tell	us	about	these	two	subjects.	(5B.1)
faithfulness:	
The	doctrine	that	God	will	always	do	what	he	has	said	and	fulfill	what	he	has	promised.	(12B.5)
fasting:	
The	discipline	of	abstaining	for	a	time	from	all	or	certain	foods.	In	the	Bible,	fasting	often	accompanies	prayer	for
the	purpose	of	intensive	intercession,	repentance,	worship,	or	the	seeking	of	guidance.	(18C.12)
fatalism:	
A	system	in	which	human	choices	and	human	decisions	make	no	real	difference	because	things	will	turn	out	as
they	have	been	previously	ordained.	This	is	in	contrast	to	the	doctrine	of	election,	in	which	people	make	real	choices	that
have	real	consequences	and	for	which	they	will	be	held	accountable.	(32C.1)
filioque
:	
Latin	for	“and	from	the	Son,”	a	term	referring	to	a	clause	inserted	into	the	Nicene	Creed	to	indicate	that	the	Holy
Spirit	proceeds	not	from	the	Father	only	but	also	from	the	Son.	The	controversy	that	arose	over	this	doctrinal	point
contributed	to	the	split	between	the	Eastern	and	Western	churches	in	A.D.	1054.	(14C.2.d)
filled	with	the	Holy	Spirit:	
An	event	subsequent	to	conversion	in	which	a	believer	experiences	a	fresh	infilling	with	the
Holy	Spirit	that	may	result	in	a	variety	of	consequences,	including	greater	love	for	God,	greater	victory	over	sin,	greater
power	for	ministry,	and	sometimes	the	receiving	of	new	spiritual	gifts.	(39D.2.c)
final	judgment:	
The	last	and	ultimate	proclamation	by	Jesus	Christ	of	the	eternal	destinies	of	all	people	which	will	take
place	after	the	millennium	and	the	rebellion	that	occurs	at	the	end	of	it.	(56A.1)
firstfruits:	
The	first	portion	of	a	ripening	harvest	(Greek	
aparchē
).	In	describing	Christ	in	his	resurrection	as	the	“firstfruits”
(1	Cor.	15:20),	the	Bible	indicates	that	our	resurrection	bodies	will	be	like	his	when	God	raises	us	from	the	dead.	(28A.4.c)
flood	geology:	
The	view	that	attributes	the	present	geological	status	of	the	earth	to	the	tremendous	natural	forces	caused	by
the	flood	of	Genesis	6–9.	(15E.4.b.(2)).
foreknowledge:	
Relating	to	the	doctrine	of	election,	the	personal,	relational	knowledge	by	which	God	thought	of	certain
people	in	a	saving	relationship	to	himself	before	creation.	This	is	to	be	distinguished	from	the	mere	knowledge	of	facts	about
a	person.	(32C.2.a)
forensic:	
A	term	that	means	“having	to	do	with	legal	proceedings.”	This	term	is	used	to	describe	justification	as	being	a	legal
declaration	by	God	that	in	itself	does	not	change	our	internal	nature	or	character.	(36A)
free	choices:	
Choices	made	according	to	our	free	will	(see	“free	will”).	(16B.9)
freedom:	
That	attribute	of	God	whereby	he	does	whatever	he	pleases.	(13D.15)
free	will:	
(a)	with	respect	to	God:	All	things	that	God	decided	to	will	but	had	no	necessity	to	will	according	to	his	nature.
(13D.14.b)
(b)	with	respect	to	man:	The	ability	to	make	willing	choices	that	have	real	effects	(however,	other	people	define	this	in	other
ways,	including	the	ability	to	make	choices	that	are	not	determined	by	God).	(16B.9)
gap	theory:	
The	idea	that	between	Genesis	1:1	and	1:2	is	a	gap	of	millions	of	years	during	which	God	judged	an	earlier
creation,	making	it	“without	form	and	void”	and	necessitating	a	second	creation	depicted	in	Genesis	1:3–2:3.	(15E.2.d)
general	assembly:	
In	a	presbyterian	form	of	church	government,	the	term	for	the	national	(or	regional)	governing	body.
(47C.2)
general	eschatology:	
The	study	of	future	events	that	will	affect	the	entire	universe,	such	as	the	second	coming	of	Christ,	the
millennium,	and	the	final	judgment.	(54)
general	redemption:	
Another	term	for	“unlimited	atonement.”	(27D)
general	revelation:	
The	knowledge	of	God’s	existence,	character,	and	moral	law	that	comes	through	creation	to	all
humanity.	(7E)
gifts	of	the	Holy	Spirit:	
All	abilities	that	are	empowered	by	the	Holy	Spirit	and	used	in	any	ministry	of	the	church.	(52A)
glorification:	
The	final	step	in	the	application	of	redemption.	It	will	happen	when	Christ	returns	and	raises	from	the	dead	the
bodies	of	all	believers	for	all	time	who	have	died,	and	reunites	them	with	their	souls,	and	changes	the	bodies	of	all	believers
who	remain	alive,	thereby	giving	all	believers	at	the	same	time	perfect	resurrection	bodies	like	his	own.	(42)
glory:	
The	created	brightness	that	surrounds	God’s	revelation	of	himself.	In	another	sense	of	the	term,	it	refers	to	God’s
honor.	(13E.20)
God:	
In	the	New	Testament,	a	translation	of	the	Greek	word	
theos,	
which	is	usually,	but	not	always,	used	to	refer	to	God	the
Father.	(26B.1.a)
God-breathed:	
A	translation	of	the	Greek	
theopneustos	
(sometimes	translated	“inspired	by	God”)
,	
which	the	Bible	(2	Tim.
3:16)	uses	metaphorically	to	describe	the	words	of	Scripture	as	being	spoken	by	God.	(4A)
goodness:	
The	doctrine	that	God	is	the	final	standard	of	good,	and	that	all	that	God	is	and	does	is	worthy	of	approval.
(12C.6)
gospel	call:	
The	general	gospel	invitation	to	all	people	that	comes	through	human	proclamation	of	the	gospel.	Also	referred
to	as	“external	calling.”	(33A)
government:	
An	aspect	of	God’s	providence	that	indicates	that	God	has	a	purpose	in	all	that	he	does	in	the	world	and
providentially	governs	or	directs	all	things	in	order	that	they	accomplish	his	purposes.	(16C)
governmental	theory:	
The	theory	that	Christ’s	death	was	not	a	payment	for	our	sins	but	God’s	demonstration	of	the	fact
that,	since	he	is	the	moral	governor	of	the	universe,	some	kind	of	penalty	must	be	paid	whenever	his	laws	are	broken.
(27C.2.e.(4))
grace:	
God’s	goodness	toward	those	who	deserve	only	punishment.	(12C.8)
Great	Commission:	
The	final	commands	of	Jesus	to	the	disciples,	recorded	in	Matthew	28:18–20.	(1C.1)
great	tribulation:	
An	expression	from	Matthew	24:21	referring	to	a	period	of	great	hardship	and	suffering	prior	to	the	return
of	Christ.	(54F.3.b;	55E)
great	white	throne	judgment:	
Another	term	for	the	final	judgment	spoken	of	in	Revelation	20:11–15.	(56A.2)
healing:	
A	gift	of	the	Holy	Spirit	that	functions	to	bring	a	restoration	to	health	as	a	foretaste	of	the	complete	freedom	from
physical	weakness	and	infirmity	that	Christ	purchased	for	us	by	his	death	and	resurrection.	(53D)
heaven:	
The	place	where	God	most	fully	makes	known	his	presence	to	bless.	It	is	in	heaven	where	God	most	fully	reveals
his	glory,	and	where	angels,	other	heavenly	creatures,	and	redeemed	saints	all	worship	him.	(57A.1)
hell:	
A	place	of	eternal	conscious	punishment	for	the	wicked.	(56G)
hermeneutics:	
The	study	of	correct	methods	of	interpreting	texts.	(6D)
hierarchical	government:	
Another	term	for	an	episcopalian	form	of	church	government	in	which	final	decision-making
authority	lies	outside	the	local	church.	(47C).
historical	theology:	
The	historical	study	of	how	Christians	in	different	periods	have	understood	various	theological	topics.
(1A.1)
historic	premillennialism:	
The	view	that	Christ	will	return	to	the	earth	after	a	period	of	great	tribulation	and	then	establish	a
millennial	kingdom.	At	this	time	believers	who	have	died	will	be	raised	from	the	dead	and	believers	who	are	alive	will
receive	glorified	resurrection	bodies,	and	both	will	reign	with	Christ	on	earth	for	a	thousand	years.	(55A.3.a)
history	of	redemption:	
The	series	of	events	throughout	history	by	which	God	acted	to	bring	about	the	salvation	of	his
people.	(3B)
holiness:	
The	doctrine	that	God	is	separated	from	sin	and	devoted	to	seeking	his	own	honor.	(12C.9)
holy	orders:	
One	of	the	seven	sacraments	in	Roman	Catholic	teaching,	the	ordination	to	the	priesthood	or	diaconate.	(48A)
Holy	Spirit:	
One	of	the	three	persons	of	the	Trinity	whose	work	it	is	to	manifest	the	active	presence	of	God	in	the	world,	and
especially	in	the	church.	(30)
homoiousios
:	
A	Greek	word	meaning	“of	a	similar	nature,”	used	by	Arius	in	the	fourth	century	to	affirm	that	Christ	was	a
supernatural	heavenly	being	but	to	deny	that	he	was	of	the	
same
	nature	as	God	the	Father.	(14C.2.a)
homoousios
:	
A	Greek	word,	meaning	“of	the	same	nature,”	which	was	included	in	the	Nicene	Creed	to	teach	that	Christ	was
of	the	exact	same	nature	as	God	the	Father	and	therefore	was	fully	divine	as	well	as	fully	human.	(14C.2.a)
homo	sapiens
:	
The	scientific	designation	for	an	early	form	of	man	(lit.,	“wise	man”),	believed	by	many	to	have	lived
sometime	between	300,000	B.C.	and	40,000	B.C.	(15E.3.b)
humiliation	of	Christ:	
One	of	the	two	“states”	of	Christ,	the	other	being	exaltation.	The	state	of	humiliation	includes	four
aspects	of	his	work:	his	incarnation,	suffering,	death,	and	burial.	(28C)
hypostatic	union:	
The	union	of	Christ’s	human	and	divine	natures	in	one	person	(from	the	Greek	
hypostasis,	
“being”).
(26C.2)
ICBI:	
International	Council	on	Biblical	Inerrancy.	This	organization	drafted	the	“Chicago	Statement	on	Biblical	Inerrancy”
in	1978	that	affirmed	the	inerrancy	of	Scripture	and	defined	what	most	evangelicals	understand	by	the	term	
inerrancy
.	(5B.2;
Appendix	1)
ideal	time	theory:	
Another	name	for	“mature	creationism.”
image	of	God:	
The	nature	of	man	such	that	he	is	like	God	and	represents	God.	(21C.1)
imago	Dei
:	
A	Latin	phrase	meaning	“image	of	God.”	(21C.1)
immanent:	
Existing	or	remaining	in.	The	term	is	used	in	theology	to	speak	of	God’s	involvement	in	creation.	(15B)
immersion:	
The	mode	of	baptism	in	the	New	Testament	in	which	the	person	is	put	completely	under	the	water	and	then
brought	back	up	again.	(49A)
imminent:	
A	term	referring	to	the	fact	that	Christ	could	return	and	might	return	at	any	time,	and	that	we	are	to	be	prepared
for	him	to	come	at	any	day.	(54F.1)
immutability:	
Another	term	for	God’s	unchangeableness.	(11B.2)
impassibility:	
The	doctrine,	often	based	on	a	misunderstanding	of	Acts	14:15,	that	God	does	not	have	passions	or	emotions.
Scripture	instead	teaches	that	God	does	have	emotions,	but	he	does	not	have	sinful	passions	or	emotions.	(11B.2.c)
impeccability:	
The	doctrine	that	Christ	was	not	able	to	sin.	(26A.4)
impute:	
To	think	of	as	belonging	to	someone,	and	therefore	to	cause	it	to	belong	to	that	person.	God	“thinks	of”	Adam’s	sin
as	belonging	to	us,	and	it	therefore	belongs	to	us,	and	in	justification	he	thinks	of	Christ’s	righteousness	as	belonging	to	us
and	so	relates	to	us	on	this	basis.	(24C.1;	36C)
incarnation:	
The	act	of	God	the	Son	whereby	he	took	to	himself	a	human	nature.	(26B)
“in	Christ”:	
A	term	referring	to	a	variety	of	relationships	between	believers	and	Christ	through	which	Christians	receive	the
benefits	of	salvation.	(43A)
incommunicable	attributes:	
Aspects	of	God’s	character	that	God	does	not	share	with	us.	(11A.1)
incomprehensible:
	Not	able	to	be	fully	understood.	As	this	applies	to	God,	it	means	that	God	cannot	be	understood	fully	or
exhaustively,	although	we	can	know	true	things	about	God.	(10B)
incorruptible:	
The	nature	of	our	future	resurrection	bodies,	which	will	be	like	Christ’s	resurrection	body	and	therefore	will
not	wear	out,	grow	old,	or	be	subject	to	any	kind	of	sickness	or	disease.	(28A.4.c)
independence:	
The	doctrine	that	God	does	not	need	us	or	the	rest	of	creation	for	anything,	yet	we	and	the	rest	of	creation
can	glorify	him	and	bring	him	joy.	(11B.1)
inerrancy:	
The	idea	that	Scripture	in	the	original	manuscripts	does	not	affirm	anything	that	is	contrary	to	fact.	(5A)
infallibility:	
The	idea	that	Scripture	is	not	able	to	lead	us	astray	in	matters	of	faith	and	practice.	(5B.1)
infant	baptism:	
See	“paedobaptism.”
infinite:
	When	used	of	God,	a	term	referring	to	the	fact	that	he	is	not	subject	to	any	of	the	limitations	of	humanity	or	of
creation	in	general.	(11B.2.e)
infinity	with	respect	to	space:	
Another	term	for	God’s	omnipresence.	(11B.4)
infinity	with	respect	to	time:
	Another	term	for	God’s	eternity.	(11B.3)
infused	righteousness:	
Righteousness	that	God	actually	puts	into	us	and	that	changes	us	internally.	The	Roman	Catholic
Church	understands	justification	to	involve	such	an	infusion,	which	differs	from	Protestantism’s	view	that	justification	is	a
legal	declaration	by	God.	(36C)
inherited	corruption:	
The	sinful	nature,	or	the	tendency	to	sin,	which	all	people	inherit	because	of	Adam’s	sin	(often
referred	to	as	“original	pollution”).	This	idea	entails	that	(1)	in	our	natures	we	totally	lack	spiritual	good	before	God;	and	(2)
in	our	actions	we	are	totally	unable	to	do	spiritual	good	before	God.	(24C.2)
inherited	guilt:	
The	idea	that	God	counts	all	people	guilty	because	of	Adam’s	sin	(often	referred	to	as	“original	guilt”).
(24C.1)
inherited	sin:	
The	guilt	and	the	tendency	to	sin	that	all	people	inherit	because	of	Adam’s	sin	(often	referred	to	as	“original
sin”).	(24C)
“in	Jesus’	name”:	
A	term	referring	to	prayer	made	on	Jesus’	authorization	and	consistent	with	his	character.	(18B.3)
inner	sense	of	God:	
An	instinctive	awareness	of	God’s	existence	that	every	human	being	has.	(9A)
inspiration:	
A	term	referring	to	the	fact	that	the	words	of	Scripture	are	spoken	by	God.	Because	of	the	weak	sense	of	this
word	in	ordinary	usage,	this	text	prefers	the	term	“God-breathed”	to	indicate	that	the	words	of	Scripture	are	spoken	by	God.
(4A.1)
intelligent	design:	
The	view	that	God	directly	created	the	world	and	its	many	life	forms,	which	stands	against	the	view	that
new	species	came	about	through	an	evolutionary	process	of	random	mutation.	(15E.2.b)
intercession:	
Jesus’	ongoing	act	of	standing	in	God’s	presence	and	making	petitions	before	him	on	our	behalf	as	our	great
high	priest.	(29B.3)	The	term	is	also	used	to	refer	to	prayers	of	request	for	ourselves	or	others.	(18)
intermediate	state:	
The	condition	or	mode	of	being	of	a	person	between	the	time	of	one’s	death	and	the	time	that	Christ
returns	to	give	believers	new	resurrection	bodies.	(41C)
internal	calling:	
Another	term	for	“effective	calling.”	(33A)
interpretation	of	tongues:	
The	gift	of	the	Holy	Spirit	by	which	the	general	meaning	of	something	spoken	in	tongues	is
reported	to	the	church.	(53E.2.e)
“in	the	Holy	Spirit”:	
The	state	of	consciously	dwelling	in	an	atmosphere	of	God’s	manifested	presence.	(30E)
invisibility:	
The	doctrine	that	God’s	total	essence,	all	of	his	spiritual	being,	will	never	be	able	to	be	seen	by	us,	yet	God	still
shows	himself	to	us	through	visible,	created	things.	(12A.2)
invisible	church:	
The	church	as	God	sees	it.	(44A.2)
“in,	with,	and	under”:	
A	phrase	descriptive	of	the	Lutheran	view	of	the	Lord’s	Supper	that	holds,	in	contrast	to	the	idea	that
the	bread	actually	becomes	the	physical	body	of	Christ,	that	the	physical	body	of	Christ	is	present	“in,	with,	and	under”	the
bread	of	the	Lord’s	Supper.	(50C.2)
irresistible	grace:	
A	term	that	refers	to	the	fact	that	God	effectively	calls	people	and	also	gives	them	regeneration,	both	of
which	guarantee	that	we	will	respond	in	saving	faith.	This	term	is	subject	to	misunderstanding	since	it	
seems
	to	imply	that
people	do	not	make	a	voluntary,	willing	choice	in	responding	to	the	gospel.	(34A)
jealousy:	
The	doctrine	that	God	continually	seeks	to	protect	his	own	honor.	(12C.12)
judgment:	
See	“final	judgment.”
judgment	of	the	nations:	
In	the	dispensational	premillennial	view,	a	judgment	that	will	come	between	the	tribulation	and
the	beginning	of	the	millennium,	during	which	time	nations	are	judged	according	to	how	they	have	treated	the	Jewish	people
during	the	tribulation.	(56A.2)
justice:	
Another	term	for	God’s	righteousness.	(12C.11)
justification:	
An	instantaneous	legal	act	of	God	in	which	he	(1)	thinks	of	our	sins	as	forgiven	and	Christ’s	righteousness	as
belonging	to	us,	and	(2)	declares	us	to	be	righteous	in	his	sight.	(36)
kenosis	theory:	
The	theory	that	Christ	gave	up	some	of	his	divine	attributes	while	he	was	on	earth	as	a	man	(from	the	Greek
verb	
kenoō
,	which	means	“to	empty”).	(26B.3)
“keys	of	the	kingdom”:	
A	phrase	used	by	Jesus	in	Matthew	16:19	referring	to	the	authority	to	preach	the	gospel	and	to
exercise	discipline	within	the	church.	(46B)
king:	
One	of	the	three	offices	fulfilled	by	Christ	in	which	he	rules	over	the	church	and	the	universe.	(29)
knowable:	
A	term	referring	to	the	fact	that	we	can	know	true	things	about	God,	and	that	we	can	know	God	himself	and	not
simply	facts	about	him.	(9A)
knowledge:	
The	doctrine	that	God	fully	knows	himself	and	all	things	actual	and	possible	in	one	simple	and	eternal	act.
(12B.3)
laying	on	of	hands:	
A	practice	that	often	accompanied	prayer	in	the	New	Testament	as	a	means	of	personal	ministry	to
individuals.	(48B.11)
likeness:	
A	term	referring	to	something	that	is	similar	but	not	identical	to	the	thing	it	represents,	such	as	man’s	being	made
after	God’s	“likeness”	(Gen.	1:26,	translating	Hebrew	
demût)	
(21C.1)
limbo:	
According	to	a	view	common	in	Roman	Catholic	theology,	the	place	where	the	souls	of	believers	who	died	before
Christ’s	resurrection	went	to	wait	for	his	work	of	redemption	to	be	complete	(from	the	Latin	
limbus
,	“border”).	(41C.1.c)
limited	atonement:	
The	Reformed	view	that	Christ’s	death	actually	paid	for	the	sins	of	those	whom	he	knew	would
ultimately	be	saved.	A	preferable	term	for	this	view	is	“particular	redemption”	in	that	the	power	of	the	atonement	is	not
limited,	but	rather	it	is	fully	effective	for	particular	people.	(27D.1)
literary	framework	theory:	
An	“old	earth”	theory	of	creation	that	views	the	six	days	of	Genesis	1,	not	as	a	chronological
sequence	of	events,	but	as	a	literary	“framework”	that	the	author	uses	to	teach	about	God’s	creative	activity.	(15E.4.a.(2)).
living	creatures:	
A	class	of	created	spiritual	beings	with	appearances	like	a	lion,	an	ox,	a	man,	and	an	eagle	who	are	said	to
worship	around	the	throne	of	God.	(19A.3.c)
logos
:	
The	Greek	term	for	“word”	by	which	the	apostle	John	refers	to	Jesus	in	John	1:1.	As	applied	to	Jesus,	the	term	implies
both	the	Old	Testament	concept	of	the	powerful,	creative	word	of	God	and	the	Greek	idea	of	the	organizing	and	unifying
principle	of	the	universe.	(26B.1.c)
Lord:	
In	the	New	Testament,	a	translation	of	the	Greek	word	
kyrios
	that	is	usually,	but	not	always,	used	to	refer	to	Christ.	In
the	Greek	translation	of	the	Old	Testament,	this	word	is	used	to	translate	the	Hebrew	
yhwh
,	the	personal	name	of	the
omnipotent	God.	(26B.1.b)
Lord’s	Supper:	
One	of	the	two	ordinances	that	Jesus	commanded	his	church	to	observe.	This	is	an	ordinance	to	be	observed
repeatedly	throughout	our	Christian	lives	as	a	sign	of	continuing	in	fellowship	with	Christ.	(50)
love:	
When	used	of	God,	the	doctrine	that	God	eternally	gives	of	himself	to	others.	(12C.7)
macro-evolution:	
The	“general	theory	of	evolution,”	or	the	view	that	all	organisms	emerged	from	nonliving	substance.
(15E.2.c.1)
major	doctrine:	
A	doctrine	that	has	a	significant	impact	on	our	thinking	about	other	doctrines,	or	that	has	a	significant
impact	on	how	we	live	the	Christian	life.	(1C.2)
manifestation	of	God’s	active	presence:	
A	description	of	the	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit,	the	member	of	the	Trinity	whom
Scripture	most	often	represents	as	being	present	to	do	God’s	work	in	the	world.	(30)
maranatha
:	
An	Aramaic	term	used	in	1	Corinthians	16:22,	meaning	“Our	Lord,	come,”	expressing	eager	longing	for
Christ’s	return.	(54B)
marks	of	the	church:	
The	distinguishing	characteristics	of	a	true	church.	In	Protestant	tradition,	these	have	usually	been
recognized	as	the	right	preaching	of	the	Word	of	God	and	the	right	administration	of	the	sacraments	(baptism	and	the	Lord’s
Supper).	(44B.1)
materialism:	
The	view	that	the	material	universe	is	all	that	exists.	(15B)
mature	creationism:	
A	“young	earth”	theory	of	creation	which	holds	that	the	original	creation	had	an	“appearance	of	age”
from	the	very	beginning.	Also	called	the	“ideal	time”	theory,	in	that	the	appearance	of	age	does	not	in	fact	indicate	any	actual
time.	(15E.4.b.(1)).
means	of	grace:	
Any	activities	within	the	fellowship	of	the	church	that	God	uses	to	give	more	grace	to	Christians.	(48A)
mediator:	
The	role	that	Jesus	plays	in	coming	between	God	and	us,	enabling	us	to	come	into	the	presence	of	God.	(18B.2)
mental	attributes:	
Aspects	of	God’s	character	that	describe	the	nature	of	his	knowing	and	reasoning.	(12B)
mercy:	
God’s	goodness	toward	those	in	misery	and	distress.	(12C.8)
Michael:	
An	archangel	who	appears	as	a	leader	in	the	angelic	army.	(19A.4)
micro-evolution:
	The	view	that	small	developments	occur	within	one	species	without	creating	new	species.	(15E.2.c.(1))
middle	knowledge:	
An	Arminian	view	of	God’s	foreknowledge	which	teaches	that,	because	God	knows	what	every	creature
would	do	in	any	given	set	of	circumstances,	he	therefore	foreknows	everything	that	happens	in	the	world	by	bringing	about
the	situations	in	which	all	creatures	act.	(16H.5.a)
midtribulation	rapture:	
A	variation	of	the	pretribulational	premillennial	view	in	which	Christ	returns	in	the	middle	of	the
seven	year	tribulation	to	rescue	believers,	and	then	again	after	the	tribulation	to	reign	on	earth	for	1,000	years.	(55A.1.3.b)
mighty	work:	
A	biblical	term	for	miracles	(translating	the	Hebrew	
gebûrāh
	and	the	Greek	
dynamis
),	indicating	an	act
displaying	great	or	divine	power.	(17A)
millennium:	
A	term	that	refers	to	the	period	of	1,000	years	mentioned	in	Revelation	20:4–5	as	the	time	of	the	reign	of	Christ
and	believers	over	the	earth	(from	Latin	
millennium
,	“thousand	years”).	(55)
minor	doctrine:	
A	doctrine	that	has	very	little	impact	on	how	we	think	about	other	doctrines,	and	that	has	very	little	impact
on	how	we	live	the	Christian	life.	(1C.2.c)
miracle:	
A	less	common	kind	of	God’s	activity	in	which	he	arouses	people’s	awe	and	wonder	and	bears	witness	to	himself.
(17A)
miraculous	gifts:	
Gifts	given	by	the	Holy	Spirit	that	are	less	common,	and	that	arouse	people’s	awe	and	wonder	and	bear
witness	to	God.	(52A.6)
modalism:	
The	heretical	teaching	that	holds	that	God	is	not	really	three	distinct	persons,	but	only	one	person	who	appears	to
people	in	different	“modes”	at	different	times.	(14C.1)
modalistic	monarchianism:	
Another	term	for	modalism.	(14C.1)
monism:
	The	view	that	man	is	only	one	element,	and	that	his	body	is	the	person.	(23A)
monophysitism:	
The	fifth-century	heresy	which	held	that	Christ	had	only	one	nature,	that	being	a	mixture	of	divine	and
human	natures	(from	the	Greek	
monos
,	“one,”	and	
physis
,	“nature”).	(26C.1.c)
monothelite	view:	
The	position	that	Jesus	had	only	one	will,	a	view	that	was	rejected	as	heretical	in	the	seventh	century.
(26C.3.a)
moral	argument:	
An	argument	for	the	existence	of	God	which	reasons	that	there	must	be	a	God	who	is	the	source	of	man’s
sense	of	right	and	wrong.	(9C)
moral	attributes:	
Aspects	of	God’s	character	that	describe	his	moral	or	ethical	nature.	(12C)
moral	influence	theory:	
The	theory	that	Christ’s	death	was	not	a	payment	for	sins,	but	simply	a	demonstration	of	how	much
God	loved	human	beings	by	identifying	with	their	sufferings,	even	to	the	point	of	death.	This	becomes,	then,	an	example
designed	to	draw	from	us	a	grateful	response.	(27C.2.e.(2))
mortal	sin:	
In	Roman	Catholic	teaching,	a	sin	that	causes	spiritual	death	and	cannot	be	forgiven.	(24D.4.b)
mutual	submission:
	A	phrase	that	proponents	of	egalitarianism	use	to	describe	the	type	of	relationship	they	believe	should
exist	between	husband	and	wife,	in	which	each	is	subject	to	the	other	in	the	same	way.	In	this	understanding	of	“mutual
submission,”	it	undermines	the	unique	authority	that	the	Bible	gives	to	the	husband	in	the	marriage	relationship.	(22C.3)
mystical	union:	
A	term	referring	to	the	union	between	the	believer	and	Christ,	the	workings	of	which	are	not	fully
understood	and	are	known	only	through	God’s	revelation	in	Scripture.	(43)
names	of	God:	
Various	descriptions	of	God’s	character	that	are	found	in	Scripture.	(11A.2)
natural	law:	
Relative	to	the	discussion	on	miracles,	any	of	the	“laws	of	nature”	or	inherent	qualities	of	the	natural	order	that
are	viewed	by	some	people	as	operating	independently	of	God.	(17A)
natural	selection:	
The	idea,	assumed	in	evolutionary	theory,	that	living	organisms	that	are	most	fitted	to	their	environment
survive	and	multiply	while	others	perish	(also	called	“survival	of	the	fittest”).	(15E.2.c.(1))
necessary	will:	
Those	things	that	God	must	will	according	to	his	own	nature.	(13D.14.b)
necessity	of	Scripture:	
The	idea	that	the	Bible	is	necessary	for	knowing	the	gospel,	for	maintaining	spiritual	life,	and	for
knowing	God’s	will,	but	is	not	necessary	for	knowing	that	God	exists	or	for	knowing	something	about	God’s	character	and
moral	laws.	(7)
neo-catastrophism:
	Another	term	for	the	flood	geology	view	of	the	geological	status	of	the	earth.	(15E.4.b.(2))
neo-orthodoxy:	
A	twentieth-century	theological	movement	represented	by	the	teachings	of	Karl	Barth.	Instead	of	the
orthodox	position	that	all	the	words	of	Scripture	were	spoken	by	God,	Barth	taught	that	the	words	of	Scripture	become	God’s
words	to	us	as	we	encounter	them
.	
(4A.2)
Nestorianism:	
A	fifth-century	heresy	that	taught	that	there	were	two	separate	persons	in	Christ,	a	human	person	and	a	divine
person.	(26C.1.b)
new	covenant:	
The	administration	of	the	covenant	of	grace	established	after	the	death	and	resurrection	of	Christ,	a	covenant
in	which	Christ’s	atoning	death	covers	all	of	the	believer’s	sins	and	the	Holy	Spirit	empowers	the	believer	to	fulfill	the
righteous	demands	of	the	law.	(25C.2)
new	covenant	experience	of	the	Holy	Spirit:	
The	more	powerful	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	in	people’s	lives	that	began	at
Pentecost	for	the	disciples	and	now	happens	at	conversion	for	believers.	(39B)
new	heavens	and	new	earth:	
A	description	of	the	entirely	renewed	creation	in	which	believers	will	dwell	after	the	final
judgment.	(57A)
New	Testament	theology:	
The	study	of	the	teaching	of	the	individual	authors	and	sections	of	the	New	Testament,	and	of	the
place	of	each	teaching	in	the	historical	development	of	the	New	Testament.	(1A.1)
nonmiraculous	gifts:	
Gifts	given	by	the	Holy	Spirit	that	are	more	common	and	appear	to	be	more	ordinary,	such	as	serving,
teaching,	encouraging,	and	doing	acts	of	mercy.	(52A.6)
“not	discerning	the	body”:	
A	phrase	used	in	1	Corinthians	11:29	of	the	Corinthians’	abuse	of	the	Lord’s	Supper.	In	their
selfish,	inconsiderate	conduct	toward	each	other	during	the	Lord’s	Supper,	they	were	not	understanding	the	unity	and
interdependence	of	people	in	the	church,	which	is	the	body	of	Christ.	(50D)
office:
	A	publicly	recognized	position	of	one	having	the	right	and	responsibility	to	perform	certain	functions	for	the	benefit
of	the	whole	church.	(47A)
officer:	
Someone	who	has	been	recognized	as	having	the	right	and	responsibility	to	perform	certain	functions	for	the	benefit
of	the	whole	church.	(47A)
old	covenant:	
A	term	referring	specifically	to	the	Mosaic	covenant	established	at	Mount	Sinai,	which	was	an	administration
of	detailed	written	laws	given	for	a	time	to	restrain	the	sins	of	the	people	and	to	be	a	custodian	to	point	people	to	Christ.
(25C.2)
old	covenant	experience	of	the	Holy	Spirit:	
The	less	powerful	and	less	extensive	work	of	the	Holy	Spirit	that	characterized
the	old	covenant	before	the	day	of	Pentecost.	(39B)
“old	earth”	theory:	
A	theory	of	creation	that	views	the	earth	as	very	old,	perhaps	as	old	as	4.5	billion	years.	(15E.3)
Old	Testament	theology:	
The	study	of	the	teaching	of	the	individual	authors	and	sections	of	the	Old	Testament,	and	of	the
place	of	each	teaching	in	the	historical	development	of	the	Old	Testament.	(1A.1)
omnipotence:	
The	doctrine	that	God	is	able	to	do	all	his	holy	will	(from	Latin	
omni
,	“all,”	and	
potens
,	“powerful”).
(13D.16)
omnipresence:	
The	doctrine	that	God	does	not	have	size	or	spatial	dimensions	and	is	present	at	every	point	of	space	with	his
whole	being,	yet	God	acts	differently	in	different	places.	(11B.4)
omniscience:	
The	doctrine	that	God	fully	knows	himself	and	all	things	actual	and	possible	in	one	simple	and	eternal	act.
(12B.3)
one	simple	and	eternal	act:	
A	term	referring	to	an	aspect	of	God’s	knowledge	whereby	he	is	always	fully	aware	of
everything	and	his	knowledge	never	changes	or	grows.	(12B.3)
only	begotten:	
A	mistranslation	of	the	Greek	word	
monogenēs	
(John	3:16	et	al.),	which	actually	means	“unique”	or	“one	of
a	kind.”	The	Arians	used	this	word	to	deny	Christ’s	deity,	but	the	rest	of	the	church	understood	it	to	mean	that	the	Son
eternally	related	as	a	son	to	the	Father.	(14C.2.a)
ontological	argument:	
An	argument	for	the	existence	of	God	that	begins	with	the	idea	of	God	as	the	greatest	of	beings	that
can	be	imagined.	As	such,	the	characteristic	of	existence	must	belong	to	such	a	being,	since	it	is	greater	to	exist	than	not	to
exist.	(9C)
ontological	equality:	
A	phrase	that	describes	the	members	of	the	Trinity	as	eternally	equal	in	being	or	existence.	(14D.2)
order:	
Another	term	for	God’s	peace.	(12C.10)
order	of	salvation:	
A	theological	term	referring	to	a	list	of	the	events	in	which	God	applies	salvation	to	us	in	the	specific
order	in	which	they	are	believed	to	occur	in	our	lives	(sometimes	referred	to	by	the	Latin	phrase	
ordo	salutis
).	(32)
ordinance:	
A	term	commonly	used	by	Baptists	to	refer	to	baptism	and	the	Lord’s	Supper;	other	Protestants	such	as	those	in
Lutheran,	Reformed,	and	Anglican	churches	have	preferred	the	word	“sacrament”	for	these	ceremonies.	(See	also
“sacrament.”)	(49)
original	guilt:	
Another	term	for	“inherited	guilt.”	(24C.1)
original	pollution:
	Another	term	for	our	inherited	sinful	nature	(see	“inherited	corruption”).	(24C.2)
original	sin:	
The	traditional	term	for	the	doctrine	referred	to	in	this	text	as	“inherited	sin.”	(24C)
overseer:	
A	translation	of	the	Greek	
episkopos
,	a	term	used	interchangeably	with	“overseer,”	“pastor,”	and	“elder”	to	refer	to
the	main	governing	office	of	a	local	church	in	the	New	Testament.	(47A.2.b)
paedobaptism:	
The	practice	of	baptizing	infants	(the	prefix	“paido-”	is	derived	from	the	Greek	
pais
,	“child”)
.	
(49B.4)
pantheism:	
The	idea	that	the	whole	universe	is	God	or	part	of	God.	(15B)
paradox:	
A	seemingly	contradictory	statement	that	may	nonetheless	be	true;	an	apparent	but	not	real	contradiction.	(1D.3)
parousia:	
The	second	coming	of	Christ	(from	the	Greek	
parousia
,	“coming”).	(54A)
particular	redemption:	
Another,	more	preferable	term	for	the	Reformed	doctrine	of	“limited	atonement.”	(27D.1)
pastor:	
A	term	used	interchangeably	with	“elder,”	“overseer,”	and	“bishop”	to	refer	to	the	main	governing	office	of	a	local
church	in	the	New	Testament.	Translating	the	Greek	
poimēn
,	the	term	identifies	the	shepherding	task	with	the	office	of	elder.
(47A.2.b)
passive	obedience:
	A	term	referring	to	Christ’s	sufferings	for	us	in	which	he	took	the	penalty	due	for	our	sins	and	as	a	result
died	for	our	sins.	(27C.2)
patience:	
God’s	goodness	in	withholding	of	punishment	toward	those	who	sin	over	a	period	of	time.	(12C.8)
peace:	
The	doctrine	that	God	is	separate	from	all	confusion	and	disorder	in	his	being	and	in	his	actions,	yet	he	is	continually
active	in	innumerable	well-ordered,	fully	controlled,	simultaneous	actions.	(12C.10)
Pelagius:	
A	fifth-century	monk	who	taught	(Pelagianism)	that	man	has	the	ability	to	obey	God’s	commands	and	can	take	the
first	and	most	important	steps	toward	salvation	on	his	own.	(24D.2)
penal	substitution:	
The	view	that	Christ	in	his	death	bore	the	just	penalty	of	God	for	our	sins	as	a	substitute	for	us.	(27C.2.c.
(4))
Pentecost:	
A	Jewish	feast	during	which,	following	the	ascension	of	Jesus,	the	Holy	Spirit	was	poured	out	in	new	covenant
fullness	and	power	on	the	disciples.	This	day	marked	the	point	of	transition	between	the	old	covenant	work	and	ministry	of
the	Holy	Spirit	and	the	new	covenant	work	and	ministry	of	the	Holy	Spirit.	(39B)
pentecostal:	
Any	denomination	or	group	that	traces	its	historical	origin	to	the	Pentecostal	revival	that	began	in	the	United
States	in	1901	and	that	holds	to	the	doctrinal	positions	(a)	that	baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit	is	ordinarily	an	event	subsequent	to
conversion,	(b)	that	baptism	in	the	Holy	Spirit	is	made	evident	by	the	sign	of	speaking	in	tongues,	and	(c)	that	all	the	spiritual
gifts	mentioned	in	the	New	Testament	are	to	be	sought	and	used	today.	(39)
perfection:	
The	doctrine	that	God	completely	possesses	all	excellent	qualities	and	lacks	no	part	of	any	qualities	that	would
be	desirable	for	him.	(13E.17)
perfectionism:	
The	view	that	sinless	perfection,	or	freedom	from	conscious	sin,	is	possible	in	this	life	for	the	Christian.
(38B.4)
perseverance	of	the	saints:	
The	doctrine	that	all	those	who	are	truly	“born	again”	will	be	kept	by	God’s	power	and	will
persevere	as	Christians	until	the	end	of	their	lives,	and	that	only	those	who	persevere	until	the	end	have	been	truly	“born
again.”	(40)
personal	address:	
A	form	of	God’s	word	in	which	he	speaks	directly	to	people	on	earth.	(2B.2)
personal	eschatology:	
The	study	of	future	events	that	will	happen	to	individuals,	such	as	death,	the	intermediate	state,	and
glorification.	(54)
perspicuity:	
An	older	term	for	the	clarity	of	Scripture.	(6C)
philosophical	theology:	
The	study	of	theological	topics	that	primarily	employs	the	tools	and	methods	of	philosophical
reasoning	and	what	can	be	known	about	God	from	observing	the	universe.	(1A.1)
pictorial-day	theory:	
Another	term	for	the	literary	framework	view	of	Genesis	1.	(15E.4.a.(2))
plenary	inspiration:	
The	idea	that	all	the	words	of	Scripture	are	God’s	words,	
plenary
	meaning	“full.”	(4A.1)
postmillennialism:
	The	view	that	Christ	will	return	to	the	earth	after	the	millennium.	In	this	view,	the	millennium	is	an	age
of	peace	and	righteousness	on	the	earth,	brought	about	by	the	progress	of	the	gospel	and	the	growth	of	the	church.	(55A.2)
posttribulational	premillennialism:	
Another	term	for	historic	premillennialism	(or	“classic	premillennialism”).	This	is
distinguished	from	other	premillennial	views	by	the	idea	that	Christ	will	return	after	the	great	tribulation.	(55A.3.a)
posttribulational	rapture:	
The	“taking	up”	of	believers	after	the	great	tribulation	to	be	with	Christ	just	a	few	moments	prior
to	his	coming	to	earth	with	them	to	reign	during	the	millennial	kingdom	(or,	on	the	amillennial	view,	during	the	eternal
state).	(55E)
power:	
Another	term	for	God’s	omnipotence.	(13D.16)
power	of	the	church:	
The	church’s	God-given	authority	to	carry	on	spiritual	warfare,	proclaim	the	gospel,	and	exercise
church	discipline.	(46)
prayer:	
Personal	communication	with	God.	(18)
predestination:	
Another	term	for	“election”;	in	Reformed	theology	generally,	this	is	a	broader	term	that	includes	not	only
election	(for	believers),	but	also	reprobation	(for	nonbelievers).	(32)
premillennialism:	
A	term	that	includes	a	variety	of	views	having	in	common	the	belief	that	Christ	will	return	to	the	earth
before	the	millennium.	(55A.3)
presbyterian	government:	
A	form	of	church	government	in	which	elders	govern	their	respective	local	churches,	and	some
elders,	through	a	presbytery	and	general	assembly,	govern	churches	in	a	region	and	the	denomination	as	a	whole.	(47C.2)
presbytery:
	A	group	of	elders	drawn	from	several	churches	in	a	region	and	having	governing	authority	over	those	churches.
(See	also	“classis.”)	(47C.2)
preservation:	
An	aspect	of	God’s	providence	whereby	he	keeps	all	created	things	existing	and	maintaining	the	properties
with	which	he	created	them.	(16A)
presupposition:
	An	assumption	that	forms	the	beginning	point	of	any	study.	(1B)
pretribulation	rapture:	
The	“taking	up”	of	believers	into	heaven	secretly	during	Christ’s	first	return	prior	to	the	great
tribulation.	(55E)
pretribulational	premillennialism:	
The	view	that	Christ	will	return	secretly	before	the	great	tribulation	to	call	believers	to
himself,	and	then	again	after	the	tribulation	to	reign	on	earth	for	1,000	years.	(55A.3.b)
priest:	
A	person	appointed	by	God	in	the	Old	Testament	to	offer	sacrifices,	prayers,	and	praises	to	God	on	behalf	of	the
people.	This	office	was	fulfilled	by	Christ,	who	has	become	the	great	high	priest	for	all	believers.	The	term	can	also	refer	to	a
category	of	church	officers	in	both	Roman	Catholic	and	Anglican	churches,	though	they	each	attach	different	meanings	to
the	word	“priest.”	(29;	47C)
primary	cause:
	The	divine,	invisible,	directing	cause	of	everything	that	happens.	(16B.4)
primogeniture:	
The	Old	Testament	practice	in	which	the	firstborn	in	any	generation	in	a	human	family	has	leadership	in	the
family	for	that	generation.	(22C.2.a)
principalities	and	powers:	
Other	names	for	demonic	powers	in	some	verses	of	the	Bible.
progressive	creationism:	
An	“old	earth”	theory	which	holds	that	God	created	new	types	of	plant	and	animal	creatures	at
several	different	points	of	time	in	the	earth’s	history,	and	between	those	points,	plant	and	animal	life	developed	more
diversity	on	its	own.
prophecy	
(as	a	spiritual	gift	in	the	New	Testament):	The	New	Testament	gift	of	the	Holy	Spirit	that	involves	telling
something	that	God	has	spontaneously	brought	to	mind.	(53A)
prophet:	
One	of	the	offices	fulfilled	by	Christ,	the	office	by	which	he	most	fully	reveals	God	to	us	and	speaks	to	us	the
words	of	God.	(29A)
propitiation:	
A	sacrifice	that	bears	God’s	wrath	to	the	end	and	in	so	doing	changes	God’s	wrath	toward	us	into	favor.
(27C.2.b.(4))
providence:	
The	doctrine	that	God	is	continually	involved	with	all	created	things	in	such	a	way	that	he	(1)	keeps	them
existing	and	maintaining	the	properties	with	which	he	created	them;	(2)	cooperates	with	created	things	in	every	action,
directing	their	distinctive	properties	to	cause	them	to	act	as	they	do;	and	(3)	directs	them	to	fulfill	his	purposes.	(16)
purgatory:	
In	Roman	Catholic	doctrine,	the	place	where	the	souls	of	believers	go	to	be	further	purified	from	sin	until	they
are	ready	to	be	admitted	into	heaven.	(41C.1.a)
purity	of	the	church:	
The	church’s	degree	of	freedom	from	wrong	doctrine	and	conduct,	and	its	degree	of	conformity	to
God’s	revealed	will	for	the	church.	(45B)
raised	in	glory:	
A	phrase	describing	our	future	resurrection	bodies,	which	will	exhibit	a	beauty	and	radiance	appropriate	to
the	position	of	exaltation	and	rule	over	creation	that	God	will	give	us	after	the	manner	of	Christ.	(28A.4.c;	also	42C)
raised	in	power:	
A	phrase	describing	our	future	resurrection	bodies,	which	will	exhibit	the	fullness	of	strength	and	power
that	God	intended	human	beings	to	have	in	their	bodies	when	he	created	them.	(28A.2;	also	42C)
raised	with	Christ:	
A	phrase	that	describes	the	aspect	of	union	with	Christ	by	which	a	person	receives	new	spiritual	life	and
a	change	in	his	character	and	personality	after	coming	to	faith.	(43A.3.a)
random	mutation:	
The	view	that	various	life	forms	resulted	from	an	evolutionary	process	in	which	random	differences
occurred	when	cells	reproduced	themselves.	(15E.2.b)
ransom	to	Satan	theory:	
The	view	that	in	the	atonement	Christ	paid	a	ransom	to	Satan	to	redeem	us	out	of	his	kingdom.
(27C.2.e.(1))
rapture:	
The	“taking	up”	or	snatching	up	(from	Latin
	rapio
,	“seize,	snatch,	carry	away”)	of	believers	to	be	with	Christ	when
he	returns	to	the	earth.	(55A.3.b;	also	55E)
reconciliation:	
The	removal	of	enmity	and	the	restoration	of	fellowship	between	two	parties.	(27C.2.d.(3)).
rector:	
The	officer	in	charge	of	a	local	parish	in	an	episcopalian	system	of	church	government.	(47C.1)
redemption:	
Christ’s	saving	work	viewed	as	an	act	of	“buying	back”	sinners	out	of	their	bondage	to	sin	and	to	Satan	through
the	payment	of	a	ransom	(though	the	analogy	should	not	be	pressed	to	specify	anyone	to	whom	a	ransom	was	paid).
(27C.2.d.(4))
Reformed:	
Another	term	for	the	theological	tradition	known	as	Calvinism.	(16)
regeneration:	
A	secret	act	of	God	in	which	he	imparts	new	spiritual	life	to	us;	sometimes	called	“being	born	again.”	(34)
repentance:	
A	heartfelt	sorrow	for	sin,	a	renouncing	of	it,	and	a	sincere	commitment	to	forsake	it	and	walk	in	obedience	to
Christ.	(35B)
reprobation:	
The	sovereign	decision	of	God	before	creation	to	pass	over	some	persons,	in	sorrow	deciding	not	to	save	them,
and	to	punish	them	for	their	sins	and	thereby	to	manifest	his	justice.	(32E)
resurrection:	
A	rising	from	the	dead	into	a	new	kind	of	life	not	subject	to	sickness,	aging,	deterioration,	or	death.	(28A)
revealed	will:	
God’s	declared	will	concerning	what	we	should	do	or	what	God	commands	us	to	do.	(13D.14.b.2)
righteousness:	
The	doctrine	that	God	always	acts	in	accordance	with	what	is	right	and	that	he	is	himself	the	final	standard	of
what	is	right.	(12C.11)
Sabellianism:	
Another	name	for	modalism,	a	term	derived	from	the	third-century	teacher	Sabellius,	who	propagated	this
doctrine.	(14C.1)
sacrament:	
In	Protestant	teaching,	a	ceremony	or	rite	that	the	church	observes	as	a	sign	of	God’s	grace	and	as	one	means	by
which	those	who	are	already	justified	receive	God’s	continuing	grace	in	their	lives.	The	two	Protestant	sacraments	are
baptism	and	the	Lord’s	Supper.	In	Roman	Catholic	teaching,	there	are	seven	sacraments,	and	they	are	understood	as	a
necessary	means	of	conveying	saving	grace.	(See	also	“ordinance.”)	(48A;	49)
sacrifice:	
Christ’s	death	on	the	cross	viewed	from	the	standpoint	that	he	paid	the	penalty	that	we	deserved.	(27C.2.d.(1))
sanctification:	
A	progressive	work	of	God	and	man	that	makes	us	more	and	more	free	from	sin	and	more	like	Christ	in	our
actual	lives.	(38)
Satan:	
The	personal	name	of	the	head	of	the	demons.	(20B)
saving	faith:	
Trust	in	Jesus	Christ	as	a	living	person	for	forgiveness	of	sins	and	for	eternal	life	with	God.	(35A.3)
Scripture:
	The	writings	(Greek	
graphē
,	rendered	in	Latin	by	
scriptura
)	of	the	Old	and	New	Testaments,	which	have
historically	been	recognized	as	God’s	words	in	written	form.	Another	term	for	the	Bible.	(4A)
secondary	cause:	
The	properties	and	actions	of	created	things	that	bring	about	events	in	the	world.	(16B.4)
second	coming	of	Christ:	
The	sudden,	personal,	visible,	bodily	return	of	Christ	from	heaven	to	earth.	(54A)
secret	will:	
God’s	hidden	decrees	by	which	he	governs	the	universe	and	determines	everything	that	will	happen.
(13D.14.b.2)
self-attesting:	
The	self-authenticating	nature	of	the	Bible	by	which	it	convinces	us	that	its	words	are	God’s	words.	(4A.4)
self-existence:	
Another	term	for	God’s	independence.	(11B.1)
separation:	
With	reference	to	the	church,	the	act	of	formal	division	of	one	group	from	another	on	the	basis	of	doctrinal
differences,	matters	of	conscience,	or	practical	considerations.	Such	separation	can	take	more	severe	forms,	such	as	the
refusal	to	cooperate	or	the	avoidance	of	personal	fellowship.	(45E-F)
seraphim:
	A	class	of	created	spiritual	beings	that	are	said	to	continually	worship	God.	(19A.3.b)
session:	
The	“sitting	down”	of	Christ	at	God’s	right	hand	after	his	ascension,	indicating	that	his	work	of	redemption	was
complete	and	that	he	received	authority	over	the	universe.	The	term	can	also	refer	to	the	group	of	elders	with	governing
authority	over	a	local	church	in	a	presbyterian	form	of	church	government	(28B.3;	47C.2)
sign:	
A	biblical	term	for	miracles	(translating	the	Hebrew	
’
ôth	
and	the	Greek	
sēmeion),	
specifically	meaning	something	that
points	to	or	indicates	something	else,	especially	God’s	activity	and	power.	(17A)
“signs	of	an	apostle”:	
A	phrase	used	by	the	apostle	Paul	in	2	Corinthians	12:12	that	refers	to	those	various	things	that
distinguished	him	as	a	true	apostle	from	others	who	were	false	apostles.	Some	who	deny	the	continuation	of	miracles	today
use	this	phrase	to	contend	that	miracles	were	uniquely	the	signs	that	distinguished	apostles	from	ordinary	Christians.	(17D.2)
simplicity:	
Another	term	for	the	unity	of	God.	(11B.5)
sin:	
Any	failure	to	conform	to	the	moral	law	of	God	in	act,	attitude,	or	nature.	(24A)
sinless	perfection:	
The	state	of	being	totally	free	from	sin;	some	hold	that	such	a	state	is	possible	in	this	life.	(See	also
“perfectionism.”)	(38B.4)
Son	of	God:	
A	title	often	used	of	Jesus	to	designate	him	as	the	heavenly,	eternal	Son	who	is	equal	in	nature	to	God	himself.
(26B.1.c)
Son	of	Man:	
The	term	by	which	Jesus	referred	to	himself	most	often,	which	had	an	Old	Testament	background,	especially	in
the	heavenly	figure	who	was	given	eternal	rule	over	the	world	in	the	vision	in	Daniel	7:13.	(26B.1.c)
sons	of	God:
	Another	name	for	angels	(Job	1:6;	2:1).	(19A.2)
soul:	
The	immaterial	part	of	man;	used	interchangeably	with	“spirit.”	(23B.1)
soul	sleep:	
The	doctrine	that	believers	go	into	a	state	of	unconscious	existence	when	they	die,	and	that	they	return	to
consciousness	when	Christ	returns	and	raises	them	to	eternal	life.	(41C.1.b)
sovereignty:	
God’s	exercise	of	power	over	his	creation.	(13D.16)
speaking	in	tongues:	
Prayer	or	praise	spoken	in	syllables	not	understood	by	the	speaker.	(53E.2)
special	grace:	
The	grace	of	God	that	brings	people	to	salvation;	also	known	as	“saving	grace.”	(31A)
special	revelation:	
God’s	words	addressed	to	specific	people,	including	the	words	of	the	Bible.	This	is	to	be	distinguished
from	general	revelation,	which	is	given	to	all	people	generally.	(7E)
spirit:	
The	immaterial	part	of	man,	a	term	used	interchangeably	with	“soul.”	(23B.1)
spiritual	body:	
The	type	of	body	we	will	receive	at	our	future	resurrection,	which	will	not	be	“immaterial”	but	rather	suited
to	and	responsive	to	the	guidance	of	the	Holy	Spirit.	(28A.2;	42C)
spirituality:	
The	doctrine	that	God	exists	as	a	being	that	is	not	made	of	any	matter,	has	no	parts	or	dimensions,	is	unable	to
be	perceived	by	our	bodily	senses,	and	is	more	excellent	than	any	other	kind	of	existence.	(12A.1)
spiritual	presence:	
A	phrase	descriptive	of	the	Reformed	view	of	the	Lord’s	Supper	that	regards	Christ	as	spiritually	present
in	a	special	way	as	we	partake	of	the	bread	and	wine
.	
(50C.3)
states	of	Jesus	Christ:	
The	different	relationships	Jesus	had	to	God’s	law,	to	the	possession	of	authority,	and	to	receiving
honor	for	himself,	during	the	various	stages	in	his	work.	The	two	states	of	Jesus	Christ	are	humiliation	and	exaltation.	(28C)
subordinationism:	
The	heretical	teaching	that	the	Son	was	inferior	or	“subordinate”	in	being	to	God	the	Father.	(14C.2.b)
sufficiency	of	Scripture:	
The	idea	that	Scripture	contained	all	the	words	of	God	he	intended	his	people	to	have	at	each	stage
of	redemptive	history,	and	that	it	now	contains	all	the	words	of	God	we	need	for	salvation,	for	trusting	him	perfectly,	and	for
obeying	him	perfectly.	(8A)
summary	attributes:	
God’s	attributes	of	perfection,	blessedness,	beauty,	and	glory,	which	are	called	“summary”	attributes	in
this	book	because	they	have	to	do	with	looking	at	and	evaluating	all	the	other	attributes	of	God	considered	together	as	a
whole.
symbolic	presence:	
The	common	Protestant	view	that	the	bread	and	wine	of	the	Lord’s	Supper	symbolize	the	body	and
blood	of	Christ,	rather	than	change	into	or	somehow	contain	the	body	and	blood	of	Christ.	(50C.3)
synod:	
A	national	governing	assembly	of	a	denomination	(sometimes	called	a	general	assembly).	(47C.2)
systematic	theology:	
Any	study	that	answers	the	question,	“What	does	the	whole	Bible	teach	us	today?”	about	any	given
topic.	(1A)
teaching:	
In	the	New	Testament,	the	ability	to	explain	Scripture	and	apply	it	to	people’s	lives.	(53B)
teleological	argument:	
An	argument	for	the	existence	of	God	which	reasons	that,	since	the	universe	exhibits	evidence	of
order	and	design,	there	must	be	an	intelligent	and	purposeful	God	who	created	it	to	function	in	this	way.	(9C)
temporary	blessings:	
Influences	of	the	Holy	Spirit	and	the	church	that	make	unbelievers	look	or	sound	like	genuine
believers	when	in	fact	they	are	not.	(40C)
textual	variants:	
Occurrences	of	different	words	in	different	ancient	copies	of	the	same	verse	of	Scripture.	(5B.3)
theistic	evolution:	
The	theory	that	God	used	the	process	of	evolution	to	bring	about	all	of	the	life	forms	on	earth.	(15E.2.b)
theophany:	
An	“appearance	of	God”	in	which	he	takes	on	a	visible	form	to	show	himself	to	people.	(12A.2)
total	depravity:	
The	traditional	term	for	the	doctrine	referred	to	in	this	text	as	“total	inability.”	(24C.2.a)
total	inability:	
Man’s	total	lack	of	spiritual	good	and	inability	to	do	good	before	God	(often	referred	to	as	“total	depravity”).
(24C.2.a)
traducianism:	
The	view	that	the	soul	of	a	child	is	inherited	from	the	baby’s	mother	and	father	at	the	time	of	conception.
(23F).
transcendent:	
The	term	used	to	describe	God	as	being	greater	than	the	creation	and	independent	of	it.	(15B)
transitional	types:
	Fossils	showing	some	characteristics	of	one	animal	and	some	of	the	next	developmental	type,	which,	if
found,	would	provide	evidence	for	evolutionary	theory	by	filling	in	the	gaps	between	distinct	kinds	of	animals.	(15E.2.c)
transubstantiation:
	The	Roman	Catholic	teaching	that	the	bread	and	wine	of	the	Lord’s	Supper	(often	referred	to	as	“the
eucharist”)	actually	become	the	body	and	blood	of	Christ.	(50C.1)
trichotomy:	
The	view	that	man	is	made	up	of	three	parts:	body,	soul,	and	spirit.	(23C)
Trinity:	
The	doctrine	that	God	eternally	exists	as	three	persons—Father,	Son,	and	Holy	Spirit—and	each	person	is	fully
God,	and	there	is	one	God.	(14)
tritheism:	
The	belief	that	there	are	three	gods.	(14C.3)
trust:	
An	aspect	of	biblical	faith	or	belief	in	which	we	not	only	know	and	agree	with	facts	about	Jesus,	but	also	place
personal	trust	in	him	as	a	living	person.	(35A.3)
truthfulness:	
The	doctrine	that	God	is	the	true	God	and	that	all	his	knowledge	and	words	are	both	true	and	the	final	standard
of	truth.	(12B.5)
twenty-four-hour	day	theory:	
The	view	that	the	six	“days”	of	creation	in	Genesis	1	are	to	be	understood	as	literal	twenty-
four-hour	days.	(15E.3.e)
two-class	Christianity:	
A	view	of	the	church	that	divides	it	into	two	categories	of	believers,	such	as	ordinary	believers
versus	“sanctified”	believers,	or	ordinary	believers	versus	Spirit-baptized	believers.	(39D.1)
ubiquity	of	Christ’s	human	nature:	
The	teaching,	put	forth	by	Martin	Luther	in	support	of	his	view	of	the	Lord’s	Supper,
that	Christ’s	human	nature	was	present	everywhere	(“ubiquitous”)	after	his	ascension.	(50C.2)
unchangeableness:	
The	doctrine	that	God	is	unchanging	in	his	being,	perfections,	purposes,	and	promises,	yet	he	does	act
and	feel	emotions,	and	he	acts	and	feels	differently	in	response	to	different	situations.	(11B.2)
union	with	Christ:
	A	phrase	that	summarizes	several	different	relationships	between	believers	and	Christ,	through	which
Christians	receive	every	benefit	of	salvation.	These	relationships	include	the	fact	that	we	are	in	Christ,	Christ	is	in	us,	we	are
like	Christ,	and	we	are	with	Christ.	(43)
unity:	
The	doctrine	that	God	is	not	divided	into	parts,	yet	we	see	different	attributes	of	God	emphasized	at	different	times.
(11B.5)
unity	of	the	church:
	The	church’s	degree	of	freedom	from	divisions	among	true	Christians.	(45B)
universalism:
	The	doctrine	that	all	people	will	ultimately	be	saved.	(56G)
unlimited	atonement:
	The	view	that	Christ’s	death	actually	paid	for	the	sins	of	all	people	who	ever	lived.	(27D)
unpardonable	sin:	
The	unusually	malicious,	willful	rejection	and	slander	against	the	Holy	Spirit’s	work	attesting	to	Christ,
and	attributing	that	work	to	Satan.	(24D.6)
valid	proofs:	
Arguments	for	the	existence	of	God	that	are	based	on	facts	and	that	correctly	reason	to	a	true	conclusion.	No
such	proofs,	however,	are	able	to	compel	agreement	from	everyone	who	considers	them.	(9C)
venial	sin:	
In	Roman	Catholic	teaching,	a	sin	that	can	be	forgiven,	although	perhaps	after	punishments	in	this	life	or	in
purgatory.	(24D.4.b)
veracity:	
Another	term	for	God’s	truthfulness.	(12B.5)
vicar:
	In	an	episcopalian	system	of	church	government,	a	church	officer	in	charge	of	a	local	parish	and	acting	in	place	of	a
rector.	(47C.1)
vicarious	atonement:	
The	work	Christ	did	to	earn	our	salvation	by	standing	in	our	place	in	his	life	and	death.	(27C.2.c.(4))
virgin	birth:	
The	biblical	teaching	that	Jesus	was	conceived	in	the	womb	of	his	mother	Mary	by	a	miraculous	work	of	the
Holy	Spirit	and	without	a	human	father.	(26A.1)
visible	church:	
The	church	as	Christians	on	earth	see	it.	Because	only	God	sees	our	hearts,	the	visible	church	will	always
include	some	unbelievers.	(44A.2)
voluntary	choices:	
Choices	that	are	made	in	accord	with	our	desires,	with	no	awareness	of	restraints	on	our	will	or
compulsion	against	our	will.	(16H.3)
waiting	on	the	Lord:	
A	posture	of	the	heart	during	prayer	in	which	we	wait	quietly	before	God	for	some	sense	of	guidance
in	our	prayer,	and	also	for	an	assurance	of	God’s	presence	and	of	his	answer	to	our	prayer.	(18C.9)
watchers:	
Another	name	for	angels	(Dan.	4:13,	17,	23).	(19A.2)
Western	church:	
A	term	referring	to	the	Roman	Catholic	Church,	from	which	the	Eastern	(Orthodox)	church	separated	in
A.D.	1054.	Later,	the	Western	church	split	into	Protestant	and	Roman	Catholic	branches.	(45E)
will:	
The	attribute	of	God	whereby	he	approves	and	determines	to	bring	about	every	action	necessary	for	the	existence	and
activity	of	himself	and	all	creation.	(13D.14)
willing	choices:	
Choices	that	are	made	in	accord	with	our	desires,	with	no	awareness	of	restraints	on	our	will.	(16B.9).
wisdom:	
The	doctrine	that	God	always	chooses	the	best	goals	and	the	best	means	to	those	goals.	(12B.4)
wonder:	
A	biblical	word	for	miracles	(translating	the	Hebrew	
môpēth	
and	the	Greek
	teras
),	specifically	referring	to	an	event
that	causes	people	to	be	amazed	or	astonished.	(17A)
Word	of	God:	
A	phrase	that	refers	to	several	different	things	in	the	Bible,	including	the	Son	of	God,	the	decrees	of	God,
God’s	words	of	personal	address,	God’s	words	spoken	through	human	lips,	and	God’s	words	in	written	form,	the	Bible.	It	is
this	last	form	of	the	Word	of	God	that	is	the	focus	of	systematic	theology,	since	it	is	the	form	that	is	available	for	study,	for
public	inspection,	for	repeated	examination,	and	as	a	basis	for	mutual	discussion.	(2)
word	of	knowledge:	
The	ability	to	speak	with	knowledge	about	a	situation.	(53F)
word	of	wisdom:	
The	ability	to	speak	a	wise	word	in	various	situations.	(53F)
worship:	
The	activity	of	glorifying	God	in	his	presence	with	our	voices	and	hearts.	(51A)
wrath:	
As	an	attribute	of	God,	the	doctrine	that	God	intensely	hates	all	sin.	(12C.13)
“young	earth”	theory:	
A	theory	of	creation	that	views	the	earth	as	relatively	young,	perhaps	as	young	as	10,000	to	20,000
years	old.	(15E.3)
OceanofPDF.com
List	of	Authors
Abelard,	Peter
Adams,	Jay
Addison,	Joseph
Adger,	John	B.
Aldrich,	Joseph	C.
Alexander,	Donald	L.
Alford,	Henry
Alleine,	Joseph
Allen,	Ronald
Allison,	Gregg
Allis,	Oswald	T.
Andersen,	Francis	L.
Anderson,	J.	Kerby
Anderson,	J.	N.	D.
Anderson,	Neil	T.
Anselm
Apollinaris
Archer,	Gleason	L.
Arius
Arminius,	James	(Jacob)
Arndt,	William
Athanasius
Augustine
Austin,	Stephen	A.
Babbage,	S.	B.
Bacchiocchi,	Samuele
Baillie,	John
Baker,	D.	L.
Baker,	John	P.
Baker,	J.	P.
Baldwin,	H.	Scott
Balmer,	Randall	H.
Banks,	Robert	J.
Bannerman,	James
Barclay,	D.	R.
Baring-Gould,	Sabine
Barker,	Kenneth
Barnes,	Robert	D.
Barr,	James
Barth,	Karl
Basinger,	David
Basinger,	Randall
Bastible,	James
Bauckham,	Richard	J.
Bavinck,	Herman
Note:	Bavinck	is	also	indexed	under	“Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic
Theologies”	at	the	end	of	each	chapter.
Baxter,	Richard
Beasley-Murray,	G.	R.
Beckwith,	Roger	T.
Beechick,	Allen
Beegle,	Dewey	M.
Beisner,	Calvin
Bennett,	Arthur
Bennett,	Dennis
Bennett,	Rita
Berg,	Caroline	V.	Sandell
Berkhof,	Louis
Note:	Berkhof	is	also	indexed	under	“Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic
Theologies”	at	the	end	of	each	chapter.
Berkouwer,	G.	C.
Bickersteth,	Edward	H.
Bietenhard,	H.
Bilezikian,	Gilbert
Birdsall,	J.	N.
Bizer,	Ernst
Blaising,	Craig	A.
Blamires,	Harry
Blocher,	Henri
Bloesch,	Donald	G.
Blomberg,	Craig
Blue,	Ken
Bockmuehl,	Klaus
Bock,	Darrell	L.
Boettner,	Lorraine
Bohlin,	R.	G.
Boice,	James	Montgomery
Bonar,	Horatius
Borland,	James	A.
Borror,	Gordon
Boston,	Thomas
Bounds,	E.	M.
Bowman,	Robert	M.,	Jr.
Boyce,	James	Pettigru
Note:	Boyce	is	also	indexed	under	“Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic
Theologies”	at	the	end	of	each	chapter.
Bradley,	W.	L.
Brandt,	Doug
Bray,	Gerald	L.
Brewer,	Greg
Bridge,	Donald
Bromiley,	Geoffrey	W.
Brother	Lawrence
Brown,	Colin
Brown,	Harold	O.	J.
Brown,	John
Brown,	R.
Bruce,	F.	F.
Bruner,	Frederick	Dale
Brunner,	Emil
Bube,	Richard	H.
Budgen,	Victor
Buis,	Harry
Bultmann,	Rudolf
Burgess,	Stanley	M.
Burge,	G.	M.
Burtchaell,	James	Tunstead
Burton,	E.	D.
Buswell,	James	Oliver
Note:	Buswell	is	also	indexed	under	“Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic
Theologies”	at	the	end	of	each	chapter.
Butzer,	Karl	W.
Caird,	G.	B.
Calvin,	John
Note:	Calvin	is	also	indexed	under	“Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic
Theologies”	at	the	end	of	each	chapter.
Cameron,	Nigel	M.	de	S.
Campbell,	Donald	K.
Campbell,	John	McLeod
Carson,	D.	A.
Carson,	Herbert	M.
Carter,	Charles	W.
Note:	Carter	is	also	indexed	under	“Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic
Theologies”	at	the	end	of	each	chapter.
Carter,	R.	Kelso
Caulley,	T.	S.
Cennick,	John
Chafer,	Lewis	Sperry
Note:	Chafer	is	also	indexed	under	“Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic
Theologies”	at	the	end	of	each	chapter.
Chantry,	Walter	J.
Charles,	R.	H.
Charnock,	Stephen
Chrysostom,	John
Clairvaux,	Bernard	of
Clark,	Ellyn
Clark,	Gordon	H.
Clark,	R.	E.	D.
Clark,	Stephen	B.
Clement	of	Alexandria
Clement	of	Rome
Clements,	Roy
Clines,	David	J.	A.
Clotz,	J.	W.
Clouse,	Bonnidell
Clouse,	F.	G.
Clouse,	Robert	G.
Clowney,	Edmund	P.
Cobb,	John	B.,	Jr.
Cohen,	I.	L.
Coleman,	Robert	E.
Collins,	G.	N.	M.
Colwell,	J.	E.
Conn,	H.	M.
Cooper,	John	W.
Copernicus
Coppedge,	Allan
Cottrell,	Jack	W.
Note:	Cottrell	is	also	indexed	under	“Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic
Theologies”	at	the	end	of	each	chapter.
Cousin,	Anne	R.
Cowper,	William
Cox,	G.	S.	R.
Craig,	Samuel	G.
Craig,	William	Lane
Cranfield,	C.	E.	B.
Crick,	Francis
Crockett,	William	V.
Croly,	George
Custance,	Arthur	C.
Daane,	James
Dabney,	Robert	L.
Note:	Dabney	is	also	indexed	under	“Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic
Theologies”	at	the	end	of	each	chapter.
Darby,	John	Nelson
Darwin,	Charles
Davidheiser,	Bolton
Davids,	P.	H.
Davis,	John	Jefferson
Davis,	Percival
Davis,	Stephen	T.
De	Young,	Donald	B.
Deere,	Jack
Deissmann,	G.	Adolf
DeKoster,	L.
Delitzsch,	Franz
Demarest,	Bruce
Note:	Demarest	is	also	indexed	under	“Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic
Theologies”	at	the	end	of	each	chapter.
Dennison,	James	T.
Denton,	Michael
Dickason,	C.	Fred
Diehl,	D.	W.
Dillard,	Raymond
Dio	Chrysostom
Diodorus	Siculus
Dioscurides	of	Cilicia
Dockery,	David	S.
Dodd,	C.	H.
Doerksen,	Vernon	D.
Donaldson,	J.
Downs,	Perry	G.
Dumbrell,	William	J.
Dunbar,	David	G.
Dunn,	James	D.	G.
Dwight,	Timothy
Eaton,	Michael
Eckelmann,	Herman	J.,	Jr.
Eddy,	Mary	Baker
Edgar,	Thomas
Edwards,	David	L.
Edwards,	Jonathan
Note:	Edwards	is	also	indexed	under	“Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic
Theologies”	at	the	end	of	each	chapter.
Edwards,	Paul
Edwards,	William
Eidsmoe,	John
Eldredge,	Niles
Elliot,	Charlotte
Ellis,	E.	E.
Elwell,	Walter
Engle,	Paul	E.
Epiphanius
Erickson,	Millard
Note:	Erickson	is	also	indexed	under	“Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic
Theologies”	at	the	end	of	each	chapter.
Ervin,	Howard	M.
Eusebius
Eutyches
Evans,	Mary	J.
Fairchild,	J.	H.
Farnell,	F.	David
Fawcett,	John
Featherstone,	William	R.
Fee,	Gordon	D.
Feinberg,	Charles	L.
Feinberg,	John	S.
Feinberg,	Paul	D.
Ferguson,	S.	B.
Fields,	Weston	W.
Figard,	Steve
Finney,	Charles	G.
Note:	Finney	is	also	indexed	under	“Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic
Theologies”	at	the	end	of	each	chapter.
Fitzmyer,	Joseph
Flavel,	John
Flew,	Anthony
Foh,	Susan	T.
Forsyth,	P.	T.
Foster,	Richard	J.
Frair,	Wayne
Frame,	John	M.
France,	R.	T.
Friesen,	Garry
Fuller,	Daniel	P.
Fung,	Ronald	Y.	K.
Gaffin,	Richard	B.,	Jr.
Galen	of	Pergamum
Galileo
Gange,	Robert
Geehan,	E.	R.
Gee,	Donald
Geisler,	Norman	L.
Gentry,	Kenneth	L.,	Jr.
Gentry,	R.	V.
Gerstner,	John	H.
Gill,	John
Note:	Gill	is	also	indexed	under	“Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic
Theologies”	at	the	end	of	each	chapter.
Gilmore,	John
Gish,	D.	T.
Godfrey,	William	Robert
Goetchius,	E.	V.	N.
Golder,	Michael
Gordon,	Adoniram	Judson
Gould,	Stephen	Jay
Graham,	Billy
Grant,	Sir	Robert
Green,	Michael
Green,	William	Henry
Greig,	Gary
Grensted,	L.	W.
Grenz,	Stanley	J.
Grider,	J.	K.
Grier,	W.	J.
Griffin,	David	R.
Griffith	Thomas,	W.	H.	
See	
Thomas,	W.	H.	Griffith
Gromacki,	Robert	G.
Gross,	Edward	N.
Grotius,	Hugo
Grudem,	Wayne
Gruenler,	Royce	Gordon
Gundry,	Patricia
Gundry,	Robert	H.
Guthrie,	Donald
Guthrie,	William
Habermas,	Gary
Hackett,	Stuart
Haley,	John	W.
Hallesby,	O.
Halsne,	Doug
Harper,	Michael
Harrison,	E.	F.
Harris,	Murray	J.
Harris,	R.	Laird
Hartshorne,	Charles
Hawthorne,	Gerald
Hayford,	Jack	W.
Heard,	J.	B.
Heber,	Reginald
Heijenoort,	John	van
Held,	Heinrich
Helm,	Paul
Hendriksen,	William
Hennecke,	E.
Henry,	Carl	F.	H.
Note:	Henry	is	also	indexed	under	“Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic
Theologies”	at	the	end	of	each	chapter.
Heppe,	Heinrich
Note:	Heppe	is	also	indexed	under	“Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic
Theologies”	at	the	end	of	each	chapter.
Héring,	Jean
Herodotus
Hick,	John
Hirsch,	E.	D.,	Jr.
Hodge,	Archibald
Hodge,	Charles
Note:	Hodge	is	also	indexed	under	“Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic
Theologies”	at	the	end	of	each	chapter.
Hodges,	Zane	C.
Hoehner,	Harold
Hoekema,	Anthony	A.
Hofius,	O.
Holmes,	Arthur
Hoover,	A.	J.
Horton,	Michael	Scott
Horton,	S.	M.
Hort,	F.	J.	A.
Houghton,	S.	M.
House,	H.	Wayne
Houston,	Graham
Houston,	James
How,	William	Walsham
Hoyle,	Fred
Hubbard,	D.	A.
Hubbard,	Robert	L.
Hughes,	Philip	Edgcumbe
Hummel,	Charles	E.
Hunter,	W.	Bingham
Hurley,	James	B.
Ignatius	of	Antioch
Inch,	Morris	A.
Irenaeus
Irving,	Edward
Jepsen,	Dee
Jeremias,	Joachim
Jerome
Jewett,	Paul	K.
Jocz,	Jakob
Johnson,	Philip	E.
Johnson,	R.	K.
Joppie,	A.	S.
Josephus
Kaiser,	Christopher	B.
Kaiser,	Walter	C.,	Jr.
Kantzer,	Kenneth	S.
Kaplan,	M.	M.
Kassian,	Mary	A.
Kautzsch,	E.
Kearsley,	R.
Keil,	J.	K.	F.
Kelly,	J.	N.	D.
Kelly,	Thomas	R.
Kennedy,	D.	James
Kerkut,	G.	A.
Kethe,	William
Kevan,	Ernest	F.
Kidner,	Derek
Kik,	J.
Kingdon,	David
Kirby,	G.	W.
Kirkpatrick,	William	J.
Kirk,	J.	A.
Klein,	William	W.
Kline,	Meredith	G.
Kling,	August	J.
Klooster,	F.	H.
Knight,	George	W.	III
Koch,	Kurt
Kofahl,	Robert	E.
Krämer,	Helmut
Kraueter,	Tom
Kroeger,	Catherine	I
Kroeger,	Richard
Kromminga,	C.	G.
Kruse,	Colin
Kuyper,	Abraham
Kydd,	Ronald	A.
Ladd,	George	Eldon
Laidlaw,	John
Lake,	Kirsopp
Laney,	J.	Carl
Lane,	A.	N.	S.
Lathbury,	Mary	A.
Law,	William	A.
Leiman,	S.	Z.
Lenski,	R.	C.	H.
Lester,	L.	P.
Letham,	Robert
Lewis,	Arthur	H.
Lewis,	C.	S.
Lewis,	David	C.
Lewis,	Gordon	R.
Note:	Lewis	is	also	indexed	under	“Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic
Theologies”	at	the	end	of	each	chapter.
Liefeld,	Walter	L.
Lightfoot,	J.	B.
Lightner,	Robert	P.
Lincoln,	Andrew	T.
Linder,	R.	D.
Lindsell,	Harold
Little,	Paul
Litton,	Edward	Arthur
Note:	Litton	is	also	indexed	under	“Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic
Theologies”	at	the	end	of	each	chapter.
Lloyd-Jones,	D.	Martyn
Longenecker,	Richard
Longstaff,	William	D.
Lowrey,	Robert
Lucian	of	Samosata
Luther,	Martin
Maatman,	Russell
MacArthur,	John	F.,	Jr.
McBrien,	Richard	P.
Note:	McBrien	is	also	indexed	under	“Sections	in	Representative	Roman
Catholic	Systematic	Theologies”	at	the	end	of	each	chapter.
McCheyne,	Robert	Murray
McClain,	Alva	J.
McClelland,	S.	E.
McComiskey,	Thomas	E.
McCown,	Wayne
McDonald,	H.	D.
McDowell,	Josh
McGaughy,	Lane	C.
McGee,	Gary	B.
McGrath,	Alister	E.
Machen,	J.	Gresham
McKim,	Donald	K.
McKnight,	Scot
Macleod,	D.
MacMillan,	John	A.
McNeill,	John	T.
McRay,	J.	R.
Mallone,	George
Manson,	P.	D.
Marcel,	Pierre	Ch.
Marshall,	D.	W.
Marshall,	I.	Howard
Martens,	Elmer
Martin,	Hugh
Martin,	James	P.
Martin,	Ralph	P.
Martyr,	Justin
Massey,	James	Earl
Mattern,	Jack
Mavrodes,	George	I.
Maxson,	J.	Robin
Melito	of	Sardis
Menninga,	Clarence
Metzger,	Bruce	M.
Mickelsen,	Alvera
Mickelsen,	A.	Berkeley
Miethe,	Terry	L.
Migne,	J.	P.
Mikolaski,	S.	J.
Miley,	John
Note:	Miley	is	also	indexed	under	“Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic
Theologies”	at	the	end	of	each	chapter.
Milligan,	George
Mills,	Pauline	Michael
Milne,	Bruce
M’Intyre,	D.	M.
Montgomery,	James
Montgomery,	John	Warwick
Moorehead,	P.	S.
Moo,	Douglas	J.
Moreland,	J.	P.
Morey,	Robert	A.
Morison,	Frank
Morowitz,	Harold	J.
Morris,	Henry	M.
Morris,	John	D.
Morris,	Leon
Morris,	William
Morrow,	T.	W.
Mortenson,	Terry
Moule,	C.	F.	D.
Moulton,	J.	H.
Mounce,	Robert	H.
Mueller,	John	Theodore
Note:	Mueller	is	also	indexed	under	“Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic
Theologies”	at	the	end	of	each	chapter.
Mullins,	Edgar	Young
Note:	Mullins	is	also	indexed	under	“Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic
Theologies”	at	the	end	of	each	chapter.
Mundle,	W.
Murray,	Andrew
Murray,	Iain
Murray,	John
Note:	Murray	is	also	indexed	under	“Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic
Theologies”	at	the	end	of	each	chapter.
Nash,	Ronald
Nathan,	Rich
Neale,	John	Mason
Nestorius
Nettles,	Thomas	J.
Neuer,	Werner
Neumark,	Georg
Newman,	Robert	C.
Newton,	John
Nicholson,	Steve
Nicole,	Roger
Oden,	Thomas
Note:	Oden	is	also	indexed	under	“Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic
Theologies”	at	the	end	of	each	chapter.
Oepke,	Albrecht
Olsen,	R.	L.
Olson,	Arnold	T.
Omanson,	R.	L.
Orgel,	L.	E.
Origen
Ortlund,	Raymond	C.,	Jr.
Osborne,	Grant	R.
Osterhaven,	M.	E.
Otto,	Randall	E.
Ott,	Ludwig
Note:	Ott	is	also	indexed	under	“Sections	in	Representative	Roman
Catholic	Systematic	Theologies”	at	the	end	of	each	chapter.
Owen,	John
O’Donovan,	Oliver
Pache,	Rene
Packer,	J.	I.
Palmer,	Edwin	H.
Parker,	T.	H.	L.
Payne,	D.	F.
Payne,	Philip	B.
Pelagius
Penn-Lewis,	Jessie
Pentecost,	J.	Dwight
Peterson,	David
Peterson,	Erik
Peterson,	Michael	L.
Peters,	G.	N.	H.
Philo
Phypers,	David
Pieper,	Francis
Note:	Pieper	is	also	indexed	under	“Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic
Theologies”	at	the	end	of	each	chapter.
Pink,	A.	W.
Pinnock,	Clark	H.
Piper,	John
Pitman,	M.
Plantinga,	Alvin
Plato
Plotinus
Plummer,	Alfred
Plutarch
Polybius
Pope,	William	Burt
Note:	Pope	is	also	indexed	under	“Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic
Theologies”	at	the	end	of	each	chapter.
Poythress,	Vern	S.
Preus,	Robert	D.
Prince,	Derek
Prior,	K.
Provenzola,	Tom
Purkiser,	W.	T.
Note:	Purkiser	is	also	indexed	under	“Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic
Theologies”	at	the	end	of	each	chapter.
Pytches,	David
Radmacher,	Earl	D.
Rad,	Gerhard	von
Ramm,	Bernard
Rapinchuk,	Mark
Rayburn,	Robert	G.
Rayburn,	R.	S.
Reid,	W.	S.
Reiter,	Richard
Renehan,	James
Rengstorf,	K.	H.
Reymond,	Robert	L.
Rice,	Richard
Richards,	Lawrence	O.	A.
Ridderbos,	Herman	N.
Ridderbos,	N.	H.
Roberts,	A.
Roberts,	Evan
Robertson,	O.	Palmer
Robertson,	Pat
Robinson,	H.	W.
Robinson,	J.	A.	T.
Rogers,	Jack	B.
Rosenthal,	Marvin
Ross,	A.
Ross,	Hugh
Rothwell,	Don
Rufinus
Runia,	Klaas
Rusch,	W.	H.
Ruthven,	Jon
Ryle,	J.	C.
Ryrie,	Charles
Note:	Ryrie	is	also	indexed	under	“Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic
Theologies”	at	the	end	of	each	chapter.
Sabellius
Sammis,	James	H.
Saucy,	Robert	L.
Schaeffer,	Francis
Schaff,	Philip
Schatzmann,	Siegfried
Schep,	J.	A.
Schlegel,	Katharina	von
Schneemelcher,	W.
Schreiner,	Thomas	R.
Schultz,	Samuel	J.
Schürer,	Emil
Segraves,	Kelly	L.
Seneca
Shakespeare,	William
Shank,	Robert
Shedd,	William	G.	T.
Note:	Shedd	is	also	indexed	under	“Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic
Theologies”	at	the	end	of	each	chapter.
Silva,	Moisés
Sire,	James
Smeaton,	George
Smedes,	Lewis	B.
Smith,	David	R.
Smith,	S.	M.
Smith,	Walter	Chalmers
Smith,	Wilbur	M.
Snaith,	Norman
Snyder,	Howard	A.
Socinus,	Faustus
Song,	R.	J.
Spear,	Wayne
Spencer,	Aida	B.
Spiceland,	J.	D.
Springer,	Kevin
Sproul,	R.	C.
Stacey,	W.	D.
Steele,	David	N.
Stein,	Robert	H.
Stephanou,	Eusebius	A.
Stevenson,	John	O.
Stone,	Samuel	J.
Storms,	C.	Samuel
Stott,	John	R.	W.
Stowell,	Hugh
Strauch,	Alexander
Strauss,	James	D.
Strong,	Augustus	H.
Note:	Strong	is	also	indexed	under	“Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic
Theologies”	at	the	end	of	each	chapter.
Stuart,	Douglas
Swete,	Henry	Barclay
Tasker,	R.	V.	G.
Tatian
Taylor,	Jack	R.
Tenney,	Merrill	C.
Tertullian
Thaxton,	C.	B.
Thiessen,	Henry	Clarence
Note:	Thiessen	is	also	indexed	under	“Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic
Theologies”	at	the	end	of	each	chapter.
Thigpen,	Paul
Thiselton,	Anthony	C.
Thomas	à	Kempis
Thomas,	Curtis	C.
Thomas,	Robert	L.
Thomas,	W.	H.	Griffith
Note:	Thomas	is	also	indexed	under	“Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic
Theologies”	at	the	end	of	each	chapter.
Thompson,	J.	G.	S.	S.
Thompson,	J.	A.
Thornwell,	James	Henley
Thucydides
Tiller,	J.
Toon,	Peter
Torrance,	D.	W.
Torrance,	T.	F.
Tozer,	A.	W.
Travis,	S.	H.
Tucker,	Ruth	A.
Turner,	M.	M.	B.
Turretin,	Francis
Tuttiett,	Lawrence
Twelftree,	G.	H.
Unger,	Merrill	F.
Ussher,	James
Van	Gemeren,	Willem
Van	Kampen,	Robert
Van	Leeuwen,	Mary	Stewart
Van	Til,	Cornelius
Van	Till,	Howard	J.
Vawter,	Bruce
Verduin,	Leonard
Vermes,	G.
Vos,	Geerhardus
Wace,	Henry
Wagner,	C.	Peter
Wainwright,	Geoffrey
Wallace,	Ronald	S.
Wallis,	Arthur
Walvoord,	John	F.
Ware,	Bruce	A.
Warfield,	Benjamin	B.
Note:	Warfield	is	also	indexed	under	“Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic
Theologies”	at	the	end	of	each	chapter.
Warner,	Timothy	M.
Watson,	David	C.
Watson,	Richard
Watson,	Thomas
Watson,	T.	E.
Watts,	Isaac
Webber,	Robert	E.
Weeks,	Noel
Weinrich,	William
Wells,	David	F.
Wells,	Paul
Wenham,	David
Wenham,	John	W.
Wesley,	Charles
Wesley,	John
Westcott,	Brooke	Foss
Westminster	Seminary	Faculty,
Whisenant,	Edgar
Whitcomb,	John	C.
Whitefield,	George
White,	John
White,	R.	E.	O.
White,	R.	Fowler
Wilder-Smith,	A.	E.
Wiles,	Maurice
Wiley,	H.	Orton
Note:	Wiley	is	also	indexed	under	“Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic
Theologies”	at	the	end	of	each	chapter.
Wilkenson,	J.
Willard,	Dallas
Williams,	Don
Williams,	J.	Rodman
Note:	Williams	is	also	indexed	under	“Sections	in	Evangelical	Systematic
Theologies”	at	the	end	of	each	chapter.
Wilson,	R.	McL.
Wimber,	John
Woodbridge,	John	D.
Wood,	Leon	J.
Wood,	Rick
Wright,	D.	F.
Wright,	Nigel
Wright,	N.	T.
Yandell,	Keith
Yee,	Tet-Lim
Yocum,	Bruce
Youngblood,	Ronald
Young,	Davis	A.
Young,	Edward	J.
Young,	Francis
Zahn,	Theodor
Ziesler,	J.	A.
Zinzendorf,	Count	Nikolaus
Zuck,	Roy	B.
Zwingli,	Ulrich
OceanofPDF.com
List	of	Hymns
A	Mighty	Fortress	Is	Our	God
All	People	That	on	Earth	Do	Dwell
Angels	From	the	Realms	of	Glory
Be	Still,	My	Soul
Blest	Be	the	Tie	That	Binds
Blest	the	Man	That	Fears	Jehovah
Break	Thou	the	Bread	of	Life
Call	Jehovah	Thy	Salvation
Children	of	the	Heavenly	Father
Christ	the	Lord	Is	Risen	Today
Christian,	Dost	Thou	See	Them?
Come,	O	Come,	Thou	Quickening	Spirit
Come,	O	Creator	Spirit
Come,	Thou	Almighty	King
Fairest	Lord	Jesus
From	Every	Stormy	Wind
Glorious	Things	of	Thee	Are	Spoken
God	Moves	in	a	Mysterious	Way
God,	Be	Merciful	to	Me
Great	God,	What	Do	I	See	and	Hear!
Hallelujah,	Praise	Jehovah!
Here,	O	My	Lord,	I	See	Thee	Face	to	Face
Holy,	Holy,	Holy
How	Firm	a	Foundation
I	Heard	the	Voice	of	Jesus	Say
I	Love	Thy	Kingdom,	Lord
I	Sought	the	Lord,	and	Afterward	I	Knew
I	Will	Thee	Praise,	My	God,	O	King
If	Thou	but	Suffer	God	to	Guide	Thee
Immortal,	Invisible,	God	Only	Wise
Jehovah’s	Perfect	Law
Jesus	Shall	Reign	Where’er	the	Sun
Jesus,	Thou	Joy	of	Loving	Hearts
Jesus,	Thy	Blood	and	Righteousness
Just	As	I	Am
Love	Divine,	All	Love	Excelling
Lo!	He	Comes,	With	Clouds	Descending
My	Jesus	I	Love	Thee
O	For	a	Thousand	Tongues	to	Sing
O	Quickly	Come,	Dread	Judge	of	All
O	Word	of	God	Incarnate
O	Worship	the	King
Onward	Christian	Soldiers
Rejoice	the	Lord	Is	King
Spirit	of	God,	Descend	Upon	My	Heart,
Standing	On	the	Promises
Take	Time	to	Be	Holy
Teach	Me,	O	Lord,	Your	Way	of	Truth
Ten	Thousand	Times	Ten	Thousand
The	Church’s	One	Foundation
The	Law	of	the	Lord	Is	Perfect
The	Sands	of	Time	Are	Sinking
The	Spacious	Firmament	on	High
Thou	Art	Worthy,
Trust	and	Obey
Up	From	the	Grave	He	Arose
When	I	Survey	the	Wondrous	Cross
When	This	Passing	World	Is	Done
When	We	Walk	With	the	Lord
OceanofPDF.com
List	of	Scripture
Note:
	This	index	does	not	list	all	the	Scripture	quotations	or	Scripture
references	in	this	book,	but	only	those	where	a	passage	is	discussed	in	some
way;	that	is,	where	an	argument	is	made	for	a	particular	understanding	of	a
passage	or	some	other	interpretative	comments	are	made.
	
	
	
Genesis
Numbers
Nehemiah
1:1
23:19
9:6
1:2
	
	
1:5
Deuteronomy
Job
1:11
4:2
19:25–26
1:16
6:6–7
	
1:24
18:18–20
Psalms
1:26
29:29
12:6
1:31
32:16–17
19:1
2:4–6
	
19:7
2:7
1
	Samuel
22:1
2:18
15:10
27:4
2:23
	
45:6–7
3:15
	
	
3:16
2	Samuel
51:5
5:1–2
10:12
51:11
5:2
12:20
73:25
6:2–4
24:1
90:2
6:2
	
90:4
6:6
1
	Kings
102:25–27
9:8–17
8:27
106:35–37
50:20
	
110:1
	
	
111:10
Exodus
2	Kings
1
19:1
3:14
22:14–20
119:18
4:21
	
119:160
20:4–6
1
	Chronicles
	
20:7
26:24
Proverbs
20:12
	
8:22–31
32:9–14
	
2	Chronicles
8:22
34:6–7
5:13–14
9:10
Ecclesiastes
Zephaniah
25:46
9:11
3:17–18
26:8
	
	
26:39
Isaiah
Matthew
27:46
6:8
1:8–9
27:46
9:6
3:11
27:52–53
13:10
4:4
27:53
14:12–15
5:26
28:2
38:1–6
5:48
28:6
43:7
6:9
28:19–20
43:25
6:12
28:19
45:7
6:12
	
46:9–10
6:14–15
Mark
48:16
7:21–23
1:5
53:4–5
8:16–17
1:8
62:3–5
11:25–26
1:10
63:10
11:28–30
1:13
65:20
12:31–32
3:29–30
	
12:32
3:29
Jeremiah
12:40
5:8
1:9
13:43
6:2
7:31
13:53–58
6:5
9:23–24
16:1–4
9:29
19:5
16:16–19
10:6
31:31–34
16:19
11:24
31:35
18:10
12:30
Ezekiel
18:15–20
13:32
36:25–26
18:15
16:16
18:17
16:17–18
Daniel
18:18
16:17
12:2
18:20
12:3
22:44
Luke
24:6–7
1:35
Hosea
24:12
2:11
6:7
24:15–31
3:16
24:29–31
4:1–11
Jonah
24:29
4:14
1:15
24:30
10:20
2:3
24:44
12:10
3:4
25:13
18:18–30
3:10
25:31–46
22:43
23:43
17:21
16:16–18
24:25
17:24
16:31
24:31
20:4–7
17:30–31
20:17
18:9–10
John
20:19
18:11
1:1–4
20:22
18:26
1:1–2
20:23
19:2
1:1
20:28
19:3
1:3
19:4
1:9
Acts
20:22–23
1:13
1:1
20:32
1:33
1:4
21:4
3:5
1:5
21:10–11
3:7
1:8
24:14
3:11
1:9–11
24:15
3:16
2:4
27:31
4:23–24
2:23
28:17–19
4:24
2:27
28:17
5:28–29
2:39
6:38–40
2:41
Romans
6:53–57
4:27–28
1:19–21
8:31–32
4:27
1:20
8:44
4:30
2:14–15
8:58
6:3
3:23
10:18
7:38
3:25
10:27–29
8:2
4:3
10:30
8:4–25
4:6–8
12:27
8:38
4:16
13:14
9:17
4:17
13:21
9:31
4:25
14:9
10:40
5:12–21
14:17
11:6
5:13–14
14:26
11:15–17
5:18–19
14:30
11:16
6:16
15:26
12:20–24
8:1
16:7
13:8–11
8:1
16:13–14
13:48
8:10
16:13
14:23
8:13
17:5
14:15
8:14
17:17
16:14–15
8:21
8:26–27
7:12
15:12–58
8:28–30
8:6
15:22–23
8:28
8:11
15:23–25
8:29
10:11
15:25
8:30
10:13
15:29
8:34
10:16
15:42–44
9:5
10:17
15:43
9:11–13
11:2–16
15:44
9:18
11:3
15:49
9:19
11:7
15:50
9:20–24
11:29
10:6–7
12:3
2	Corinthians
10:13–17
12:4–31
1:13–14
10:18
12:4–6
3:17
11:2
12:8–10	1080–1081
5:10
11:29
12:10
6:14
12:6–8
12:12–27
7:1
12:6
12:13
7:9–10
13:1
12:28
10:3–4
14:15
12:29–30
11:2
15:4
12:30
12:7
16:1
13:1
12:12
16:7
13:8–13
13:14
13:9–10
1
	Corinthians
13:10
Galatians
1:7
13:12
1:19
1:16
14:13–19
3:16–18
1:22–24
14:14–15
4:6
1:22–24
14:14
5:18
2:9
14:15
2:10
14:21
Ephesians
2:11
14:22–23
1:9–10
2:13
14:24–25
1:9
2:14–3:4
14:29–38
1:10
2:14
14:30–31
1:11
3:15
14:30
1:13–14
4:19
14:31
1:22–23
5:5
14:33–36
2:6
6:3
14:33
2:8–9
7:1
14:36
2:12–20
7:7–9
14:37
2:20
3:6
2	Thessalonians
1:3
4:8–9
1:9
1:5–9
4:11
2:8
1:5–7
4:14
2:13
1:5
4:15–16
1:6
5:8
1
	Timothy
1:7
5:15–16
1:11
1:9
5:21–33
2:4
1:12
5:21
2:5
2:12–13
5:26
2:11–14
2:13
6:11–12
2:13
3:5
6:17
3:1–7
3:1–2
Hebrews
Philippians
3:2
1:1–2
1:1
3:8–13
1:2
1:6
3:11
1:3
2:5–7
4:1–3
1:8
2:7
4:4–5
1:10–12
3:9
4:10
1:11–12
3:19
3:19
2:3–4
3:20
5:17–18
2:8
5:17
2:9
Colossians
5:18
2:14–16
1:15
5:19–21
2:17
1:17
5:20
2:18
1:22–23
5:21
3:14
2:9
5:22
4:12
2:11–12
2:11–12
5:8
2:13
2:13
6:1–2
2:19
6:18
6:4–8
3:18–19
6:4–6
2	Timothy
6:18
1
	Thessalonians
1:18
7:25
1:4–5
2:10
8:6–13
2:6
2:24–26
8:8–10
4:14
3:15
10:10
4:16
3:16–17
10:19
4:17
3:16
10:26–31
5:3
10:26–27
5:19–21
Titus
10:26
5:23
1:2
11:3
12:1–2
4:6
5:7
12:10
4:10
5:16–17
12:23
4:11
5:18
13:17
4:19
5:1–2
2	John
James
5:2–5
10–11
1:13–14
5:2
10
1:17
5:4
1:18
5:5
Jude
1:19–20
4–5
2:10–11
2	Peter
6
2:21
1:1
9
2:24
1:20
20
3:13
1:21
3:17–18
2:1
Revelation
4:2
2:4
3:10
4:15
3:2
3:14
5:14
3:7
4:11
5:15
3:8
10:6
3:9–10
12:11
1
	Peter
3:9
13:7–8
1:2
3:10
19:13
1:5
3:16
19:16
1:12
2:4–10
1
	John
20:1–10
2:8
1:8–10
20:1–6
2:11
1:8
20:1–3
2:21
1:10
20:1
2:24
2:2
20:2–3
3:13–22
2:19
20:3
3:15
3:6
20:4
3:17
3:8
20:5–6
3:18–20
4:10
20:5
3:21
5:1
22:18–19
OceanofPDF.com
About	the	Author
Wayne	Grudem	(Ph.D.,	Cambridge)	is	research	professor	of	Bible	and
theology	at	Phoenix	Seminary	in	Scottsdale,	Arizona.	He	previously	taught
for	twenty	years	at	Trinity	Evangelical	Divinity	School	in	Deerfield,	Illinois.
	
This	entire	book	is	now	available	on	a	CD-ROM	that	includes	a	full	working
version	of	the	Zondervan	Reference	Software,	a	User’s	Guide,	and	a	free
electronic	copy	of	the	ASV	Bible	(1901).	You	can	copy	the	text	to	your	hard
drive,	search	instantly	for	any	word	or	phrase	or	combination	of	words	and
phrases,	print	any	range	of	text,	and	export	sections	to	your	word	processor
for	easy	citation	in	sermons	and	Bible	studies.	The	CD	includes	hyperlinks
from	every	verse	reference	to	the	ASV	(or	any	other	installed	Bible
translation).
To	order,	contact	Bits&Bytes	Computer	Resources,	623	Iowa	Ave.,	Whitefish,
MT	59937,	USA.	E-mail:	info@bitsbytescomputer.com.	Phone:	(888)	231-
7280	or	(800)361-7280.	Fax:	(406)	862-0876.	All	major	credit	cards	accepted.
Requires	Windows	95	or	higher,	6	MB	disk	space,	CD-ROM	drive.	Price	in
US	dollars	is	$39.95	+	$4.95	S&H	within	the	US;	shipping	higher	overseas.
How	do	we	know	the	Bible	is	God’s	Word?
What	is	sin	and	where	did	it	come	from?
How	is	Jesus	fully	God	and	fully	man?
What	are	spiritual	gifts?
When	and	how	will	Christ	return?
Bible	Doctrine
Essential	Teachings	
of	the	Christian	Faith
Wayne	Grudem,	Edited	by	Jeff	Purswell
If	you’ve	asked	questions	like	these,	then	“systematic
theology”	is	no	abstract	term.	It’s	an	approach	to	finding	answers	every
Christian	needs	to	know.
Bible	Doctrine
	takes	a	highly	commended	upper-level	textbook	on	systematic
theology	and	makes	it	accessible	to	the	average	reader.	Abridged	from	Wayne
Grudem’s	award-winning	
Systematic	Theology,	Bible	Doctrine
	covers	the
same	essentials	of	the	faith,	giving	you	a	firm	grasp	on	seven	key	topics:
The	Doctrine	of	the	Word	of	God
The	Doctrine	of	God
The	Doctrine	of	Man
The	Doctrine	of	Christ
The	Doctrine	of	the	Application	of	Redemption
The	Doctrine	of	the	Church
The	Doctrine	of	the	Future
Like	
Systematic	Theology,
	this	book	is	marked	by	its	clarity,	its	strong
scriptural	emphasis,	its	thoroughness	in	scope	and	detail,	and	its	treatment	of
such	timely	topics	as	spiritual	warfare	and	the	gifts	of	the	Spirit.	But	you
don’t	need	to	have	had	several	years	of	Bible	school	to	reap	the	full	benefits
of	
Bible	Doctrine.
	It’s	easy	to	understand—and	it’s	packed	with	solid,	biblical
answers	to	your	most	important	questions.
Hardcover	0-310-22233-8
Look	for	
Bible	Doctrine	
at	your	local	Christian	bookstore.

Point	-	Counterpoint
Clarify	the	Holy	Spirit	debate!
Are	Miraculous	Gifts	for	Today?
Wayne	A.	Grudem,	General	Editor
Four	Views
Do	you	fully	understand	your	own	position	and	the
positions	of	others	on	whether	the	gifts	of	tongues,
prophecy,	and	healing	are	for	today?	Cessationists	say	
no
.
Pentecostal,	Charismatic,	and	Third	Wave	Christians	say	
yes
.	Open	But
Cautious	evangelicals	say	
maybe
.
In	this	book,	General	Editor	Wayne	A.	Grudem	moderates	a	spirited
conversation,	providing	an	impartial	forum	for	comparing	the	four	main	lines
of	thinking:	Cessationist,	represented	by	Richard	B.	Gaffin;	Open	But
Cautious	(Robert	L.	Saucy);	Third	Wave	(Samuel	Storms);	and
Pentecostal/Charismatic	(Douglas	A.	Oss).
Also	Available	in	the	Counterpoints	Series:
Two	Views	on	Women	in	Ministry
	
	
0-310-23195-7
Five	Views	on	Apologetics
	
	
0-310-22476-4
Three	Views	on	Creation	and	
Evolution
	
	
0-310-22017-3
Four	Views	on	Hell
	
	
0-310-21268-5
Five	Views	on	Sanctification
	
	
0-310-21269-3
Five	Views	on	Law	and	Gospel
	
	
0-310-21271-5
Four	Views	on	Salvation	in	a	
Pluralistic	World
	
	
0-310-21276-6
Three	Views	on	the	Rapture
	
	
	0-310-21298-7
Four	Views	on	the	Book	of	
Revelation
	
	
0-310-21080-1
Three	Views	on	the	Millennium	and	
Beyond
	
	
0-310-20143-8
Look	for	
Bible	Doctrine	
at	your	local	Christian	bookstore.
OceanofPDF.com
About	the	Publisher
Founded	in	1931,	Grand	Rapids,	Michigan-based	Zondervan,	a	division	of
HarperCollins
Publishers,
	is	the	leading	international	Christian
communications	company,	producing	best-selling	Bibles,	books,	new	media
products,	a	growing	line	of	gift	products	and	award-winning	children’s
products.	The	world’s	largest	Bible	publisher,	Zondervan
(www.zondervan.com)	holds	exclusive	publishing	rights	to	the	
New
International	Version	of	the	Bible
	and	has	distributed	more	than	150	million
copies	worldwide.	It	is	also	one	of	the	top	Christian	publishers	in	the	world,
selling	its	award-winning	books	through	Christian	retailers,	general	market
bookstores,	mass	merchandisers,	specialty	retailers,	and	the	Internet.
Zondervan	has	received	a	total	of	68	Gold	Medallion	awards	for	its	books,
more	than	any	other	publisher.

We	want	to	hear	from	you.	Please	send	your	comments	about	this	book	to	us
in	care	of	the	address	below.	Thank	you.
OceanofPDF.com