0. Me
OEE
The Analects of Confucius
Confucius
Translated by Arthur Waley
L. Isit not pleasant to learn...
Il. He who exercises government...
Ml. If he can bear to do this...
1V. It is virtuous manners...
Vv. The Master said of Kung-ye Ch'ang...
VI. He might occupy the place of a prince...”
VIL. Believing in and loving the ancients...
VIII. The highest point of virtuous action...
1X. The subjects of which the Master seldom spoke... X. Confucius, in his village, looked simple and sincere... XL. The men of former times...
XH. Yen Yuan asked about perfect virtue. ...
XIIl, Tsze-lu asked about government. ...
XIV. Hsien asked what was shameful. ...
XV. The Duke Ling of Wei asked Confucius about tactics. ... XVI. The head of the Chi family...
XVII. Yang Ho wished to see Confucius...
XVIIL. The Viscount of Wei withdrew from the court. ... XIX. The scholar, trained for public duty...
XX. The Heaven-determined order of succession...
The Master said, "Is it not pleasant to learn with a constant perseverance and application?
“Is it not delightful to have friends coming from distant quarters?
“Is he not a man of complete virtue, who feels no discomposure though men may take no note of him?"
The philosopher Yu said, “They are few who, being filial and fraternal, are fond of offending against their superiors. There have been none, who, not liking to offend against their superiors, have been fond of stirring up confusion,
“The superior man bends his attention to what is radical. That being established, all Practical courses naturally grow up. Filial piety and fratemal submission, —are they not the root of all benevolent actions?"
The Master said, “Fine words and an insinuating appearance are seldom associated with true virtue.”
The philosopher Tsang said, “! daily examine myself on three points: —whether, in Iransacting business for others, 1 may have been not faithful; —whether, in intercourse with friends, | may have been not sincere; —whether | may have not Mastered and Practiced the instructions of my teacher."
The Master said, "To rule a country of @ thousand chariots, there must be reverent
attention to business, and sincerity; economy in expenditure, and love for men; and the employment of the people at the proper seasons.”
The Master said, "A youth, when at home, should be filial, and, abroad, respectful to his elders. He should be camest and truthful. He should overflow in love to all, and cultivate the friendship of the good, When he has time and opportunity, after the performance of these things, he should employ them in polite studies."
Tsze-hsia said, "tf a man withdraws his mind from the love of beauty, and applies it 48 Sincerely to the love of the virtuous: if, in serving his parents, he can exert his utmost
strength; if, in serving his prince, he can devote his life: if, in his intercourse with his friends, his words are sincere: —although men say that he has not learned, | will certainly say that he has.
The Master said, "If the scholar be not grave, he will not call forth any veneration, and his learning will not be solid,
“Hold faithfulness and sincerity as first principles.
“Have no fnends not ogual fo yourself, "When vou have faults, do not fear to abandom them.”
The phelosopher Tsang stid, “Let there be a careful attention to perform the funeral rites te parents. ard let them de followed when long gone with the ceremonies of sacrifice, —then the virtue of the people will resume its proper excellence.”
Taze-ch'in askod Tkze-kung saying, "When our master comes to any country, be dows mot fae! 10 learn all about its gowernment, Does he ask his information? or is it given
te hin?”
Teze-kung sel, "Our master is benign, upright, courteous, temperate, and complaisant end thus be gets his information, The master's mode of asking information, —is it mot different from that of other men?”
The Mantes seid, “While a man's father is alive, look at the bent of his will; when his farther is dead. jock ot his conduct. If foe three years he does not alter from the way of his father, he mzy h called filial.
The philosceher Yu said, "In practicing the rules of propriety, a natural case is to be prized. |n the ways prescribed by the ancient kings, this is the excellent quality, and in things small end great we follow them.
“Yet it is not te be odeerved in all cases. If one, knowing how such ease should be prized, manifesis @, without regulating it by the rules of propriety, this likewise is not to be done.”
The philosopher Yu said, "When agreements are made according to what is right, what is spoken can be made good When respect is shown according to what is proper, one keeps far from shame and disgrace. When the parties upon whom a man leans are proper persons to he intimate with, he cam make them his guides and masters.
4 ‘The Master said, "He who aims to be » man of complete virtue in his food does pot seck to gratify his appetite. nor in his dwelling place does he seek the appliances of ease: the is camest im what he is doing. and careful in his speech; he frequents the company men of principle that he may be rectified —such a person may be said indeed to love to learn.”
1s Taze-kung said, “What do you pronounce conceming the poor man who yet does not flamer, and the rich man who is not proud?” The Master replied, “They will do; but they are not equal to him, who, though poor, is yet cheerful, and to him, who, though rich,
loves the rules of propriety.”
Tsze-kung replied, “It is said in the Book of Poetry, ‘As you cut and then file, as you carve and then polish’ —The meaning & the same, ! apprehend, as that which you have just expressed.”
The Master said, "With one like Ts'ze, | can begin to talik about the odes. | told him one point, and he knew its proper sequence.
The Master said, "1 will not be afflicted at men's not knowing me: | will be afMicted that | do not know men.”
|. “The Master said, "He who exercises government by means of his virtue may be compared to the north polar star, which keeps its place and all the stars turn towards it.”
The Master said, “In the Book of Poetry are three huexired pieces, but the design of them all may be embraced in one sentence "Having mo depraved thoughts."
The Master said, “If the peopte be led by laws, and uniformity sought to be given them by Punishments, they will try to avoid the punishment, but have no sense of shame.
“If they be led by virtue, and uniformity sought to be given them by the rules of Propriety, they will have the sense of shame, and moreover will become good.” ‘The Master said, "At fifteen, | had my mind bent om learning. "At thirty, 1 stood firm. "At forty, | had no doubts. "At fifty, | knew the decrees of Heaven, "At sixty, my Fn was an obedient organ for the reception of truth, “At seventy, | could follow what my heart desired, without transgressing what was right.”
Mang | asked what filinl piety was. The Master said, "It is not being disobedient *
Soon after, as Fan Chih was driving him, the Master told him, saying, “Mang-sun asked me what filial piety was, and | answered him, —not being disobedient,"
Pan Ch'th said, "What did you mean?” The Master replied, *That parents, when alive, be Served according to propriety: that, when dead, they should be buried according to Propriety; and that they should be sacrificed to according to propriety.”
© Mang Wu asked what filial piety was. The Master said, "Parents are arcious lest their children should be sick.”
Tsze-yu asked what filial piety was. The Master said, “The filial piety nowadays means the support of one's parents, But dogs and horses likewise are able to do something in the way of support: —without reverence, what is there to distinguish the One Support given from the other?”
Tsze-hsia asked what filial piety was, The Master said, "The difficulty is with the
countenance. [{, wher their elders have any troublesome affairs, the young take the toil of them. and if, when the young hive wine and food, they set them before their elders, is
THIS to be considered filial riety” The Master said, “I heve alked with Mui for a whole day, and he has not made any
oticebon so anythemg | said: —as I he were stupid. He has retired, and | have examined his conduct when away from me. and foeand him able to illustrate my teachings. Hui! —
He i not stupid ~
The Master said. "See what a man does. "Mark hés motives. “Examine in what things he rests. "How cana man conceal hes character? How can a man conceal his character™
The Master said. "Ife man keers cherishing his old knowledge, so as continually to be acauiring new. he may be # teacher of others.*
The Master said. “The accomplished scholar is pot a utensil,”
Taze-Lung asked whet constituted the superior man. The Master said, “He acts hefure he peaks and afterwards speaks according to his actions.”
The Master said, “The superior man is catholic and not partisan. The mean man is
The Master saidl, "Learning without thought is labor Jost; thought without learning is perilous.”
The Master sand “The study of strange doctrines is iqjurious indeed!"
The Master said, "Yu, shall | teach you what knowledge is? When you know a thing, to hold that you know it: and wher you do not know a thing, 10 allow that you do net know it —ithis is knowledge.”
S Teae-chang was learning with 2 view to official emolurment. The Master said, “Hear much and put aside the points of which you stand in doubt, while you speak cautiously at the same time of the others: —then you will afford few occasions for blame. See much and put eside the things which seem perilous, while you are cautious at
the same time in carrying the others into practice: then you will have few occasions for repentance, When one gves few occasions for blame in his words, and few occasions for
repentance in his conduct. he is in the way to get emolument.*
The Duke Aj asked, saying, "What should be done in order to secure the saibmission of the people?” Confucews replied, "Advance the upright and set aside the crooked, then the people will subeen. Advance the crocked and set aside the upright,
then the people will not subrut”
Chi Kang asked how to cause the peuple 0 reverence their ruler, to be faithful to hin, and to go on to nerve themselves to virtue The Master said, “Let him preside over
iheen with pravity:; —then they will reverence bitm. Let bm be: Greal area bleed tall: — then they will be Failhfid to bin, Let him advance the good pnd track the competes —ohen they will eagerly seek jo be virtucas."
Some one addressed Confucius, saying, “Sir, why ane yoru not engaged is the Povemimont?
The Master said, “Wheat does the Shu-ching say of filial piety? —"You are final, yom diichange your brotherly duties. These qualities are displayed in gowerement’ This hen also constitutes the exercise of government, Why must there be THAT making one be i the Eoverenent?”
The Master said, | do nod know how a man without truthfulness is 40 get on. How San a large carriage be made to go without the crossbar for yolcing the oun ts, or a smadl Coriage without the arrangement for yoking the horses?"
Tite-chang asked whether the affairs of ten ages after could be known.
Confucius said, The Yin dynasty followed the regulations of the Hsia: whersis ie took from or added 19 them may be known. The Chaw dynasty haa followed the regulations of Yin; wherein it took. from or added to them mary bee loncram, Scene other mary folkrw the Chau, but though it should be at the distance of a hundred ages, ies affairs may be
known," 5 Uhe Master sald, "Fora men to sacrifice to a spirit which does not belong to him is albery,
“Te see what is right and not todo it is want of courage."
Confucius said of the head of the Chi family, who fad cag econ off parioeries in es aria, "lf he can bear to de vhis. what may he not bear sn de!
‘The three families used the Yungede, while the vessels were being rermownd, at the Conclusion of the sacrifice. The blaster sad, “Assisting ane the princes: the son of
heaven looks profound and grave’; —whaet application can these words have in the hall AP the three families
The Mosier said, “Lf a man be wethoat the virtues proper to hemanity, wha te he do wilh the rites of propriety? Lf aman be without the virtues proper bo hamanity. what
fue he ho awh hime
Lin Fang asked what was the first thing to be attended to in ceremonies. The Master anid, “A grea question indeed! “In feeive ceremonies, i is beter to be dpering, chan extmvagani. In the ceremonies of mourning, lt is better that there be deep sorrow than in Tune EEA 1) observances,"
The Master-said, “The rude ote al the cast and month have their prinees, and are eal Gibe the States of our great land which are without them.”
The chief of the Chi family wee about to sacrifice to the Tal mountain. The Master seid to Zan Yu, “Can oe not save hire from this?" He answered, "l camnod.” Confucius said, "Alas! will you sary that the Tai mountain is not so discerning as Lin Fang?
The Master seid, "The student of virtue has ne contentions. (fit be said he cannes avoid them, shall this be i archery? But be bows compiaismntly to his competitors; thus be ascends the hall, descends, and exacts the forfeit of drinking. In his contention, be is
sill the Chore,“
Tige-bsia salved, saving, "What is the meaning of the passage —The pretty dimphes of her artful amile! The well-defined black:and white of her eye! The plain ground for she colores?” The Master said, “The business: of laying an the colors follows the preperation of the plain grind“ “Ceremonies then are a subsequent thing?” The Master said, “It es Shang who can being oul my meaning. Now I-cam begin to talk about the ores with em.
The Master said, "T could describe the ceremonies of the Hsia dynasty, but Chi cannot sufficiently aoiest my words. 1 eould describe the ceremonies of the ‘Yin dynapty, ier Sung cannce sufficiently attest my words. They cannot do so because of the lemufficiency of their reconts and wise men. If those were sufficient, | could adduce ther in sappent af my words," 1a The Master said. “Ar the great sacrifice, afler the pouring out of the libathon, I have io wish to fook on”
1) Soe coe asked the meaning of the preat sacrifice. The Master said, “! do not know, He who knew its meaning would find i! as ensy ta gowern the Kingdom as to look: on this” —pointing io his palm.
le He sacrificed to the dead, as ifthey were present. He sacrificed to the spirits, as IP the spirits wore presen, The Master said, “| consider my not being present at the sacrifice, aa if | did not sacrifice.”
js, ‘Mang-eun Chis asked, saying “What is ihe meaning of the saying, It ls bebier bo pay court go the Furnace thon tc the southwest comer'?!* The Master said, “Nor so, He who offends again Heaven bas mone bo who he can pemy.”
1. The Misster sald, “Chau had the advantage of viewing the two past dyruntion Here complete ond elegant are iis repalathcna® | follow (Cha,
The Master, when he entered the grand tereple, asked shoul everything. Some one said, “Who say that ihe son of the man of Trau knows the rules of propriety! He has
entered the grand temple and asks aboul everything.” The Masser heard the remark, and said, “This is a rule of peoprbety."
The Master anid, “In archery it. is not gorng. Uarough the heather which in the PringSpal thing; —becase people's strength i not equal. This was the old wey." 17 Thze-lcung wished to do away with the offering of a sheep connected with the ifuguemion of Ue first day of each mecmth.
The Master said, "Tye, you Jove the sheep: | ove the ceremony” ‘Tike Minster said, “The full observance of the rales of propriety in serving co's Pines is accounted by peaphe to be flattery."
1 The Duke Ting asked how 8 prince should employ his mininers, and bow ministers Should serve thelr prince. Confucius replied, “A prince shoold exmeley his minister
SSSorting br acconting to the miles of propriety: Ministers Should serve their prince with Soinhfuleess,*
The Master said, “The Kraan Tsu is eupreasive af hous, and of grief without being hurifully exces
The Duke Ai asked Taai Wo about the altars of the spirits of the land. Tsai Wp
replied, "The Hsia sovereign planted the pine tree about them: the men of the Yin plarsuee the cypress: amd ihe
mon of the Chau planted the chestnut tree, meaning thereby i cause the people te be in awe"
licern 1"
When the Master hecard th, he sald, “Things that are done, it is nemdlew in speak shout: things that hawe ‘had their
COUrsE, its nesdiess i remmorestreie wbcwut: hires that are part, It i mecdless to blame,*
The Master suid, “Small indeed was the capacity of Kwan Chung!"
Some one said, "Was Kwan Chung parshmonious?” "Kwan," was the reply, “had the San
Kweli, and his officers perfoemed no-double duties: how can be be considered Rarsinonicus
“Then, did) Kwan (Chung know the cubes of proprieny?* Tike Master iaed, “The princes of Stares have w screen intercepting the view at their gates. Komnn had likewise a sercen at ‘his gate. The Princes of States on any friendly meeting beteeen cwoof them, had a stand
on which to place their inverted caps. Rwan had alin sock attend, Hf Kwanknew the Tiles of propriety, who does not lorecew thee?
The Master instructing the grand music master of Lu said, "How to play music may be known Al the commencemers of the piece, all the parts should sound together. As it proceeds, they should be on harmony while severally distinct and flowing without break, and thes on to the conelussen.”
The border warden al Yi requested to be introduced to the Master, saying, "When men of superior virtue have come to this, f have never been denied the privilege of secing them.” The followers of the sage introduced him, and when he came out from the interview. he saicl "My frends, why are you distressed by your master's loss of office? The kingdom has long been without the principles of truth and right; Heaven is going to use Vour master as a bell weth its wooden tongue.”
The Master said of the Shao that # was perfectly beautifial and also perfectly good, He said of the Wu that it was perfectly beautifid but not perfectly good,
The Master sasd, “High station filled without indulgent generosity; ceremonies
performed without reverence: mourning conducted without sorrow; —wherewith should | contemplate such ways?”
The Master said, "Il & virtuous manners which constitute the excellence of a neighborhood, Ifa man in selecting a residence do not fix on one where such prevail, tow can he be wise’!”
The Masier said, "Those who are without virtue cannot abide long either in a ; conn fe and hardship. or ina condition of enjoyment. The virtuous rest in
the wise desire virtue.” "The Masier said, “ft is only the truly virtuous man, who can love, o¢ who can hate, others.”
‘The Master said, “If the will be set on virtue, there will be no practice of wickedness.”
The Master said, “Riches and honors are what men desire. If they cannot be obtained
in the proper way, they should not be held. Powerty and meanness are what men dislike. If they cannot be avoided in the proper way, they should not be avoided.
“If a superior man abandon virtue, how can he fulfill the requirements of that name?
b
“The superior man does mot, even for the space of & single meal, act contrary to virme. tn Moments of haste, he cleaves to it. In seasons of danger, he cleaves to i”
' ‘The Master said, "I have not seen a person who lowed virtue, or one who hated what was hot virtuous. He who loved virtue, would esteem nothing shove it. He who hated Whal is not virtuous, would practice virtue in such a way that be would not allow "anything that is not virtuous to approach his person.
Is any one able for one day to apply his strength to virtue? | have not seen tre case in which his strength would be insufficient.
“Should there possibly be any such case, | have not seen it.”
The Master said, “The faults of men are characteristic of the class to which they belong By observing a man’s faults, it may be known that he is virtuous."
‘The Master said, “If a man in the moming hear the night way, he may de in the evening hear regret.”
The Master said, "A scholar, whose mind is set on truth, and who is ashamed of bad Clothes and bad food, is not fit to be discoursed with.”
‘The Master said, "The superior man, in the world, does not set his mind either for anything, or against anything: what is right he will fallow.”
The Master said, "The superior man thinks of virtue; the small man thinks of Somfort. The superior man thinks of the sanctions of law: the smail mas thinks of favors which he may receive.”
The Master said: "He who acts with » constant view to his own advarnage willl be Much murmured against.”
The Master said, “If a prince is able to govern his kingdom with the complaisance Proper to the rules of propriety, what difficulty will he have? If he cannot govern it with that Complaisance, what has he to do with the nules of proprety?™
may fit myself for one. | am not concemed that | am not kaown, | seck to be worthy to be known."
The Master said, "Shan, my doctrine is that of an all-pervading unity.” The desciple
! The Master said, "A man should say, | am not concemed that | have no place, { am concemed how | Tsang replied, "Yes."
’
The Master went out, and the other disciples asked, saying, "What do his words meas?” ‘Tsang said, “The doctrine of our thaster is to be true to the princkples—-of our nature and : the benewolent exercise of them to others,—this and nothing more.”
‘The Master said, “The mind of the superioe man is conversant with rightecusness,
the mand at ae mean mani conversin wath pain.”
The Mister aml “When we sce men of worth, we should chink of aqualing them; when we see men of a coniracy character, we should bam inwards and eoumine mete”
Phe Maser anid. “ln serving his parent, a aon may rememnsirabe with chem, but. gently: when he sees that they do not incline to fodkow his advice, be shows an iincremed degree of prvermce, bot does nol shards his purpose: and should ihey pamigh him, he
does Ft abe Aire | do mura”
The Masser said, "While bis parents are alive, the son may not go abrond 80 distince [fhe does po abroad. be musi hawe a fied place io which he goes.”
The Masser sald, "If the son for three years does mot eter fron the way of his father, he cay he called fitsal.”
The Master cald, The atars of parents may by no meses not be kept in the PeTOO. Be ar ocosson at once fir joy and for fear”
The Master sald, “The reason why the ancients did not readily give utterance ta tev words: was that they feared best thelr actions should not conse up bo Lem.
The Maier sald, “The canalous. seldom err,”
The Master said, "The superior man wishes to be slow in his speech and earnest In bis conduct."
The flesuer send, “Vimue is not left to stand alkne, He who practices it will have
Teze-yu said, "In serving e prince, frequen remonsirances bead to disgrace. Hierween friends, freouent maroofs make che fiendahijs distant.”
: Vibe laser anid of Kong-ye Cl'eng that he might be wived: although be was put in bonds, he nad inet bert guilty of any crime. Accordingly, he gave him his own daughter to wite.
Of Man Yieng he said thal iftse oounry were well powerned he would noc be out of
office, and If it were in governed, he would escape punishment and dingmece. He gave him the daughter of hia own elder brother to wie.
The Master said of Texe-chien, “Of superior virtue indeed issuch a man! |f Ghere were ned ¥eruouws men in Lo, how eculd ibis ean have aequired this character™
Tize-keng asked, "What do you amy of me, Teze!” The Mawter said, “You area utensil,” "What utensil?" "A gered sacrificial uteri.”
Some one sald, “Yung is truly virtuous, bol he 16 not ready with bee tongue"
The Master said, “What is the good of being ready with the tongue? They who encounter Men with smartness of speech for the most part procure themacives hatred. | know not Wheiber he be truly virtuous, but why should be show readiness of the tongue
The Master was wishing Chii-tiac K's to enter an official employment, He replied, “1 1h 104 vel able bo rest in the assurance of this." The Master arms pleaser,
The Master said, “My doctrines make mo way. will get epon a raft, and flowed about on the sea, He that will accompany me will be Yu, | dare say.” Tane-be hearing thet wean glad,
Upsin which the Master seid. *Yu la fonder of daring than | am. He does oof exercise hits Jidement upon matters."
“Mang Wu eked about Trze-lu, whether he wes perfectly virtuous, The Maser said, “1 do not loner,"
ne wked again, when the Master replied, “In a kingdom of a thousand chariots, Yu sight fmpioved to manage the enllitary levies, bet | do not know whether he be perticctiy
Virtus,"
“Ark whed do you say of Chiuy* The Master replied, “In a city of a thousand families, or a clan ofa hundred ebriots, Chiu might be employed as gowemor, but} do mest iuncrer whether be is perfectly virtuous.”
“What der you say of CW'ih?" The Master replied, "With bis sash girt and standing im a
court, Chih might be emphoyed ta converse with the visitors and guests, but | de not know whether he is periectly virtuous,"
The Master said to Tsze-kung, “Whieh do pou consider superice, yourself or Huil*
Tsze-kung replied, "How dare | compare enyself with Hei? Hud hears ome point and lcs All about a subject; | hear one point, and know a second."
‘The Master said, “You ane not equal to him, | grant you, you are mot equal tc bim.*
Tsai Vu being asleep during the daytime, the Master wid, “Rotten wood canna be
carved; a wall of dirty enrih will nod reeeive tke neawel. The Yu,—visa is the use of my reoprowing hin?
The Mewes uid, “AL Geet my way with men wan hear thelr words, and ghve them ened fe their conduc! Mew my way iso hear their words, and look at their condeel, [tes from ful that | ere learned to take this chong,”
The Mister sat, “T huve met een a firm and unbending man" Someone replied, “There is Sheet Mang” “CRiang.” arid the Mester, “is under the influence of his pasion; how gan he he proncumond fim and unbending?*
Taoehone sald What | donot wick mento dato me, | also wish not bo dio bo ment.” Ther A ected, © The, ern Bete Pec) aided de Va."
Tareiung cand, “The Meners personal displays of hea principtes and ordenary descriptions of thes may be heard. His deconorses about man’s nature, and the wary af
fleaees, canned he heard.”
When Taze-le heard aewthing, (fhe had not yet succeeded in carrying it into practice, be ures onl wai dew he should hear something eke.
Tane-husg xked waving. "On whal ground did Kung-wan get that tile of Wan?”
Tike Mater enid “He was ef ae acter: nature and yet food of beerrcvingg. aumvcl fe wns rect pshemed Wo ask and Jeam of his iferiors! —On these prounck he has heen styled Wan"
The Mister said of Thee-chan that he had four of the characteristic of a SupereOr mman—in his cowie of himeelf, he was humble; in serving his superior, he was respectful, in nowrishing the people, he was kind: it ordering the people, he was just.”
The Master said. "Vien Ping kaw well how to maintain Friendiy intercourse, The acguainiane: miph be tong, but he showed the same respect asad fired,"
The Manter said, “Thang Wen kept e large dortosay in a boae, on the capltads of the pillars oof which be fed [ii freste, andl with representations of duckweed an che small pallens aberee: the beans supporting the rafters. Oe what sscrt viens his wisdom?”
Taze-ching asked, saying, "The minister Tize-wan theice took office, and manifested fo joy in his countenance. Tence he retined from office. and manifested no displeasure. He made ia poi it infonn the new minister of the way re which he had conducted the georrernment; shat do you aay of him?* The Master replied, "He was loyal." "Was he periectly virtamur’* “I do not know, How can be be pronounced perfectly virtucas 7”
Teno-chang proconded, “Wier the officer Chel killed the prince of Chi, Chan Wan, thoagh he werthe owner of forty hones, abandoned the and lett the country. Corimg to mother ciate, ht aed, “They are bere lie our prea officer, Cituiy and beft i. He came boo second wine, and with same obeercation left it aka; —what do you aay of him?” The
eter repleed,, “He wean pure” “Yes be perfectly virtuous" “1 do not know. How can he he proncenced perfectly virtua”
the (Chi Was thought thrice, and ihen acted, When Master was informed of it, he sek,
“Twice may da.*
A) The Master saad, "Wher good order prevailed in his country, Ning Wu acted thee part ofa wise man. When his country was in disorder, he sched the part of w staped un. Others may equal bis wisdom, but they cannot equal his stupacity.”
i When the Mester vos in Cham, be aabd, “Let me reser! Ley me peor! The lierte:
children of my schoo! are ambitious and too hasty. They are accomplished and complete
[ilipelaetin: «demerit: hii
— The Master ssid, "Poi and Shu-cl’i did not keep the former wickedwmes of men in ind, and hence ihe resentments directed trevueds them wese few,"
The Master sagd, “Who gaye oT Weiskang Ran thas he ti upright? One begged some ineper of hm, and he begged it of aneighbor ane jgerve if to the man.”
The Master said, “Fine words, am insimasting appearasce. and caresses mgect — Tso (Ch iusming was ashamed of them. | also um eshamed of them. To conceal resentment Agito person, and appear friendly wish him: —Teo Ch luring aes athemed of suck omehict | also an asad of i."
“fen Yuin and (Ohi Liu being ty tes aie, the MMawer aiid iy them, “Come, let each of | Fou toll his wishes.”
‘Tite-Lu said, “| should like, having chariots amd horses, amd Sight fier clothes, so share thes with my friends, and though they should spoil them, | would not be dimpled *
Yen Yuen sald, "] should Hike mot to boast of scl my exmelience, not i meme a digelry off my
Taze-lu then said, “1 should like, six, 10 hear: ishes." . i
‘ . fin, your w ‘The Maer exid,
Armand to the aged, te give them real: im regard to friends, 10 Lees Caer Renee inca 1o the wounp, bo tear them tenderly."
The flasher sal, “MH is all over. | have nod yret sste one who comkd pencetwe is Fite, and inwardly aocuse himeelf"
The Master said, "Ina hamlet of tem families, these may be found one honorbie ara | Sitecere 8 Loam. but mal to fond of leering,”
The Mester eri “There is Yeng! —Ee might occupy the place ofa prince."
Chuine-kiing asked abou Taye-aaeg Pooper. The Muster said, “He may pass. He does not frre) Sea || Sea *
Chong tung can, 10a toe chensh i himself's reverential feeling of the necessity of aiterion to busines, hpegh he may be easy in small matiers in his goverment of the people, (et may fe allowed. Bin if heeberish in himself that cosy feeling, and abs carry ite in he precise, 6 Ao sock an essyreode of procedore excerawe?”
The Monaer said, “Yune's words are right” The Duke Abashed which of the disciphes loved to hear.
Confiacius repiied to him, "There: wre Vien Hii: Bue Soren to lear. ibe oid mo trometer hes age, ed nat repeat a fault. Linforumanely, his appointed time was sort and he died: mad now Shes ls sot auch ancther. | have not yet heard of ay one who lowes to- learn
he did
Taze-hwa fest emelosed ona mugsion to Chi, the discipke Zar requested grain For jv mothe: The Master seed, “Give hers fu” Yen requested more. “Give her ay" said che Mager, Ve pores her five ping.
The Muster aed, “Whes Chih was pmeeeding io Chi, he hed! fat bones to his garage and wepre light flrs, | have kewrd that a superior man helps the distressed, but Goes pit add ao che wealih of the mech”
Yuu Soe heing made governor of his sown by the Master, be gave him nine thurvdred mesures of gram. but See deglingd Sheen,
The Master said, “Do met decline them. May you not give (hem aveny i he meaghborhondh, hamlets, towns, and villages?"
The Master. speaking of Churg-hung. seid, "I'the calfod'a briefed cow be ned and homed, sithough men mey not wish to use it, would the spirits of the mountains wend Fives poll it anedde’
1 The Maser eal, “Such wes Hui thal for three months there would be nothing in hit mnind comtrary to perfect virter. The others may atain i this on soome days or in sore morris, bat neching more”
6 (Cad Rang exked about Chung-yu, whether be was fit to be employed as an officer of
porveremmersi. The Master said, “Yu is. a man of declaing, what difficulty cea Eee Fired ine being wn officer of poeeremeni™” Kiang asked, "Is Ti'ae ft to be emplowed as an officer
of goverment?” anuj aie atewerdd, “Ti'ze in a man of intelligence, whet diMeuiey would he find im being an officer of gowernment?” And to the same queviion about Citi the Master gave the same reply, saying, “Cilia tum era off yearioum ability *
The chief of thee (Ohi family ser to ask Min Tame-ch’ien to be greene of Ph, ein Ttrechien said, "Decline the offer for me politely. Ufany one come again to me with a second Invitation. {shall be ohliped co go and |ive on the teeth off th Wan."
(i Poeriu tedeng 10, thas Maeter wend to agk for him. He inok hold of ina pared shorapgh the window, and saad, “ht is killing him, ia the appedrirert of Heaven, alas! Thal wach, ATW showld have: such w eickorie! That weache wmain shoulel bore: scat silica
! ‘The Master said, *Admirable indeed was the virtue of Heil With a single hambes dish of reg, a single gourd dish of drink, end lhving be bia meme marrow lane, while athers could not hawe endured thie distri, bee did root allow his jon be. aici by 1 Adevirable indice was the virtue of Hi!”
Yen OWiu faid “Tt is mot that Ido and delight in your deetrines, teal ey sapere in ingu Eicken." The Musier ald, “Those: whine strength [i inmufficien give ores in the Middle of the woy tut ecew yee limit yourself”
The Matter said to Tie-bata, “De yoru bee: a oebevbe after the style af the saperiew Tain, om mot afer thar of the mean man.”
Taze-yu being peversor of ‘Whe-cliang. the Master said to bi, "Hane ye gt pnd men there?" He answered, “There is Tan-t'ai Miehming, who reser in ‘walkicg ies shortcut, and never comes to my office, excepting on public business *
The Master said, “Mung Chih-fan does not boast of ba meri. Being in the mar on An Ocragiin of flight, when they were about tc enter the gate, be whipped up bis hore, Saying. “HM ib not that | dent fo be last. My home would ane adegnce:*
! The Master said, “Winhcet the specious speech of the Inuit To und the beauty of the prince Chao of Sung, it ts difficul $0 escapee in the presen age"
The Master sald, "Who can go oot but by tthe doew? Hiv is it than men will mot will, aotoeding: to these ways
Tit Mle ssid, “Where the solid qualities are in exces of socomplishmene, we Mave reMticity, where the acomplisimunts are im ences of the solid qualities. we have She euumers of a clerk, When the accemplishments and solid quislities are eqpamlly bhended, ae then hawe the man. of vimue."
The Master waicl, “Hela is been for upraghtness. Ifa mas bose hin uprights. audi yel live, Bis escape from death i che effect of eure good fonane.*
The Musser aiid. “They who loniw the truth are not equal je these who bere it, ad
they who love if are not equal 16 these who defight in it”
The Master sad, “To those whose talents are above mediocrity, the highest subjects may be announced, To these who are below medicerity, the highest subjects may not be | announced.”
Fan Chih asked what constituted wisdom, The Master said, “To give one’s self earnestly to the duties due to men, and, while respecting spiritual beings, to keep aloof from them, may be called wisdom.” He asked about perfect virtue. The Master said, "The mon of virtue makes the difficulty to be overcome his first business, and success only a subsequent consideration. —this may be called perfect virtue.”
The Master said, "The wise find pleasure in water; the virtuous find pleasure in hills. The wise are active: the virtuous are tranquil, The wise are joyful; the virtuous are long-lived.”
The Master said, “CHE, by one change, would come to the State of Lu. Lu, by one charige. would come toa State where true peinciples predominated.”
‘The Master said. “A cornered vessel without comers—a strange cornered vessel! A arrange comered vessel!”
Tea! Wo asked, saying, "A benevolent man, though it be told him, —"There is a man in the well” will go inafier him, | suppose.” Confucius said, "Why should he do so?" A superior man may be made 10 20 to the well, but he cannot be made to go down into ft. He may be imposed upon, but he cannot be fooled.”
The Master said. “The superior man, extensively studying all learning, and keeping himself under the restraint of the rules of propriety, may thus likewise not overstep what is right” ~The Master having visited Nam-tsze, Tsze-lu was displeased, on which the Master swore, saying. "Wherein I have done improperly, may Heaven reject me, may Heaven reject me!”
The Master said, “Perfect is the virtue which is according to the Constant Mean! Rare for a long time has been its practice among the people.”
Tsze-kung said, “Suppose the case of 2 man extensively conferring benefits on the people, and able to assist all, what would you say of him’? Might he be called perfectly virrucus?” The Master said, "Why speak only of virtue in connection with him? Must he not have the qualities of a sage? Even Yao and Shun were still solicitous about this,
"Now the man of perfect virtue, wishing to be established himself, seeks also to establish others: wishing to be enlarged himself, he seeks also to enlarge others.
"To be able to judge of others by what is migh in ourselves; «this may be called the art
ad
of wirtie:”
fine Master said, “A iransmitter and not a maker, Seleing in and loving thea incions, | vemture bo compare myseld with car old Pang.”
The Master saad, “The silent ireaeering up of knowledge; learning sthout saiery;
eee) insiFucting ofhiers witha! being, wearked: which one of thee things belongs te fig?"
The Mosier said, “The leaving virted wilhoul proper culation, the not thoroughly @cussing what is beamed; not being able to meee iwank nghiesusness of which a keteireelectoe is gained: and not boing able io Change: eh ia ent good; thee wer che
things which ceeasion me solicitude,”
When the Master acs amoocupied with esters, hia manner wns eae, ond be looked pleased.
| The Master said, “Extreme ta my decay. For a lang tine, fl hawt mnt dncorrend, aw | Was wont be di, thal i save the duke of Cha=
The Mover said, "Let tive will (be gett the putts oof dun, “Let eeery iitalmament ie vehan ice goed bar firmly gerckped “Lat perfect wires se -aeprded with.
“Let relaaation and enjoymumt be found in the polite arts.
The Master said, “From the man bringing bes beardde of diesel fiewh fir ory temching Upwards, | havo newer reflaucd instruction in amy one.”
The Minster said “1 div nev expen ap the truth to one wher by ca eager ic jee
knowledge, nor help out any one who it nol arsious to explain himesel When | have Presented one comer of a subject to any one, ared he carmet from is bear the other tree,
Ido net repeat my lexuon." When the Mitier os eating oy ihe aide of a meurtes, he sever abe te the fall. He did not sing on the same day in whiol he had bees weepeng:
The Maier said po Yen Yuan, “i!hen called bo offing, to underiaboe bn duties, when
not so called. to he retired: —it 16 only | and you who have attained to this.”
Tsze-tu said, “If veer had the conduct of the armies ofa great state, whom would you have te act with you”
The Master said, "| would act have hem se act with me, who will unarmed attack a tiger, or cross a fiver without a boat, dying without any regret. My associate must be the man who proceeds to action full of solitude, whe is fond of adjusting his plans, and then
carries them into execution.”
The Muster said, “Ifthe search for riches is sure to be successful, though I should become § groom with whip in hand to get them, | will de so. As the search may not be successful. | will follow afer that which | lowe.”
The things in reference to which the Master exercised the greatest caution were — fasting, war, and sickness
When the Master was in CN, he heard the Shao, and for three months did not know the taste of Mesh. *| did not think™ he said, “that music could have been made so excefiem as this.”
Yeo Yu said, “Is our Master for the ruler of Wei?” Tsze-kung said, "Ob! I will ask him.” He went in accordingly, and said. "What sart of men were Po-i and Shu-ch's?” "They were ancient worthes.” said the Master. "Did they have any repinings because of their coutse™ The Master again replied. “They sought to act virtuously, and they did so; what wens there foe them to repine aboar?” On this, Tsze-kung went out and said, "Our Master is ren fee him.” “With coarse rice to ent, with water to drink, and my bended ann
The Master seid, Riches and honors acquired
for a pallow; —| have still joy in the midst of these things. by unrightcousness, are 10 me a5 8 floating cloud."
\7 The Master said, “If some years were added to my life, | would give fifty to the study of the Yi, and then | might come to be without great faults."
1 The Master's frequent themes af discourse were —the Odes, the History, and the maintenance of the Rules of Propriety. On all these he frequently discoursed,
19 The Duke of Sheh asked Tsze-tu about Confucitss, and Tsze-lu did not answer him.
‘The Master said, “Why did you not say to him, —He is simply a man, who in his eager pursuit of knowledge forgets his food, who in the jay of its attainment forgets his sorrows, and who does not perceive that old age is coming on!?*
°) The Master said, “| am not one who was bum in the possession of knowledge; | am one whe is fond of antiquity, and carnest in seeking it there,”
The subjects on which the Master did not talk, were extracedinary things: feats of strength, disorder, and spiritual beings,
The Master said, "When | walk along with two others, they may serve me as my
teachers. | will select their good qualities and follow them, their bad qualities and avoid them.”
The Master said, "Heaven produced the virtue that is ix me, Hwan Tui —what can he do to me?"
The Master said, "Do you think, my disciples, that | have any concealments? | conceal nothing from you. There is nothing which | do that is mot shown to yoru, my disciples; that is my way.”
There were four things which the Master taught,—letiers, ethics, devotion of soul, and truthfulness.
| The Master said, "A sage it is not mine to see; could | see a man of real talent and virtue, that would satisfy me,"
The Master said, *A good man it is not mine to see; could | see a man possessed of Coristancy, that would satisfy me.
“Having not and yet affecting to have, empty and yet affecting to be full, straitened and Yet affecting to be at ease, —it is difficult with such charactersstics to have constancy.”
The Master angled, but did not use a net. He shot, but sot at birds perching.
The Master said, “There may be those who act without knowing why. I do not do
%. Hearing much and selecting what is good and following it; seeing much and keeping it in memory: this Is the second style of knowledge.”
ft was difficult to talk profitably and reputably with the people of Hu-hsiang, and lad of that place having had an interview with the Master, the disciples doubted
The Master said, *] admit people's approach 10 me without committing myself as to what they may do when they have retired. Why must one be so severe? If a man purify
himself to wait upon me, I receive him so purified, without guarnnteing his past conduct.”
Pe aaa “ts virtue a thing remote? | wish to be virtuous, and lo! virtue & at
The miniser of crime of Clam asked whether the duke Chao knew propriety, and Confucius said, "He knew propriety.”
Contucsis having retired, the minister bowed to Wu-ea Chri to come forward, and said, "| hove heard that the superior man is not a partisan. May the superior man be a partisan
also” The prince marred «daughter of the house of WU, of the same sumame with tenesel and called her, ‘The elter Tare of Wu! Hf the prince knew propriety, who does rust knows it?”
Wom Chl reported these remarks, and the Master sald, “! am fortunate! If | have any errors. poople are sure to know them,”
When the Master was in company with a person who was singing, if he sang well, he would make him repeat the song, while he accompanied it with his own voice.
The Master said, "In letters tam perhaps equal to other men, but the character of the superior man, carry ing out in his conduet what he professes, is what 1 have not yet attartied 10."
The Master said, "The sage and the man of perfect virtue;—how dare I rank myself with them”? H may simply be said of me, that | strive to become such without satiety, and veach others without weariness.” Kung-hsi Hwa said, "This is just what we, the disciples, cannot imitate you in *
The Master being very sick, Tsze-lu asked leave to pray for him, He said, "May such a thing be dome" Tsze-lu replied, "It may. In the Eulogies it is said, ‘Prayer has heen made for thee to the spirits of the upper and lower worlds.” The Master said, “My praying has been for a long time.”
The Master ssid, “Extravagance leads 10 insubordination, and parsimony to meariness. ft is better to be mean than to be insubordinate.”
The Master ssid, “The superior man is satisfied and composed: the mean man is always full of distress.”
The Master was mild, and yet dignified; majestic, and yet not flerce; respectful, and yet easy.
Vin
‘The Master said, “Tai-po may be said to have reached the highest point of virtuous action. Thrice he declined the kingdom, and the people in ignorance of his motives could fot express their appeobasion of his conduct,”
: ‘The Master said, "Respectfuiness, without the rules of propriety, becomes laborious bustle: carefulness, without the rules of propriety, becomes timidity; boldness, without
Ihe fules of propriety, becones Inaubordination: sraighiforwardnes, without the rules of Propricty, becomes nedencas.
“Wher these who sre in high stations perfcers well afl their duties to their relations, che Pent are oroused bo viriee. When old frends ane net neglected by them, the pengle are Preserved from meanness."
The philosopher T: I], he cared to him the disciples of his school, and taid, “Uncover my i pecs ghalre It in amid in the Book of Poetry, "We should be apprehensive ared couticis, a if on the brink of a deep gulf, ax if trending on thin ice, Land so have | been, New and hereafter, | now my escape Grom all injury tomy person. Ove my litte children.”
‘The philosopher Tsang being ill, Meng Chang went to ask bow he was,
Taang said to him, “hen a bled fs about to die, tts notes ant mount when a caan i about to die, his words are good.
“There are three principles of conduct which the man of high rank showld commader Specially important) —that in his deporiment and manner he keep from violence and heedbessress, that in regulating his countenance be keep near to sincerity; and whut in bie words and tones he keep far from lowness and ierpropriety, Aa to such mains a Minding to the sacrificial vessels, there ane the proper officers for them.”
The phitosopher Tsang said, "Gifted with ability, and yet raming quesions to those Who were not so; possessed of much, and yet putting questions to those possessed off lithe; having, as though her hadi net; full, and yet coumting himself as empty; offended
Aigninest, and yet entering inte me altercation; formerty | hada fiend eho purswed thn aye of endict,”
The philosopher Tsang said, “Suppose that there is as individen) hs can be entrusted with the charge of a young orphan prince, andcan be commissioned wish authority over a state ofa hundred li, and whom no-emergency however greet can drive from: his principles: —is such a rian & superor man? He baa superior mn tedewd.”
_ The philosopher Tsang seid, “The officer may not be without bresdth of mind and “IE rias eniliuramoe. His burden i bevy and ie coarse § bong.
“Perfect virtue is the burden which he considers lt is his to sustain; is in oot bewrey? Only with death does his course stom: is it not borg’?
The Master said, “tia ber the Odes that ihe mind is eenuued, “Ths by the Puikes of Propriety char ihe character ts osinblished, “tL is freon Whusdc that the finish ja needled."
The Minster said, “The people enay be made to follow a pach off metice, bun they mary
mot be made fo understand it.”
The Mester said. "The man whe is fond of daring and i dissatisfied with poverty, will proseed 10 subordination, So will the man who is not virtuces, when you carry voor dishike of him to an extreme”
The Master said, “Thowgh a man have abilities as admirable as those of the Duke of Chau, yet if he be prow’ and migumndly, those other things are really not worth being locked at”
The Master said, “It is nee easy to find « man who has learned for three years without coming to be pood,”
The Master sail, "With sincere faith he unites the love of learning; holding firm to death, he is perfecting the excellence of his course.
“Such an one will not enter a lottering state, noe dwell in a disorganized one, When right principles of government prevail in the kingdom, he will show himself; when they are prostrate, he will keep concealed.
“When a counery is well governed. poverty and 2 mean condition are things t be ashamed of When a country is ill govemed, riches and honor are things to be ashamed
of”
The Master ssid, "He who és not in any particular office has nothing to do with plans for the administration of its duties.”
The Master said, "When the music master Chih first entered on his office, the finish of the Kwan Tsu was magnificent: how it filled the cars!"
The Master said. “Ardent and yet not upright, stupid and yet not attentive; simple and yet not sincere: —such persons f do noé understand,”
The Master said, “Lear as if you could not reach your object, and were always fearing aiso lest you should lose iL”
1X The Masier said, “How majestic was the manner in which Shun and Yu held possession of the empire, as if it were nothing to them!
bo Tike Master said, "Great inxteed was Yao as 2 sovereign! How majestic was he! ft is only Heaven that is grand, end only Yao corresponded to it, How vast was his virtue! The people could find no name for it
“How majestic was he sn the works whach he accomplished! How glorious in the elegant regulations which he instiswed!*
\) Styun had five minewers, and the empire was well governed.
King Wu said, “| hawe ter able mirdgtery,"
Confucius said, “Is not the saying thal ttents ere diffieall 0 find, irae’? Cnky when the dyewsties of Tang and Yu met were they more abundect than be this of Chama, yet there wit 8 woman among them, The while minigiers were no meee than nine een.
"King Wan possessed bao of the three parts of the emgire, and with those he served the dynasty of Vin. The virtue of the house of Chau may be maid bo herve reached the highest point indeed."
The Master said, "I can find no flaw inthe character of Yu. He sed hired! f eoarne fond and drink, but displayed the utrcet filial piety Iowards the spirits. His ordinary ginments were poor, bul he displayed the utmost elegance in his sacrifical cap and apron. He lived in a low, mean house, bat expended all hes strength on the ditches ana wie? charmels. | can find mathire like a flare in Ya”
The subjects of which the Master sekdom spoke were: profitableness, and also the appolntevents of Heaven, and perfect virtue.
Aman of the village of Ta-hesiang said, “Creat indeed is the philosopher Kang! His ee cktensive, and yet he does mot render his rare Garrecess by anny partacobar thane *
The Master heard the chservation, and said to his disciples, "What shall | practsce? Shall | practice Charicteeriog., or shall | pracice aechery? | will practice charioteenng.”
; The Master said, “The linen cap la that preseribed by ihe rules of ceremony, but ae Hsilk ome is wom, ff is aennomical, and | follow the common practice
“The fules of ceremony prescribe the bowing below the ball, but now the peactios & 10 bow only after ascending it. That is arrogant | continae to bow below the hall, though | oppose the eoammoon practice,"
There were four things fram which the Master waa entirely free. He had no foregone Sonclusions, no arbiarary preceienminstions, no obtinesy. and an egoam
The Maater wea put bv feger in Kwang,
He said “After the deails of Kang Wan. mas not the cae of truth lodged here im me?
UP Hesrvem Ped wished to lel ihre cane af ttl perish, chen |, a Fubure miortal! should nay have got suck a relaiion $0 thal crrase. While Heaven dives mal lel the couse of truth
perish, wheter the people of K'wang do to me?”
A high officer asked Taxe-kenig. saving. “May we not say that your Master is a sege? Here varius th het ability”
Tave-hung soul. “Cenninly Heaven hes endowed him unlimitedly, He & about a sage. Aund, moreover, his ability invari”
The Master heard of the conversation und said, "Does the high officer lence ma? When Twas virang, oy ccomtalltion wars low, and | acquited my abdlity in mary thing, bu they were mean matters. Mest the saperiot man huiwe such variety of ability? He does so need variety of atihry, Lao saad, “The Muster said, ‘Having no official employmend, | acquired many am.
The: Maser anid. “Am | indeed possessed of knowledge? | am mit knewving. But ifs mean person. who appears guile empty-like, ask anything of me. [ sed id forth from one ceri) to: the ofthe afd) exiharust 11."
The Master cot. “The Fig bind does oct come, the river sends forth no map: —itis 2 over with me!”
When the Mester saw a perion ina mrouming dress, OF HMny OK with the cap and
upper and lower garments of full dress, of a blind person, on ntserving them approaching, though they were younger than hineelf, be veould rise up, amd if he: had tn
pass By them, bse weld div an herstaty
| Yen Yuan, in admiration of the Maser’ doctrines, sighed and said, “] looked upto them. afd they seemed to become more hiete 1 tried to penetrate them, and they seemed to become mere finn: | looked al hem hefore me, and suddenly they seemed fo be boechianed
"The Master by onderle method. skillfully beads men on. He enlarged my mind with earning, and taught me the resinenits of propriety’
"When | wish te give ver the study of his doctrines, Leanned do 30, and having exerned all my ability, there Seema something tn stare right up befinre ene; but though 1 wish bo folliqay and lay hod of it, | really find no way to dio: 50"
The Maxiter being very ill, Tize-lu wished the disciples to pet as ministers to ham. Charing a remission cf bis ilieras, tee said, “Long bers the conduct of Yu been deceitful!
By peciending oo have minsters when | have them noi, whom shoubd | impose upon? Shoeid | impost upeet Heer?
, hairs dha 0 aloulel die bn ihe hands of ministers, 16 1 not besier that | should
die in the hands of you, my disciples? And though | may not get a greet burial hall | iis
“Tane-hump said, “There isa beautiful gem here. Should | lary if up iw coe aed it? or should | seek for a good price and sell If?" The Master said, “Sell in! Sell j1"
keep But | would wait for one to offer the peice,”
Mosher ‘was wishanp, bo po dred Give armmeteg Tree iree ike brite it te eae
SOME one said, “They ant rude. How can you do such a thing?” The Master said, “Ifa MEANS cin deh among then, what rudeness weld there be’
Master said, “| rebarmed from Wei to Lo, and then the mic was reSoreed, and maces in Une Royal songs and Praise songs all Gourd their proper places."
Master said. “Abroad, ta serve the high ministers and nobler a home. io ase Bdher and elder brothers; in all duties io the dead, nal 10 dire not to exer one's d mat to be overcome of wine: —ahich one of these things diy | attage wT
vent he Master standing by a stream, saéd, “It passes om just like this, not coming davy
1 The Master ied, “I have not seen one who lowes virbor as be lovey beauty.”
The Master said, “The prosecution of leamding may be compared tx whet may 1 faising mound. Vfthere want tot one beset of earth to complete the iowk, Shop, the stopping ig my own work. ls may be compared to throwing down ihe earth
lowed proven, Though brunt One beahetfial ts thrown ot atime, the achamelng swith id going forward."
‘The Macuer sald, "Newer flagging whes 1 set forth anything tn frien: —alh! that ts
=) The Master said of Yer Yeon, "Alas! | saw We constant advance Ui reeenr sare barns Mop in his progress,”
: ‘The Master said, “There are cases in which the blade apriegs, tbat the plant docs ant i] to flower! There are cases where it flower: heat fruil it mf subsequently
‘: a | The Master sid, "A youth bs 10 be regarded with respect, How do ae lenow that his
Future will mot fhe equal to our present? If he reach the ape of forty co fifky, and has mot made hirrsclf heard of, then indeed he will not be worth being regarded with respect
“1 The Master said, "an even refuse 40 assent bo the words of wiret admonition? Bat It in refering ihe conduct because of theen which is valuable, Can men nefese to be pleased with words of gentle advice? Blut it ia undotding their wen which i: valuable Ifa
5
aren bn pleased With those words, bun doas-nce unfold sels lem, snd apneete 90 Wiest not reform his conduct, | can really de nedhing with him,”
, The Master said. “Hold faithfulness and sincerity as first principles. Have no friends mo equal to yourself, When you have faults, do not fear to abandon them.”
The Master seid, “The commander of the forces of a large state may be carried off, but the will of even a coenmon man cannot be taken from him.”
The Master said. "Dressed himself in a tamered robe quilted with hemp, yet standing by the side of men dressed in flies. and net ashamed; —ah! it is Yu who is equal bo this!
“He distikes none. he covets nothing: —what can he do but what is good!" Tsze-lu kept continually repeating these words of the ode, when the Master said, "Those things are by no means sufficient to constitute perfect excellence.”
The Master said, “When the year beccenes cold, then we know how the pine and the evpress are the fast to lose their leaves.”
The Master szid, "The wise are free froen perplexities; the virtuous from anxiety; and the bold from fear,”
The Mester said, "There are some with whom we may study in common, but we shall find them unable to go along with us to principles. Perhaps we may go on with them to principles, but we shall find them unabie to get established in those along with ts: Or if we may get $0 established along with them, we shall find them unable to weigh occurring events along with us.”
“How the flowers of the aspen-plum flutter and turn! Do I not think of you? But your house is distant.”
The Master said. “It is the want of thought about it. How is it distarst?”
x I. Confucius, in his village, looked simple and sincere, and as if he were not able to
‘Thee he was inthe prince's ancestral temple, or inthe cout, he spoke minutely on every
pot, but cautiously. When he was waiting at court, in speakiny with the great officers of the lower grade, he spoke freely, but ina straightforward manner; in speaking with those of the higher grade,
he did so blandly, but precisely.
When the ruler wat present, his manner displayed respectful uneasiness: it waa greve, bul sclf-possessed.
+
2. When the prince called him to employ him in the reception of a visitor, his countenance appeared to change, and his legs io move forward with difficulty,
He inclined himself in the other officers among whem he stood, moving hin left or right arm, a8 thelr position required, but keeping the skirts of his robe before und behead wernly adjusted,
He hastened forward, with his anms like the wings of a bird.
Wher the guest had retired, he would report to the prince, "The vistior is not taming fang any more.”
1. When he entered the palace gate, be seemed to bend his body, es if Tt were ane sufficient te-admit him,
When he wad standing, he did nol occupy the middle of thet gateway; when he pamed ie of out, he did mot tread upon the threshold.
When he was passing the vacant place of the prince, hit countenance appeared to change, and lis legs to bend under him, and his words came as if he hardly hed breath to utter thea,
He ascended thee reception hall, holding up bis robe with both his hands, and bus beady bent; holding in bis breath also, as if he dered mot breathe.
When ihe canve out from the audience, as soon as he had descended one-step, he began to relax his countenance, and had a satisfied look. When he had got the botiom of the sep, he advanced rapidly to his place, with his arms like wings, sed on occupying it, his Tranner 86l showed nespectful uneasiness.
4. Wher he was carrying the scepter of his ruler, he seemed to-bend bis body, as iffhe Were fol able to bear is weight. He did not hold it higher than the position of the tama, in making a bow, mor lower than their position in giving arything to another. His SGUGLENANGE seemed to change, and book apprehensive, and he dragged bis feet akong 2s iP they were held by something to the ground.
In Presenting the presents with which he wos Chagged, he weet a placid appearance Atha private audience, he looked highly pleased.
5. The superior man did not use a deep purple, or a pune cobce, be the oraments of his dress,
Even In his undress, be did mot wear ayvihing of a red or reddish color In warm weather, he had a single garmens either of coarse or fine textare, bot he wort it displayed over an inner partment.
Ower lambs fur he yore a garment of black: ower fuwn's fur one of white; and over fox’: fur one of yellow,
The fur robe of his undress was long, with the right shewe short,
He required his sleeping dress tp be halfas long again as bis body.
When saying at home, he used thick furs of the fia or the badger.
When he put off mourning, he wore all the appendages of the
His undergarment, except when it was required to be of the curtain shape, was made (ff 4alk cut nomgew above and wide bei
Hie did not wear lamb's fur ora black cap one vii of condolence,
fn the first day of the nuoneh be put on his court robes, and presented himself at court,
When faving. be thought it necessary 10 haved fi clodhes beighth chin and made of linen cloth.
© When fasting. he thoughe it necessary 10 change his food, and also to change the place where he commonly sat in the apartment
ee nee ae Se rae Ns He a cleaned, por to have his mince meat cut quite small
He did mot cat mace whrel had been imgured by heat or damp and tumed sour, nor fish or flesh whach was gore, He did not ent what was discolored, of what was of a bad favor, nor anvihing which was il-eooked. ar was nol in season
He did not cat meat which was not cut properly, nor what was served without its proper mac
Though there might he a lange quierity of meat, he would not allow what he took to exceed the dite proportion for the nee. It was only in wine that he laid down no limit for himself, bet he did not allow himself to be confused by it.
He dad net partake of wine and dried meat bought in the market.
He was never withnul ginger when he ate, He did not cat much,
When he had heen assisting wt the prince’s sacrifice, he did not keep the Mesh which he received ovemight The flesh of his family sacrifice he did not keep over three days. If kent over three davs, people could ma cat &
When cating. he did not converse. When in bed, he did not speak, Although his food maght be coarse rice and vegetable soup, he wou sacrifice with a grave. respectful air.
7. Uf his mat was poe straight, he did not sit on it,
When the villagers were drinking together. upon thse who carried staffs going out, he aiso went cut immediaety after,
& When the villagers were poing through their ceremonies to drive away pestilential influences. ke put on his count robes and stood on the eastern steps, G When be was sending complimeraary inquiries to any one in another state, he bowed twice as he escomed the messenger away. . ae 10 Chi Kiang having sent him a present of physic, he bowed and received it, saying, “T do non know a E dare not taste it. z
nt The stable being bumed down, when he was at court, on his return he said, “Has any man been hurt?” He did not ask about the horses. .
iz When the prince presented him with food, he would adjust his matt, first taste 1, and then give it eway Lo cehers. When the prince sent him a gift of undressed meat, he would have it cooked. and offer it 1o the spirits of his ancestors, When the prince sent him a gift of a living animal, he would keep it alive,
When he was in atlendance on the prince and joining in the entertainment, the prince only sacrificed. He first tasted everything.
13. When he was ili and the prince came to visit him, be had his head to the east, made his court robes be speead over him, and drew his girdle across them.
4 When the prince’s order called him, without waiting for his carriage to be yoked, he went at once,
15, When he entered the ancestral terniple of the state, he asked about everything.
16. When ary of his friends died, if be had no relations offices, he would say, “I will bury him.”
When a friend sent him a present, hough m might be a carriage and horses, he did not
bow. The only present for which he bowed was that of the flesh of sacrifice.
Id offer a tittle of it in
17, In bed, he did not lhe like a corpse. At home, he did not put on any formal deporment. a
18. When he saw any one in a mourning dress, though it might be an
would change countenance, when be saw any one wearing the cap of full dress, or Mind person, though he might be in his undress, he would salute him in a ceremonious manner
To any person in mourning he bowed forward to the crossbar of his carriage: he bowed in the same way to any one bearing the tables of popullation.
When he was at an entertainment where there was an abundance of provisions set before him, he would change countenance and rise up.
On a sudden clap of thunder, or a violent wind, he would change countenance.
19. When he was about to mount his carriage, he would stand seright, holding the cord,
When he was in the carriage, he did not tur his head quite rownd, he did net talk hastily, he did not point with his hands.
re Seeing the group approaching, the bird instantly rises. It flies around, and by and settles.
The Master said, "There is the hen-pheasant on the hill bridge. it knows how to preserve itself!" Tsze4u made @ motion to catch it, Thrice it cried and then flew away.
The Master said, “The men of former tienes im the matters of ceremonies and music
were rustics, it is said, while the men of these latter times, in ceremonies and music, are accomplished gentlemen.
“ICT have occasion to use those things, | follow the men of former times.”
The Master said, "Of those who were with me in Cyan and Tyai, there ave none to be found to enter my doar.”
Distinguished for their virtuous Principles and practice, there were Yen Yuan, Min Tsze-chrien, Zan Po-niu, and Chung-kung: for their ability in speech, Tsai Wo and Tsze- kung: for their administrative
talents, Zan Yu and Chi Lu; for their Rterary acquirements, Tsze-yu and ‘Tsze-hsia
The Master said, "Hui gives Me oo assistance. There is nothing Gut | say in which he does not delight”
The Master said, “Fitial indeed is Min Tsze-chvient Other people say nothing of him different from the report of his pareets and brothers.”
Nan Yung was frequently repeating the lines about a white scepter stone, Confucius gave hem the daughter of his elder brother 10 wife.
. Chi K’ang asked which of the disciples loved to lea, Confucius replied to him, There was Yer Hui: he loved so learn, Unfortunately his appointed time was short, and he died. Now there is no one who loves 10 fear, as he did.”
When Yen Yuan died, Yen Lu begged the carriage of the Master to sell and get an outer shell fre has soey's coffin
The Master saad, “Every one calls his son his son, whether he has talents or has not talents. There was Li; when he died, he had a coffin but no outer shell, | would not walk on foot to get a shell for him, because. having followed in the rear of the great officers, it was not proper that | should walk om fos.”
When Yen Yuan died, the Master said. "Alas! Heaven is destroying me! Heaven is destroying me!”
When Yen Yuan died. the Master bewailed him exceedingly, and the disciples who were with him said, "Master, your grief is excessive!” Is itexcessive?* said he. “If am not to mourn bitterly for this man, for whom should T mourn?”
When Yen Yuan died, the disciples wished to give him a great funeral, and the Master said, “You may not do se.” The disciples did bury him in great style. The Master said, "Hui behaved towards me as his father, | have not been able to treat him 2s my son. The fault is not mine; it belongs to you, O disciples."
‘2, Chi Lu asked sbout serving the spirits of the dead. The Master said, "While you are not able 1 serve men, how can you serve their spirits?" Chi Lu added, “t venture to ask bout death?” He was answered, “While you do not know life, how can you know about
|) The disciple Min was standing by his side, looking bland and precise; Tsze-lu, looking bold and soidierly. Zan Yu and Teze-kung, with a free and strightforward
manner. The Master was pleased. He said, "Yu, there! —be will not die a nacural death,” ‘4 Some parties in Lu were going to take down and rebuild the Long Treasury.
Min Tsze-ch’ien said, “Suppose it were io be repaired afler its old style; —why must it be altered and made anew”
The Master said, “This man seldom speaks; when he does, he is sure bo bi the point." The Master said, "What has the bute of Yu to do in my door?
The other disciples began not ip respect Tsxelu. The Master said, “Yu he ascended to the hall, thoagh he hes pet yet passed into the inner apartmenis."
\) Tsne-loung asked wheeh of the two, Shik or Shang, was the sapere The Master sald, “Shih goes beyored the dies mean, and Shang discs aot come up to 11."
“Then,” saed Taze-kump., “ehe superiocity is with Shih, | sappose.* The Master said, “To go beyond is. as wrong a to fall short,"
The bead of the Chi family was richer than thee duke of Cham had been, ard yet CWiu collected his imposts for him, and inereased his wealth.
ite Master sald, "He is no disckple of mire. My littl children, beat the dram and aasail aa
CHai is simple. Shum ia dull, Shih is specious. Yu ip coarse. The Master said, "There is Hui! He has nearty attained to perfect virtue. He ts often in ‘ami,
“Ts'te does nol acquiesce in the apgointments of Heaven, and his goods are increesecd by him. Yet his jaxigments are often comect.”
Hid Veee-chang asked what were the characteristics of the good man, ‘The fetasier said,
does not tread in the footsteps of others, bat moreover, he does not enter the chamber of the sage."
The Master said, “if, because a tman's discourse appear solid and sincere, we allow him to bee a good man, 14 he really a superior man? or is his gravity oely in appearence’
Ts2e-fu asked whether he should immedinety cary into practioe whar he heard. The Master said, "There are your filer and elder hinothers te be conduhted: —a hy should you sect on that principle of iremediately camying into practice what you bur? #6 Yu asked the same, whether he should immediately cary ito practice what he heard, and the Master anawered, “Immediately cary inte practioe what you hear.” Kung- hst Hwa said, "Yu asked whether he should cary immediately into practioe what he heard, and you said, "There are your father and elder brothers to be consulted." Chiu usked whether he should immediately carry ints practice what te heard, and you said, ‘Curry it immediately inte practice.’ |, Ch'ih, aan perplexed, and vermure to adh pou for an explanation.” The Master eaid, “Chiu i retiring and show: therefore | urged hies forward. Wu has more than his own share of energy; theneficee | kept him back.”
The Master was put in fear in K*wang end Yen Yuan fell behind, The Master, on his
rejoining him, said, "I thought yuu had died." Mus replicd, “While you were alive, how should 1 presume to die”
OW) Tsze-7an asked whether Chune Yu and Zan Chiu could be called great Minestery,
The Master said, "I thougte vou would ask aboul some extraordinary individuals, and you only ask about Yu and Chl!
What is called « great minister. is one who serves his prince according to what is right, and when he finds he cannot dos), reteres,
"Now. as bo Yu and CW they may be called ordinary ministers,”
Taze-san stad, “Then they will always follow their chief, —win they?"
The Master said, "In an act of parnicide or regicide, they would not follow him.” Tsre-lu get Tsze-kav appointed govemor of Pi.
The Master said, You are ingureng a man’s son.”
and officers: there are the altars of the
Tsze-lu said, “There sev, there, common people hooks before he can be considered to
spirits of the land and grain. Why must one read have jearmed!*
The Master said, "It is on this sccount that | Buse your glib-tongued people. Tsze-lu, Tsang Hsi, Zan Yu, and Kueghsi Hwa were sitting by the Master. He said to them, “Dhough [am a day of so older than you, do not think of that.
"From day wo day you are szying. “We are not known’ If some ruler were to know you, what would you like to do?”
Taze-tu hastily and lightly) replied. “Suppose the let it be straitened between other large cities; let i and to this Jet there be added 2 famine in corm and in all vegetables: —if | were intrusted with the goverrenent of. in three years’ time | could make the people to be bold, and to
recognize the rules of righteous conduct.” The Master smiled at him.
Turning to Yen Yu, he said. “Ch'in, what are your wishes?” Chiu replied, “Suppose & state of sixty or seventy li square, or one of fifty or sixty, and let me have the government of it; —in theee years’ time, ! could make plenty to abound among the people. As 10 teaching them the principles of peopeiety, and music, I must wait for the rise of a superioe man to do thal.”
"What are your wishes. Chih.” said the Master next to Kung-hsi Hwa, Chvih replied, “t
case of 2 state of ten thousand chariots; be suffering from invading armies;
do cet sav tht ey obdliby eockends. bo these Gham, et | shoaid wrest learn thes, Ar ae sevicgs of the ancestral loge, ard at the audiences of the princes with the speenign, |
should Vike, drevsed in the dark square-made eobe and the black linen 0p, fo act gaa arial aescitaint.”
Lost ofall, the Mosier asked Tseng Hai, "Then, what wre your wishes” Tiss, pausing a he vos playing on bis lute, while il was yet bwanging, lied the insirument aide. and “My wishes.” he said, “are different from the cherished purposes of these three genikemen.” "Velhat haren is there in chy?" said) the Master; "da yeu als, ag well as they, speak out your wishes "Tien then said, “In this, the last month of spring, with che drevs of the seme all complete. along wth five or sis young ten whe have aesumed the cap, and aie or seven boys, 0 wohl wash in the |, enjoy the beeese among the rain alars, anal return hone dimging.” The Master hemved a sigh amd sade “I give my aporoval in Tien"
The three others having gone cut, Tsang Hid cenutined betand, and.said, “What. do you
think of the words of these three friends? The Mdaster replied, “They tiinply told ewch one: bis wishes,”
Ht pursued, “Master, why did vou smile ot Ya"
He wore. answetred The oiamagement of 5 state demands the rules of Hct 3 Propriery. iHisw wows were not humble; therghore | emiled ot him”
Hei again sasd, “Balt was it ned a state ehich Chiba proposed for bimscl?™ The reply war, Bir ei aaa territory of siaty or seventy || or one of ty oF sists, which we a Ei
Ohce mare, Hai bnquired, "And wad il ot a sine which Chih proposed for hirearif™ The Master again replied, “Yes: who but princes have to-do with ancestral temples, ard
with sudiences bar the sovereign Chih were io be a smadl sssiatane i Sereoet, Who coubd be a erat one? ° =
Yen Yunn asked about perfect virlue, The Master said, "To subdue con't self and Plu bo APOGriIGh. is perfect virtue, Ef a man cen for one day abc hires and eeium
1d prapriehy, im under heaven will ascribe pestiocy virtue} him. Ly the practice of periecy virtue from a oan linself, ox is it from eahers™"
Yor Yuan soi, “| beg to ask the steps of thet proces" The Master sepliedh, “Lacie ra at
what is Contrary fo propriety: listen oot to what is contrary to propriety; speak not what §5 cowttrary te propriety; make no movement which is contrary to propriety.” Yen Yuan then said, “Though ! am deficient in imtelligence and vigor, | will make it my business to practice this lesson.”
Chung-kung asked about perfect virtue. The Master said, “It is, when you go abroad, to behave to every one as if vou were receiving a great guest; to employ the people as if vou were assisting a @ great sacrifice; not to do to others as you would not wish done to yourself; to have no murmuring against you in the country, and none in the family.” Chung-kung said, "Though | am deficient in imelligence and vigor, | will make it my business to practice thes lesson,”
Sze-ma Niu asked about perfect virtue. The Master said, "The man of perfect virtue is cautious and slow in his speech.” "Cautious and slow in his speech!" said Niu; —"is this what is meant by perfect virtue?" The Master said “When a man feels the difficulty of doing, can he be other than cautious and slow in speaking?"
Sze-ma Niu asked about the superior man, The Master said, "The superior man has neither anxiety nor fear.” “Being without anxiety or fear!” ssid Nui; “does this constitute what we call the superior man?” The Mester said, "When intersal examination discovers nothing wrong, what is there to be anxious about, what is there to fear?”
Sze-ma Niu, full of anxiety, said, “Other men all have their brothers, | only have
no.”
Tsze-hsia said to him, "There is the following saying which | have heard: "Death and life
have their determined appointment: riches and honors depend upon Heaven.”
“Let the superior man never fail reverentially to order his own conduct, and let him be to others and obvervaert of propriety: —then all within the four seas will be his
brothers. What has the superior man to do with being distressed because he has no
brothers?*
6 Taze-chang asked what constituted intelligence. The Master said, "He with whom neither slander that gradually soaks into the mind, nor statements that startle like & wound in the flesh, are successful may be calied intelligent indeed, Yea, he with whom neither soaking slander, nor startling statements, are successful, may be called
farsecing.
> Tsze-kung asked about goverment. The Master said, “The requisites of government are that there be sufficiency of food, sufficiency of military equipment, and the
confidence of the people in their ruler.”
Tsze-kung said, “If it cannot be helped, and one of these must be dispensed with, which of the three should be foregone first?” "The military equipment,” said the Master.
Tsze-kung again asked, "If it cannot be helped, and one of the remaining two must be dispensed with, which of them should be foregone?" The Master answered, “Part with the food. From of old, death has been the lot of an men; but if the people have no faith in their rulers, there is no standing for the state.”
Chi Tsze-ch’ang said, "In a superior man it is only the substantial qualities which are wanted; —why should we seek for omamental accomplishments?”
Tsze-kung said, "Alas! Your words, sir, show you to be a superior man, but four horses cannot overtake the tongue, Omament is as substance, substance is as omament. The
hide of a tiger or a leopard stripped of its hair, is like the hide of a dog or a goat stripped of its hair.*
‘The Duke Ai inquired of Yu Zo, saying, "The year is one of scarcity, and the returns for expenditure are not suffichent; —what is to be done?”
Yu Zo replied to him, *Why not simply tithe the people?”
“With two tenths, said the duke, “I find it not enough; —how could | do with that system of ome teenth?”
Yu Zo answered, “If the people have plenty, their prince will not be left to want alone. If the people are in want, their prince cannot enjoy plenty alone.”
'\ Tsze-chang having asked how’ virtue was to be exalted, and delusions to be discovered, the Master said, "Hold faithfulness and sincerity as first principles, and be Imaving continually to what is right, this is the way to exalt one's virtue.
“You love a man and wish him to live; you hate him and wish him to die. Having wished him to live, you also wish him to die. This is a case of delusion. ‘It may not be on account of her being rich, yet you come to make a difference.”
| The Duke Ching, of Chi, asked Confucius about government. Confucius replied, “There is government, when the prince is prince, and the minister is minister; when the father is father, and the son is son,”
"Good!" said the duke: “if, indeed, the prince be not prince, the not minister, the father Pot father, and the son not son, although | have my revenue, can I enjoy it?” The Master said, "Ab! it is Yu, who could with half a word seme litigations!"
Tsze-lu never slept over a promise.
The Master sid, “In hearing litigations. | am like any other body. What is necessiry, however. 16 10 Cause the people to have no litigations.”
Tsze-chang asked about government, The Master said, “The art of governing is to keep its affairs before the mind without weariness, and fo practice them with undeviating consistency *
The Master said, “Ay extensively studying all learning, and keeping himself under the restrain of the rales of propriety, one may thus likewise not err from what is right.”
The Master said, “The superior man seeks to perfect the admirable qualities of men, ars! dees mot seek to perfect their bad qualities, The mean man does the opposite of this.”
Chi Klang asked Conficius about government. Confucius replied, "To govern means to rectify. If you tead on the peope with correctness, who will dare not to be coerect™”
Chi K’ang. distressed about the number of thieves in the state, inquired of
Confucius how to do away with them. Confucius said, “If you, sit, were not covetous, although you should reward them to do it, they would not steal.”
Chi Klang asked Confucias about government, saying, "What do you say to killing the unprincipled for the good of the principled?” Confucius replied, “Sir, in carrying on your government, why should you use killing at all? Let your evinced desires be for what 1 good. and the people will be good, The relation between superiors and inferiors is like that between the wind and the grass, The grass must bend, when the wind blows across it.”
‘Tsze-chang asked, “What must the officer be, who may be said to be distinguished” The Master said, “What is it you call being distinguished?* Ts2e-chang replied, "It is to be heard of through the state, to be heard of throughout his clan” The Master said, “That 6 notoriety, not distinction. “Now the man of distinction is sofid and straightforward, and lowes righteousness. He examines people's words, and looks at their countenarces. He is anxious to humble himself to others. Such » man will be distinguished in the country; he will be
distanguished in his clan
As to the man of notoriety, he assumes the appeamunce of virtue, bul his actions are opposed to it, and he rests in this character without any doubts about himself. Such a man will be heard of in the country; he wall be heard of in the clan.”
Fan Chith rambling with the Master under the trees about the rain altars, said, “! venture to ask how to exalt virtue, to correct cherished evil, and to discover delusions.”
The Master said, “Truly a good question!
"If doing what is to be done be made the first business, and success a secondary consideration: —is not this the way to exalt virtue? To assail one’s own wickedness and not assail that of others; —is not this the way to correct cherished evil? For a moming’s
anger to disregard one’s own life, and involve that of his parents; —ia not this a case of delusion?”
Fan Chih asked about benevolence. The Master said, “It is to love all men.” He
_ asked about knowledge, The Master said, “It is to know all men”
_ Fan Chih did not immediately understand these answers. The Master said, “Employ the
—_
upright and put aside all the crooked; in this way the crooked can be made to be upright.
Fan Ch’th retired, and, secing Tsze-hsia, he saad to him, “A Little while ago, | had an interview with our Master, and asked him about knowledge. He said, ‘Employ the
upright, and put aside all the crooked; —in this way, the crooked will be made to be upright.’ What did he mean?”
Tsze-hsia said, “Truly rich is his saying!
“Shun, being in possession of the kingdom, selected from among all the people, and employed Kai-yao-on which all who were devoid of virtue disappeared. Tang, being in Possession of the kingdom, selected from among all the people, and employed f ‘Yin — and any who were devoid of virtue disappeared.”
Tsze-kung asked about fri
friend, and skillfully tead him on. If you find him impracticable, stop, Do not disgrace yourself,” The phil
eo jasopher Tsang said, “The superior man on grounds of culture moets with hés friends, and by friendship helps his virtwe.”
Tsze-lu asked about government, The Master said, “Go before the people with your example, and be laborious in their affairs.”
He requested further instruction, and was answered, “Be not weary in these things.°
Chang-kung. being chief minaster to the head of the Chi family, asked about Bowemment, The Master said, "Employ first the services of your various officers, steal! faults, and ratse qo office men of virtue and talents,”
Chung-kuny said, "How shall | know the men of virwe and talent, so that | may raise them to office?” He wits ancwered. “Raise 10 office those whom you know. As to those whom yoo do net know, will others neglect them?”
Tszelu said, "The ruler of Wei has been waiting for you, in oeder with you to administer the powermmen. What will you consider the first thing to be done?”
The Master replied. "What is necessary is to rectify names.”
"So! indeed!” said Tsze-lu. "You are wide of the mark! Why must there be such rectification?”
The Master said, “How uncultivated you are, Yu! A superior man, in regard to what he does not kno, shows 4 cautious reserve.
“If names be not correct, language is ne in accordance with the truth of things. if language be not in accordance with the truth of things, affairs cannot be carried on to success.
"Wher affairy cannot be cartied on to success, propricties When proprieties and music do mot flourish, punishments will not be properly awarded. When punishments are nct properly awarded, the people do nat know how to move hand
or Foot.
Therefore 2 muperice man considers it necessary that the names he uses may be spoken appropmatel), and glso that what he speaks may be carried out appropriately. What the superior man requires is just that in hes words there may be neithing incorrect.
4 Fan Chih requested 10 be taught husbandry. The Master said, "1 am not #0 good for thet as an old husbandman.” He requested also fo be taugin gardening, and was answered, “1 am not so good for chat as an old gardener,”
Fan Chih having pone out, the Master said, "A small man, indeed, is Fan Hsu! Ifa superior man love propriety, the people will nat dare not to be reverent. If he love righteousness, the people will not dare nce to submit to his example. If he love good faith, the people wil! not dare not to be sincere. Now, when these things obtain, the people from all quarters will come to him, bearing their children on their hacks; what need has he of a knowledge of husbandry?"
‘The Master ssid. “Though # man may be able to recite the three hundred odes, yet if, when intrusted with a governmental charge, he knows not how to act, or if, when sent to any quarter on a mission, he cannot give his replies unassisted, notwithstanding the
extent of his leaming, of what practical use is if?”
The Master said, "When a prince's personal conduct is correct, his government ix effective without the issuing of orders. If his personal conduct is pct correct, he mary issue orders, but they will not be followed."
The Master said, "The governments of Lu and Wel are brothers.” | ‘The Master said of Ching, a scion of the ducal family of Wei, that he knew the ecomomy of 8 family well. When he began to have means, he said, "Ha! here is collection!” When they were a little increased, he said, “Ha! this is complete!" When he had become rich, he said, "Ha! this is admirable!”
When the Master went to Weil Zan Yu acted as driver of his carriage. The Master observed, "How numerous are the people!”
Yu said, “Since they are thus numerous, what more shall be done for them?" "Enrich them, was the reply.
“And when they have been enriched, what more shall be done?" The Master said, “Teach them.”
| The Master said, “If there were any of the princes who would employ me, im the
course of twelve months, | should have dose something considerable. In three years, the government would be perfected,”
The Master said, “If good men were to govern a country im succession for a hundred years, they would be able to transform the violently bad, and dispense with sapital punishments.’ True indeed is this saying!”
'— The Master said, “If's truly royal ruler were to arise, it would stir require» geeeration, and then virtue would peewail.” ls ‘The Master said, “Ifa minister make his own conduct correct, what difficulty will
he have in assisting in government? If he cannot rectify himself, what has he to do with rectifying others?*
| The disciple Zan returning from the court, the Master said to him, “How are you so late?" He replied, "We had business.” The Master said, “ht must have been
family affairs. Ef there had been government business, though | am not now in office, | should have been consulted about it.”
The Duke Ting asked whether there was a single sentence which could make a
COURITY Prosperous, Confucius replied, "Such an effect canmet be expected from one sentence,
“There is a saying, however, which people have: "To be a prince is difficult to be
Minister 6s nit ene!
“Ie ruler kimws this, the difficulty of being # prince,—may there not be expected from this one sentence the prosperity of his country!”
The duke then said. "Is there a single sentence which can fuin a country?” Confucius replred. “Such an effect as that cannot be expected froen ome sentence. There is, however, the sayin wheet people have: ‘I have no pleasure in being a prince, but only in that no one can offer aay apposition io what | say!
“Ha nuler's words he good, 4s i not alsa good that no ane oppose them? But if they are nat goed. ANd No One OPPoses them, may there pot be expected from this one sentence the ruin of his country?"
The Duke of Sheh asked about powernment
The Master said, "Good goverment obtains when those who are near are made happy. and those who are far off are attracted.”
Tsze-hsia' being governor of Chu-fuu asked about government. The Master said, "Do now be desirous to have things done quickly; do not look at small advantages. Desire to have things done quickly prevents their being done thoroughly. Looking at seal advamages prevents great affairs from being accomplished.”
The Duke of Sheh informed Confucius, saying, "Among us here there are those who mes he styled upright in their conduct. If their father have stolen a sheep, they will
bear witness 10 the fact.”
thase who are upright are
Canfucrus said, “Among us, in our part of the country, the son conceals
different from this. The father conceals the misconduct of the son, and the misconduct of the father. Uprightness is 10 be found in this.”
Fan Ch’ih asked about perfect virtue. The Master said, “It is, in retirement, to be sedately grave. in the management of business, to be reverently attentive, in intercourse with others, 0 be strictly sincere. Though # man go among rude, uncultivated tribes, these qualities may not be neglected.”
Tsze-kung asked, saying. "What qualities must a man passess to entitle him to be called an officer? The Master said. “He who in his conduct of himself maintains a sense of shame, and when sem to any quarter will nat disgrace his prince's commission, deserves to be called an officer.”
‘Tsze-hung pursued. “! Verture to ask who may be placed in the next lower rank?" And he was told, "He whom the circle of his relatives pronounce to be filial, whom his fellow Villagers and neighbors pronounce to be fraternal,”
‘Again the disciple asked, "| venture to ask about the class stil! next in onder,” The Master said, “They are determined to be sincere in what they say, and to carry out what they do.
They are obstinate fitthe men, Yet perhaps they may make the next claws.”
Tsze-kung finally inquired, "Of what sort are those of the present day, who engage
government?” The Master said "Pooh! they are so many pecks and hampert, act worth being taken into account.”
The Master said, "Since | cannot get men pursuing the due medium, to who | Might communicate my instractions, { must find the ardent and the cautiously-decided The ardent will advance and lay hold of truth: the cautiousty-decided will keep themselves from what is wrong.”
The Master said, “The people of the south have a saying: "A man without constancy cannot be cither a wizard or a doctor,” Good!
“Inconstant in bis virtue, he will be visited with disgrace.” The Master said, "This arises simply from not amending to the prognostication.”
The Master said, "The superior man is affable, but not adulutory; the mean man is adulatory, bet not affable.”
‘Tsze-kung asked, "What do you say of a man who is koved by all the people Of his scighbemuond?” The tater lied "We may not for that accord our approwal of ham.” "And what do you say of him who is hated by all the people of his neighborhood?” The Master said, “We may not for that conclude that he is bad. It is betier than either of these cages that the good in the neighborhood love him, and the bad hate him.”
The Master said, "The superior onan is easy to serve and difficult to please. If you try 10 plesse him in any way which is not accordant with right, he will not be pleased. But in his eemployment of men, he uses them according wo their capacaty. The mean man is difficult ¥ serve, and easy to please. |f you try to please him, though it be in a wey which is not accondane with right, he may be pleased. But in his employment of men, he Wishes thee to be equal to everything.”
man has pride without a dignified ease."
The Master said, “The firm, the enduring, the simple, and the modest are near to virtue.”
Tsze-lu asked, saying, "What qualities must a man possess to entitle him to be called a scholar” The Master said, "He must be thus! eamest, urgent, and blend — among his frends: earnest and urgent; aenong his beetheen: bland.”
The Master said, “Let « good man teach the people seven years, and they may then Ihewise be employed in war.”
The Moeoter seed. "Ty lend an umeestructed peopte to war, is to throw them away.”
Heiew ached what was shameful, The Master said, “When good in estate. fo be thinking only of satan: and, when tad government prevails, to be thinking. 1m tke same was. omby of salary; this is shameful.” "When the love of sanenority, toasting. resermments, and cowetousness are repressed, this mum he deemed perfect virtue,”
The Master seid. "This may he regarded as the achievement of what is difficult, But I do reot know that it oto he deemed perfect vine” The Master said, “The scholar who cherishes the love of comfort is not fit to be deemed 2 scholar,” The Master said. When good government prevails in a state, language may be lofty |s, the actions may be lofty
sx! bold and actions the sume, When bad povernment prevail and bold ber the language muy he with some reserve.”
The Master said. *The virtuous will be sure to speak speech & good may not aluays be virtuous. Men of principle are sure to those who are bold may not always be men of principle.”
Confucius, said, “1 was skillful at archery, neither of them died a natural death.
correctly, but those whose be bold, but
Nan-kung Kwo, submitemg ar inquiry to gaat Ao could move 2 boat along upan the land, but Yu and Chi personally wrought at the soils of hushanry, and they became possessors of the Kingdom.” The Master made no reply; but when Nan-kung Kwo went out, he said "A maperior man mdeed this! An esteemer of virtue indeed is this!"
The Master said, “Superice men. and yet not always vietuaus, there have been, alas! Bus there never has been 2 mean mar, and, at the same time, virtuous,”
The Master said, "Can there be lowe which does not lead to strictness with its object? (Can there be loyalty wioch dues not lead to the instruction of its object?” The Master said, “ln preparing the governmental notifications, Pi Shan first made
the rough deuft; Shi-shw examined end discussed its contents; Tsze-yu, the manager of foreign intercourse, thes polishes te style; and, finally, Tsze-ch'an of Turg-ti gave it the
proper chegance and finish”
Some one asked mbout Tsze-chan. The Master said, “He wae e kind man.” He asked about Tsze-fsi. The Master said, “That man! That man'*
He asked about Kwan Chung. "For him,” said the Master, "the city of Pien, with three bundred families, was taken from the chief of the Po family, who did not utter a murmuring word, though, to the end of his life, he had only coarse rice to eat”
|| The Master said, "To be poor without murmuring is difficult. To be rich without being proud is easy,”
|| ‘The Master said, "Mang Kung-clYo is more than fit to be chief officer in the
famities of Chao and Wei, but he is not fit to be great officer to either of the sumes Tang or Hsieh,”
\2 Tsze-lu asked what constituted s COMPLETE man, The Master said, “Suppose « man with the knowledge of Tsang Wu-chung, the freedom from cowetousness of Kasng- ch’o, the bravery of Chwang of Pien, and the varied talents of Zan ClYiur add to these the
accomplishments of the rules of propriety and music, —such a one might be reckoned 2 COMPLETE man.”
He then added, "But what is the necessity for a complete man of the present day t0 hawe all these things? The man, who in the view of gain, thinks of rightecumness: who in the view of danger is prepared to give up his life; and who does not forget an old agreement however far back it extends; —such a man may be reckoned a COMPLETE man.”
The Master asked Kung-ming Chia about Kung-sha Wan, saying, "ls it ue that your master speaks not, laughs sot, and takes nor?”
Kung-ming Chia replied, “This has arisen froen the reporters going beyond the truth. My master speaks when il i the time to speak, and so men do not get tired of his speaking. He laughs when there is occasion to be joyful, and so men do not get tired of his loughing He takes when it is consistent with ri to do 50, and so men do act get tired of his taking.” The Master said, *So! But is it so with him?
|| The Master said, "Tsang keeping possession of Fang, asked of the dube of Lu to appoint « successor to hien im his family. Although it may be said that he wes act using force with his sovereign, | believe he was.” | The Master said, "The duke Wan of Tain was crafty and not upright. The duke Hwan of Ch'l was upright and not crafty.” ' ‘Ts2e-lu said, "The Duke Hwan caused his brother Chiu to be killed, when Shao Hu
died, with bis master, but Kwan Chung did not die. May aot | say that he «as wanting im Virtue?”
‘The Master said, “The Duke Hwan assembled all the princes together, and that not with weapons oF war and chariots: —it was all through the infhaonce of Kwan Chung. Whose
heneficence was like his? Whose beneficence was like his?”
Teze-Aunp said. "Kwan Ch ' ~~
ite. | anpreherel was wanting in virtue. When the Duke Hwan caused his brother Chiu te be killed, Kwan Chung was not able to die with him. Moreover, he hecame prime minister io Hwan”
The Master said, “Kwan Chung acted as prime minister to the Duke Hwan made him leader of all the princes. and united and rectified the whale kingdom. Down to the present day, the people enjoy the gifts whicl he conferred. But for Kwan Chung. we or ol be wearing our hair unbound, and the lappets of our coats buttoning on the en side.
Will you require from him the small fidetity of common men and common women, who would commit suicide ina stream or ditch, no one knowing anything about them?"
The great officer. Hsien, who had heen family minister to Kung-shu Wan, ascended 10 the prince’s court in company with Wan.
The Master. having beard of it, said, "He deserved to be considered WAN (the accomplished 1."
The Master was speaking about the unprincipled course of the duke Ling of Weil when Chil Kang saidl, "Since he i of such a character, how is it he does not lose his
sate”
Confucius said, "The Chung-shu Yu has the superintendence of his guests and of strangers; the litanist, Ta, has the management of his ancestral temple; and Wang-sun Chia has the direction of the army and forces: —with such officers as these, how should he jose his stare?”
The Master said. "He who speaks without madesty will find it difficult to words good ~
Chan Chiang murdered the Duke Chien of Chil.
Confucius bathed, wem to court and informed the Duke Ai, saying, “Chan Hang has slain his sovereign. | beg that you will undertake to punssh him.”
make his
The duke said. “Inform the chiefs of the three families af a1.”
Confucius retired. and said, “Following in the rear of the great officers, | did not dare not 40 represent such a matter, and my prince says, “Inform the chiefs of the three families of
in”
He went to the chiefs. and informed them, but they would pot act. Confucius then said, “Following in the rear of the great ufficers. | did not dare not to represent such a matter.”
‘Tsze-lu asked how 2 fuller should be served, The Master said, "Do not impose on
hien, and, moreover, withstand him to his face.”
The Master said, “The progress of the superior man is upwards; the progress of the mean man is downwards.”
‘The Master said, “In ancient times, men learned with a view to their own improvement. Nowadays, men lear with a view to the approbation of others.”
Chu Po-yu sent a messenger with friendly inquiries to Confucius, Confiaciess sat with him, and questioned him. “What,” said he! “is your master engaged in?” The messenger reptied, "My master is ancious to make his faults few, but he has not yet succeeded.” bie then went out, and the Master said, “A messenger indeed! A messenger indeed!"
The Master said, "He who is not in any particular office has nothing to do with plans for the administration of its duties.”
The philosopher Tsang said, “The superior man, im his thoughts, does not go out of his place.”
The Master said, "The superior man is modest in his speech, but exceeds in hes actions.”
The Master said, "The way of the superior man is theeefold, but | am not equal to
it. Virtuous, be is free from anxieties; wise, he is free from penplexities, bold, he is free froen fear.
‘Tsae-hung said, "Master, that is what you yourself say.*
Tsze-kung was in the habit of comparing men together. The Mamer said, “Tze must have reached a high pitch of excellence! Now, | have not leisure for this.*
The Master said, “1 will not be concemed at men’s not knowing me: [ will be concerned at my own want of ability.”
The Master said. "He who does not anticipate amempts to deceive him, now think
beforehand of his mot being believed. and yet appechends these things readily when they occur, —is he not a man of superior worth?”
Wei-shang Mav said to Confucius, "Chiu, how is it that you keep roonting about” Is il mot thal you are an insinuating talker?
Confucius said, “1 do not dare to play the part of such a talker, but | hate obstinacy.”
The Master said, "A horse is called a ch'i, not because of its strength, but because of its other good qualities,”
Some wie saad, “Whar do you say conceming the principle that injury should be fecompensed with kindness?”
The Master said, With what then will you reecenpense kindness?” "Recoenpense injury with justice, and recompense kindness with kindness,” The Master saad, “Alas! there is.no one that knows me.”
Tsze-hung sand, "What do vou mean by thus saying-—that no one knows you?" The Master replied, "ldo not murmur against Heaven. | do noe grumble against men. My studies Ine low, and my penetration rises high. But there is Heaven;—that knows me!*
The Kung-pe Lino, having slandered Tsze-lu to Chi-sun, Tsze-fu Ching-po unformed Confucius of it. sayeng, "Que master is certainly being led astray by the Kung- pe Lino, hut f have still power enough left to cut Lino aff, and expose his corpse in the market and m the cout.”
The Master said, “If my principles are to advance, it is so ordered. If they are to fall to the ground, itis 50 ordered, What cae the Kung-po Lino do where such ordering is concemed?”
The Master said, "Same men of worth retire from the world, Some retire from particular states. Some retire because of disrespectful looks, Some retire Because of contradictory
The Master said, “Those who have dome this are seven met.”
Teze-lu happening % pass the night in Shih-man, the gatekeeper said to him, "Whom do you come from?" Tsze-lu said, "From Me. K'ung.” “It is he, is it noe?” said the other, "who knows the impracticable nature of the times and yet will be doing in them.” stone in Weil when a man carrying
was playing, one day, on a musical nid, “Fils hoot la full
a stirew besket passed door of the house where Confucius was, and who so beats the musical stone.”
A little while afer, he added, "How comemptible is the one-idewed obstinacy those ; sounds display’ When one is tuuken no notice of, he has simply at once to give over his wish for public employment, 'Deep water must be crossed with the clothes on; shallow water may be crossed with the clothes held up,"
The Master said. “How determined is he in his purpose! But this is not difficult!"
40. Tsze-chang said, "What ts meant when the Shu says that Kao-tsung, while observing the usual imperial mourning, was for three years without speaking?”
The Master said, "Why must Kao-tsung be referred to #3 an example of this? The
ancients all did so, When the sovereign died, the officers all attended to their several duties. taking instructions from the prime minister for three years.”
The Master said, "When rulers love to observe the rules of propriety, the people respond readily to the calls on theen for service.”
‘Tsze-lu asked what constituted the superior man. The Master said, “The cultivation Of himself in reverential carefulness.” "And is this all?" said Texe-fu. “He cultivates himself so as to give rest to others,” was the reply, “And is this aff?” again asked Tsze-tu. ‘The Master said, “He cultivates himself so as to give rest to all the people. He cultivates himself so 5 t0 give rest to all the people: even Yao and Shun were still solicitous about this,”
1 ‘Yuan Zang was squatting on his heels, and so waited the approach of the Master, who said to him, "In youth mot humble as befits a juror; in manhood, doing nothing , worthy of being handed down; and living on to old age: —this ts to be a pest.” With this he hit him on the shank with his staff,
i
A youth of the village of Ch'veh was employed by Confucius wo carry the messages bet
ween him and bis visitors. Some one asked about him, saying, "| suppose he has Made great progress.”
The Master said, “Lobserve that he is fond of occupying the seat of a full-grown man; | observe that he walks shoulder to shoulder with his elders. He is not ome who is seeking to make progress in learning. He wishes quickly to become a man.”
The Duke Ling of Wei asked Confucius about tactics. Confiscius replied, “I have
heard all about sacrificial vessels, but | have not learmed military matters.” On this, he took his departure the next diay.
When he was in Chan, their provisions were exhausted, and his followers became so in that they were unable to rise.
Tsze-tu, with evident dissatisfaction, said, "Has the seperior man likewise to endure in this way" The Master said, “The superior man may indeed have % endure want, but the mean man, when he is in want, gives way to unbridled license.”
The Master said, “Ts'ze, you think, | suppose, that | am one who learns many things ant keeps then in memory?”
Tsze-kung rephed, "Yes hur perhaps it is noe so?” No” was Ihe anewer: "I sock 9 unity all pervading.” The Master said “Yu t those who kmow virnae are few,"
The Master said, "Mav new Shun be instanced as having govemed efficiently without Cnertion What did he do’ He did nothing bul gmvely and reverenily occupy his royal a
Taze-chang asked how a man should conduct himself, so as to be everywhere appreciated
The Master said, "Let his words he sincere and tuthfd and his actions honoeable and careful: —such conduct may be practiced among the rude tribes of the South o
North. If his words be mot sincere and truthful and his actions not honorable and carefull wall he with such conduct. be appreciated. even in his neighborhood?
“When he is stunding. let him see those two things. as it were, fronting him. When he is in a carriage. let him see them attached 1o the yoke, Then may be subsequently carry them into practice,”
Tsze-chany wrote these counsels on the end of his sash.
The Master ssid, “Truly straightforward was the historiographer Yu. When good government prevailed in hés state, he was like an arrow. When bad government prevailed. he was like an arrow, A superior man indeed is Chu Po-yu! When good government prevails in his state, he is to be found in office. When bad government prevails. he can rol! his principles up, end keep them in his breast.”
» ‘The Master said. “When a man may be spoken with, not to speak to him is to err in preference to the man. When a man may riot be spoken with, to speak to him is toerr in peference to var words. The wise err heither in regard to their man nor to their words,
§ The Master said, “The determined scholar and the man of virtue will not seek to live at the expense of injuriny their virtue. They will even sacrifice their lives to preserve their virtue complcic ©
) Tane-kung asked about the practice of vinue ‘The Master said, The mechanic, who wishes to do his work well. must first sharpen his tools When you are living in any state, take service with the most worthy among its great officers, and make friends of the most virtwous amony its scholars *
Yen Yuan asked how the povernenent of country should be administered. The Master said. "Follow the seasons of hisua
“Ride in the state carnage of Yin.
“Wear the ceremonial cap of Chau.
Let the music be the Shao with its pantomimes. Banish the songs of Chang, and keep
{nr from specious talkers. The songs of Chang are licentious; specious talkers are dangerous.”
The Master said, “If a man take no thought about what is distant, he will find sorrow near at hand,”
The Master said, “It is all over! | have mot seem one who loves virtue as he loves bemuly.”
The Master said, "Was not Tsang Wan like one who had stolen his situation? He
knew the virtue and the talents of Hui of Liu-hsia, and yet did not procure that he should ster! with him kn court,”
‘The Master said, “He who requires much from himself and Sittle from others, will keep himself from being the object of resentment.”
The Master said, "When a man is not im the habit of saying: "What shall | think of this? What shail f think of this? I can indeed do nothing with him!"
The Master said, “When a number of people are together, for a whole day, withour their conversation turing on righteousness, and when they are foed of carrying out the suggestions of a small shrewdness; —theirs is indeed a hard case”
The Master said, "The superior man in everything considers righteousness to be essential, He performs it according to the rules of propriety. He brings it forth in humility. He completes it with sincerity. This is indeed « superior man.*
The Master said, "The superior man is distressed by his want of ability. He &s act distressed by men's not knowing him,”
The Master said, “The superior man dislikes the thought of his name act being mentioned after his death.”
The Master said, "What the superior man seeks, is in himself. What the mean man seeks, is in others.”
The Master said, “The superior man is dignified, but does not wrangle. He is sociable, but not a partisan.”
The Master said, “The superior man does not promote a man simply on account of ls words, nor does he put aside good words because of the man.”
Taze-kung asked, saying, “Is there one word which may serve as a rule of practice for all one’s life?” The Master said, "fs not RECIPROCITY wach a word? What you do hot want done to yourself, de mot do to others.”
The Master sald, “In mw dealings with men whose evil de | blame, whose geediness die) pric, beyond whee is proger' HD dic sometimes exceed in praise, Ihere mire! Ae erciinad foe i inomy examination of the individual.
“This peaple supplied the prion why the three dynasties pursued the path of stra ph foreaniness.”
The Master saad. “Even in my early dass, a histortographer would leave a blank in histest. and he whe Neel a horse would lend him to anther to ride. Now, alas! there ane rer Snachy dhe.”
The Master said. “Specious words comfound virtae. Wier of forbearance in small manners confounds great. plans,”
The Master said. “When the trultitade hate a man, it is necessary to exartalne into the case. When the muttitude bike «man, iis necessary to examine Ineo the case.”
The felaster said. “4, main can enlarge the principles which be Fallows: thee principles do not enlarge the man”
The Master sald. “To have fauhs and not to revorm them, —ahis, indeed, should be nronmcninaeed haw ing finale."
The Master said, "I Rave been the whole day without eating. and the whole might without sleeping: occupied with thinking. I was af no use. bemer plan is to bearn.”
The Master ssid, “The object of the superior nan is truth. Food is not his objess, There is plowing: even in thes there is sometimes wan. So with learning; — emdumert may be found in it. The superior man is anxious leat he should not get truth, he is not anciows lest poverty should come upon him.”
The Maser said, "When a man's knowledge is sufficient to attain, and his virtue # not sufficient to enable him to hold, whatever he may hove gaised, he will lose again.
mWhen his knowledge ix sufficient to attain, and he has virtue enough to hold fat, if he
Phen his kncwledge is sufficient 10 attain, and he bas virtue enough bo hold fast; when he governs also with dagnity, yer if he try to move the people contrary to the rules of propriety: lull excellence os Mott reached.”
‘The Master sae’ “Che superior man cannot be known in birke matters; bet he may be inersted with great concema. The weal man may not be intrusted with great congems, but fet may be kncewn in little matiers."
fhe Master sd, Viriue is mote bo mat than either water or fine. | have seer mea die froen tneadirg on water and fire, but | have never seen a man die from tresdeng, (Fe
aume of vires”
The Master said, “Let every man consider virkie a whad devolves on hiremell, He may oot yetld The perfiorerarsce of it ever te hie imho”
The Master said, “The superior man is corecty firm, and mer firm erely,”
The Master said, "A minevier, in serving bes prince, reverently discharges his duties, and makes his emolument a secondary comshderstion.”
The Master said, “In teaching there should be nc distinetion of chauen.*
The Master said, "Those whose courses ane diffierent cannot lay plane for one aeother”
That Master said, “In language it bs simply required that it convey the meaning * The music: muster, feller, hewing called upon him, when they caret ther step, the:
Master Sand, “Here. are the steps." When they came to the rat for the: pues in ait upon, he
sahil, “Here 18 hee eniat.* When all were seated, the Master informed him. saying, “So and ais here: so and. si 9 here.”
Ths arusic Master, Mien, having gone cut, Tsee-chemg asked, way try “Ie it the rule to be] those Hhings to the mesic magterl™
The felester saved, "ves. Thies ia. certainty eee: rile fcor thoes whic bededthe lind”
The head of the Chi family wus going to atinck Chevaneyu.
Zon Yuoamd (ohi-lu haul an inberview with Confisciet, ard said “Char chief, Chil in goang It SOTReSe operations agains Chwan-yu,"
Comficins said, Chiu, be it not you who are in fat here?
“how, entward io Chany, borg ago, 0 foemer King appoimied its eaber to preside over mt sacrifices to the eastern Marg, morsover, it is ix the midst of the territory of cur vince: ond Ws Fuler ik a minister in dineet connection with the sovereign: ‘Wiha laa pour chest to de wilh attacking it"
Zan Yu sard, “Our master wishes the thing. neither of us two ministers wishes it.”
Contivctits said, “Civit there are the wonts of Chau Zan, —'When he can put forth his ability. he takes his place in the ranks of office: when he finds himself unable to do so, he retires froen Hi. How can he be used as a guide to: Mind man, who does not support him when tottering. noe rise him up when fallen”
“And further. you speak wrongly. When a tiger or thinooeros escapes from his cage: when a tomoise or piece of jade is injured in its repository; —whose is the fault?”
Zan Yu sad. “Burt at present, Chwan-yu is strong and near to Pi; if our chief do not now take it, 1 will hereafter be a sorrow 10 his descendants.”
Confucius said. “Ch't, the superior man hates those dectining to say, ‘t want such and such a thing.’ and framing explanations foe their conduct,
"1 hawe heard that rubers of states and chiefs of families are not troubled lest their people should he few, but are troubled lest they should not keep their several places; that they are ret troubled with fears of povery, but are troubled with fears of a want of contented repos among the people in their several places. For when the people keep their several places. there will be no poverty: when harmony prevails, there will be no scarcity of people: and when there is such a conterted repose, there will be no rebellious
"So it is. —Therefore, if remoter people are not submissive, all the influences of civil culture and virtue are to be cultivated to attract them to be so; and when they have been so attracted, they must be made contented and tranquil,
“Now. here are you, Yu and Chiu, assisting your chief, Remoter people are not submissive. and. with your help, he cannot attract them to him, In his own territory there are divisions and downfalls, leavings and separations. and, with your help, he cannot preserve it.
“And vet he is planning these hostile movements within the state. sorrow of the Chi-sun family will not be on account of Chwan-yu, within the screen of their own court.”
_—| am afraid that the but will be found
Confucius said. "When good government prevails in the empire, ceremonies, music, and punitive military expeditions proceed from the son of Heaven. When bad prevails in the empire, ceremonies, music, and punitive military expeditions from the princes. When these things proceed from the princes, as a rule, the cases will be few in which they do not lose their power in ten generations. When they from the great officers of the princes, as a rule, the case will be few in which they do not lose their power in five generations, When the subsidiary ministers of the officers hold in their grasp the orders of the state, as a rule the cases will be few in which they do not lose their power in three generations.
"When right principles prevail in the kingdom, government will not be in the hands of the great officers
“When right principles prevail in the kingdom, there will be no discussions among the common peuple."
Confucius said, "The revenue of the state has left the ducal house now for five generations. The government has been in the hands of the great officers for four . generations. On this account, the descendants of the three Hwan are much reduced.
Confucius said, "There are three friendships which are advantageous, and three which are injurious, Friendship with the uplight; friendship with the sincere. and Ls "friendship with the man of much observation; —these are with
advantageous. the man of specious airs; friendship with the insinuatingly soft, and friendship with the glib-tongued: —these are injurious.”
Confucius said, “There are three things men find enjoyment in which are advantageous, and three things they find enjoyment in which are injurious. To find enjoyment in the discriminating study of ceremonies and music; to find enjoyment in speaking of the goodness of others; to find enjoyment in having many worthy friends: — these are advantageous. To find enjoyment in extravagant pleasures; to find enjoyment in idleness ard sauntering; to find enjoyment in the pleasures of feasting: —these are injurious.”
Confucius said, "There are three errors to which they who stand in the presence of a man of virtue and station are liable. They may speak when it does not come to them to speak, —this is called rashness. They may not speak when it comes to them to speak. — this is called concealment. They may speak without looking at the countenance of their superior, —this is called blindness.”
Confucius said, "There are three things which the superior man guards against. In youth, when the physical powers are not yet settled, he guards against bust. When he is strong and the physical powers are full of vigor, he guards against quarrelsomeness.
When he is old, and the animal powers are decayed, he guards agsinst covetousness.”
Confucius said, “There are three things of which the superior man stands in awe. He
stands in awe of the ordinances of Heaven. He stands in awe of great men. He stands in awe of the words of sages.
“The mean man does not know the ordinances of Heaven, and consequently does not suund in awe of them. He is disrespectful to great men. Hie makes sport of the words of sages,"
Confucius said, “Those who are bom with the possession of knowledge are the highest class of men. Those who lear, and so readily get possession of knowledge, are the next. Those who are dull and stupid, and yet compass the leaming, are another class neat to these. As to those who are dull and stupid and yet do not learn; —they are the lowest of the people.”
Confucius said, “The superior man has nine things which are subjects with him of thougtttul consideration. tn regard to the use of his eyes, he is anxious to see clearly. In
rogard to (he use of his ears, he is anxious to hear distinctly. In regard to his countenance, he es anion that it should he henign, In regard to his demeanoe, he is anxious that it showild Ke respectfial. In regard to his speoch, he is anxious that it should be sincere. In regard ty his doing of business. he is anxious that it should be reverently careful. In regard to what he dowhts shout, he is anxious to question others, When he is angry, he thinks of she difficulties his anger may involve him in, When he sees gain to be got, he thenks of nighteousness * . ;
Contucias said, “Contemplati ing it, as i Id not reach it; . ng good, and pursuing it, as if they could not contemplating evil! and shrinking from it, as nes eo from thrusting the hand into teviling water: —I have seen such men, as | have heard such words.
“Living in retirement to study their aims, and icing ri out thei ) ng righteousness to carTy r principles thai heed cas tae batt tone coe noah alee”
The Duke Cheng of Ch’i had a thousand teams, each of four horses, but on the day ot his death. the people did not praise him for a single virtue. Poi and Shu-ch'i died of hunger tthe foc ofthe Shawn mountain, andthe peopl, down to the Present Se
“bs mot that saving illustrated tw this?"
Chian Klang asked Pov, saying. "Have you heard any lessons from your father Gaitereat trom: wheal wis bate alt eae sid ia
Poeyu replied, "No, He was standing alone once, when | passed below the hall with hasty steps. and said to me. 'Have you learned the Odes? On my replying 'Not yet,’ he added, If you go nat learn the Odes, you wil! not be fit to converse with.’ I retired and studied the Odes
“another day, he was in the same way standing alone, when I passed by below the hall with hasty steps, and suid to me, Have you learned the rules of Propriety? On my reply ing ‘Not yet he added. “If you do not learn the rules of Propriety, your character cannex be established’ | then retired, and learned the rules of Propriety.
| heve heard only these two things from him.”
Chtang Kany retired, and, quite delighted, said, "I asked one thing, and I have got three things. | have heard about the Odes. | have heard about the rules of Propriety. I have also heard that the superior man maiedains @ distant reserve towards his son,”
The wife of the prince of a state is called by him Fu Zan, She calls herself Hsiao Tung, The people of the suste call her Chun Fu Zan, and, to the people of other states, they call her K'we Hsiao Chun The people of other states also call her Chun Fu Zan.
Yang Ho wished to see Confucius, but Confucius would not go to see he sent a present of a Pig to Confucius, who, having chosen a time when Ho was not at home went to pay his respects for the gift. He met him, however, on the way.
i jus, " ith you.” be called Ho said to Confucius, Core, let me speak with you. He then asked, “Can he | parton who keeps his jewel in his bosom, and leaves his country to confussior’” Confucius replied, "No." "Can he be called wise, who is anxious to be engaged in public employment, and yet is constantly losing the opportunity of being s07* Confucius again
said, "No." “The days and months are passing away; the years do not wait for us.” Confucius said, “Right; | will go into office."
The Master said, "By nature, men are nearly alike; by practice, they get to be wide apart.”
The Master said, “There are only the wise of the highest class, and the stupid of the lowest class, who cannot be changed.”
The Master, having come to Wu-ch'ang, heard there the sound of stringed instruments and singing,
Well pleased and smiling, he said, "Why use an ox knife to kill a fowl?" Tsze-yu replied, "Formerly, Master, | heard you say, "When the man of high station is well instructed, he loves men; when the man of low ruled."
station is well instructed, he is easily
The Master said, "My disciples, Yen's words are right, What I said was only in sport,”
Kung-shan Fu-zao, when he was holding Pi, and in an attitude of rebellion, invited the Master to visit him, who was rather inclined to go. Tsze-lu was displeased. and said, “Indeed, you cannot go! Why must you think of going to see Kung-shan’?”
The Master said, "Can it be without
employ me, may | not make an
Some reason that he has invited ME? If any one eastern Chau?*
Tsze-chang asked Confucius about perfect virtue. Confucius said, "To be able to Practice five things everywhere under heaven constitutes perfect virtue.” He begged to ask what they were, and was told, “Gravity, generosity of soul, sincerity, earnestness, and Kindness. If you are grave, you will Not be treated with disrespect, If you are generous, you will win all. If you are sincere, people will repose trust in you. If you are eamest, you will accomplish much, If you are kind, this will enable you to employ the services of others
Py His inwiting Bien te vinit him. the Master was inclined fo go.
Tere-lu said, "Master, formerty | have heard you say, ‘When a man in his own person is eunlty of GOINE evil, a suPEROF man will not associate with him.” Pi Hsi is in rebellion, holding possession of Chunpomau iT you go to him, what shall be said?"
The Master sand. “Yes, | did isse these words. But is it not said. that, if'a thing be really hard, it may he ground without hesng made thin? Is it not said, that, if a thing be really white, Fi may be steeped ms dark uid without being made black?
“Am La iitter gourd” How can | he hung up out of the way of being eaten?”
The Master said. “Yu. have you heard the six words to which are attached six hecloudings”™ Yu replied. "| have not,”
“Sit down. and | will tell them to you.
“There zs the lowe of being benevolent without the love of leaming; —the beclouding here leads t @ foolish simplicity. There is the love of knowing without the love of learning: —the beclouding here leads to dissipation of mind, There is the love of being sincere without the love of learning: —the beclouding here leads to an injurious disregard of consequences. There is the love of straightforwardness without the love of learning: —the beclouding here leads to rudeness. There is the love of boldness without the lowe of learning: —the beclouding here leads to insubordination, There is the love of firmness without the love of learning; —the beclouding here leads to extravagant
conduct.” The Master said. "My children. why do you not study the Book of Poetry?
“The Odes serve 10 stimulate the mind, “They may be used for purposes of self-comtemplation. *Thes teach the art of sociability, “They show how to regulate feelings of resentment. “From them you leam the more immedisie duty of serving one's father, and the remoter ‘one of serving ore’s prince. "From them we become lateely acquainted with the names of birds, beasts, and plants.” The Master said 1o Poryu, “Do you give yourself to the Chau-nan and the Shao-nan, The mar who has nt studied the Chsu-nan and the Shao-nan is like ome who stands with his face right against a wall, Is be not so?”
The Master said. “It is according to the rules of propriety,’ they say. 'It is according yo the rules of propriety, they say. Are gems and silk all that is meant by propriety? 'It is
music. they say.—'It is music,’ they say. Are hers and drums all that is meant by music?"
The Master said, "He who puts on an appearance of stem firmness, while inwardly
he is weak, is like one of the small, mean people: —yea, is he not like the thief who breaks through, or climbs over, a wall?"
The Master said, "Your good, careful people of the villages are the thieves of virtue.”
The Master said, To tell, as we go along, what we have heard on the way, is to cast away our virtue.”
The Master said, "There are those mean creatures! How impossible it is along with them to serve one's prince!
"While they have not got their aims, their anxiety is how to get them. When they have got them, their anxiety is lest they should lose them.
“When they are anxious lest such thi
ngs should be lost, there is nothing to which they will not proceed.” The Master said, "Anciently, men had three failings, which now perhaps are not to be found.
“The high-mindedness of antiquity showed itself in a disregard of small things; the high- mindedness of the present day shows itself in wild license. The stern dignity of antiquity showed itself in Brave reserve; the stern dignity of the present day shows itself in quarrelsome perverseness. The stupidity of antiquity showed itself in straightforwardness; the stupidity of the Present day shows itself in sheer deceit.”
The Master said, "Fine words and an insinuating appearance are sekdom associated with virtue."
The Master said, “I hate the manner in which purple takes away the luster of vermilion. | hate the w
ay in which the songs of Chang confound the music of the Ya. | hate those who with their sharp mouths averthrow kingdoms and families.”
The Master said, "! would prefer not speaking.”
Tsze-kung said, "If you, Master, do not speak, what shall we, your disciples, have to record?”
The Master said, "Does Heaven speak? The four Seasons pursue their courses, and all things are continually being produced, but does Heaven say anything’”
Zu Pei wished to see Confucius,
but Confucius declined, on the ground of being sick, lo see him, When the bearer of
this message went out at the door, the Master took
his lute ans! sang to it, in order that Pei might hear him.
Tsai Wo asked about the three ‘ i waiions eaplie years’ mourning for parents, saying that one year
“If the supenor man,” said he, “abstains for three
. years from the observances of Propriety. thase observances will be quite lost. If for three years he abstains from music, music will he ruined, Within a year the old grain is exhausted, and the new grain has sprung up. and. in procuring fire by friction, we go through all the changes of wood for that purpose. After « complete year, the mourning may stop."
The Master said. "Ifyou were, after a year, to eat good ri wear embroidered clothes, would you feel at ease?" "1 should," replied — -
The Master said. “If you can feel at ease, do it. But a superior man, during the whole period of mourning, does not enjoy pleasant food which he may eat, nor derive
from music which he may hear. He also does not feel at ease, if he is comfortably — Therefore he does not de what you propose. But now you feel at ease and may
Tsai Wo ther went out, and the Master said, "This shows Yu's want of virtue- It is not till a child is three years old that it is allowed to leave the arms of its parents. And the three vears’ mourning is universally observed throughout the empire. Did Yu enjoy the three vears' love of his parents?”
The Master said, "Hard is it to deal with who will stuff himself with food the whole day, without applying his mind to anything good! Are there not gamesters and chess players” To be one of these would still be better than doing nothing at all."
Taze-lu said, "Does the superior man esteem valor?" The Master said, "The superior man holds righteousness to be of highest importance. A man in a superior situation, having valor without righteousness, will be guilty of insubordination; one of the lower people having valor without righteousness, will commit robbery.”
Tsze-kung said, “Has the superior man his hatreds also?" The Master said, "He has his hacreds. He hates those who proclaim the evil of others. He hates the man who, being in a Jom stubon, slanders his superiors, He hates those who have valor merely, and are vnibeervart of propriety. He hates those who are forward and determined, and, at the
same time. of contracted understanding.”
The Master then inquired. *Tyize, have you also your hatreds?” Tsze-kung replied, “I hate those who pry ull matters, and ascribe the knowledge to their wisdom. I hate those who are only not modest, and think that they are valorous. I hate those who make known secrets. and think that they are straightforward.”
The Master suid, "Of all people. girls and servants are the most difficult to behave to. Ifyou are familiar with them, they Jose their humility. If you maintain a reserve
towards them, they are discontented,"
The Master said, “When a man at forty is the object of dislike, he will always continue what he is.”
AV,
|
The Viscount of Wei withdrew from the court. The Viscount of Chi became a slave to Chau. Pi-kan remonstrated with him and died.
Confucius said, "The Yin dynasty possessed these three men of virtue.”
Hui of Liu-hsia, being chief criminal judge, was thrice dismissed from his office. Some one said to him, “Is it not yet time for you, sir, to leave this?” He replied, "Serving men in an upright way, where shall 1 go to, and not experience such a thrice-repeated dismissal? If | choose to serve men in crooked way, what necessity is there for me to leave the country of my parents?*
The duke Ching of Chi, with reference to the manner in which he should treat Confucius, said, "I cannot treat him as | would the chief of the Chi family, I will treat him in a manner between that accorded to the chief of the Chil and that given to the chief of the Mang family.” He also said, “I am old; | cannot use his doctrines,” Confucius took his departure.
The people of Ch'i sent to Lu a present of female musicians, which Chi Hwan received, and for three days no court was held. Confucius took his departure.
Confucius alighted and wished to converse with him, but Chieh-yu hastened away, so that he could not talk with him.
Ch’ang-tsu and Chieh-ni were at work in the field together, when Confucius passed by them, and sent Tsze-lu to inquire for the ford.
Ci'ang-tsu said, “Who is he that holds the reins in the carriage there?" Tsze-lu told him, “lis Kung Clviu.’, "Is it not K'ung of Lu?” asked he. "Yes," was the reply, to which the other rejoined, "He knows the ford,”
pian ee mcesiitienen ap trata hey eoinprcgh nord fragt po
acter tae Me se PM the dtsoue of Kling Cyru of Lu’ asked the other. “Fann”
certend Ba on then CPeehane said tp hm. “Desowuier, like a swelling food. spreads over
pain CORTE, RE wet ye Pee that will change its stare fie you? Rather than folhow
“LTR olan wh eb et cere a “e = ’
se RE Pro merle! He ith fis wewk, Geen =
Tah) went and reported thew remarks, wien ’ i he Master observed with a sigh, “It is ee aesrouane with Bards and: Donsts, ax if they: wreve the stone with ws, 174
“ ese poopie with mankind, —with whow shall | associate? If right — presacie’ through the empure. there would he no use for me to change its
Tazete Having the Master, hanpened to fall behind. when he met an ok man, SET INE Berens Ress shoulder on a stafl a basket for weeds. Taze-lu said to him, “Have you fer mh mater er The od man replied, “Your four limbs are unaccustomed 10 wil:
0 oe SEAN Gestimgereh the five kamds of grain: —who is your master?” With this, he reamed tee staff im the ground, and prcended to weed
ec sere! he arets seross Ais Neewst and shoud before hien_
“~ cas mee Kepe Taze-le to pass the might in his house. killed a fowl, prepared millet. gee Seated bom. He also introduced to-him hes two sons.
Nex ons Thselu went on his way, andl reported his adventure, The Master said, “He is a wane * anc sent Taretu hack 10-s¢e him again. but when he got to the place, the old
mar ea gore
Teen: thes Seat te the family, “Not to take office is ext rightousts. if the relations he sets aside the cuties that
hetecer oid umd surg may mot he neglected, how is it that ae me ctvacrves berucen sovereign ant minister? Wishing to maintain his personel Faia we lows that great relation 10 come to confusion, A superior man takes office, ext porte the ngheeous dubes belonging to it As to the failure of right principles to maak Progress, fe is aware of that”
The men wth: have retired 8) pnvaRy fron the world have been Po-i, Shu-ch'i,
Vachurg. f+), Cheechang Hut of Lig-tesia, and Shao-tien
The Maser said. “Retuning to surrender their wills, of bo subwnat to arty taint in their
perkins such, | thot. wore Po att Shells
“te mas be sand of Hur of Liuetesa’ and of Shacien. that they surrendered their wills, and responded with reason, anc! their
suabeeemed be taint in their perutn. but thest words cx : acbors were such ae mer. are atanius bo Mee Toss bs all that ts to be remarked in them.
“he mas be aad of Yuorchung and 1-y1, that, whude they tod themselves in their seclusion, they gave & hceone fo their words: et on chin percans, Ue) succeeded in preserving
dhe Pernt. and. in their retirement, they acted according to the exigency of the times.
“} am dhtterent from all these. | have no course for which | am predetermined, and no qowee against which fam predetermined.”
the grand music master, Chih, went to Chi.
Kan, the Master of the band at the second meal, went to Ch'u, Liao, the band master at the tint meal, went to Ts'ai. Chueh, the hand master at the fourth meal, went to Ch'in.
Fang-siva the drum master, withdrew to the north of the river.
Wi the master of the hand drum, withdrew to the Han. Vang. the assistant music master, and Hsiang, master of the musical stone, withdrew to w sland in the sea,
the duke of Chau adkressed his son, the duke of Lu, saying, “The virtuous prince sees NOL Heglect his relations. He does not cause the great ministers to repine at his not employ ing thems, Without some great cause, he does not dismiss from their offices the
members of okt families. He does not seek in one man talents for every employment.”
'o Chau belonged the eight officers, Po-ta, Po-kwo, Chung-tu, Chung-hwu, Shu- 4 Shulsia, Chi-sui, and Chi-kwa.
‘szechang said, “The scholar, trained for public duty, seeing threatening danger, is propwred ty sacrifice his life. When the opportunity of gain is presented to him, he thinks oT mghteousness. In sacrificing. his thoughts are reverential, In mourming, his thoughts
are about the grief which he should feel, Such a man commands our approbation indeed
Vare-chang said, “When a man holds fiast to virtae, but without seeking t0 enlarge it, at believes in right principles, but without firen sincerity, what account cam be made of ius existence oF non-existence”
The disciples of Taze-hsia asked Thze-chang about the principles that shoukd characterize mutual imercourse. Tate-chang asked, “What does Taze-hsia say on the subject!” They replied, “Tsze-hsia says: “Associate with those who can advantage you.
fron whe Deas ees, whe cannes do 60." Trae-chang observed, “This is Gifrarent with all. He prnises the The superior man honors the talented and virtuous, and bears and virtue? —who is there and pities the incompetent. Am | possessed of great talents aos ond Slcteah nace nen wihemn | wil rt Naar WW? Aen | Gove putting away of others?" ill put me away from them, What have we to do with the
Suis tookens Joga oe inferior studies and employments there is something worth piven rhe antempted to carry them out to what is remote, there is a én? proving inapplicable. Therefore, the superior man does not practice
Tsze-hsia said, “He, who from d , nth ; iM jay to day recognizes what he has not yet, and from aa does not forget what he has attained to, may be said indeed to love to
Tsze-hsia said, “There are learning extensive! i : . ly, and having a firm and sincere aim; inquiring with earnestness, and reflecting with self-application: virtue is in such a
Tsze-hsia said, “Craftsmen have their shops to dwell in, in order to accornplish their works. The superior man leams. in order to reach to the utmost of his principles.”
Tsze-hsia said. "The mean man is sure to gloss his faults."
Tsze-hsia said, "The superior man undergoes three changes. Looked at from a distance, be appears stern; when approached, he is mild; when he is heard to speak, his language is firm and decided."
Tsze-hsia said, "The superior man, having obtained their confidence, may then ined their confidence, they will think that
impose inbors on his people, If he have not gar he is oppressing them. Having obtained the confidence of his prince, one may then
remonstraie with her, If he have not gained his confidence, the prince will think that he
is vilifying him.” said, "When a person does not transgress the boundary line in the great repass it in the small virtues.”
and followers of Tsze-hsia, in sprinkling and sweeping the ground. in answering and replying. in advancing and receding, are sufficiently accomplished ihun these are only the branches of learning, and they are left ignorant of what is essemtial. —How can they be acknowledged as sufficiently taught?"
Tsze-hsia beard of the remark and said, “Alas! Yen Yu is wrong. According to the way of the superior man in teaching, what departments are there which he considers of prime what are there which he considers of secondary importance,
importance, and delivery’? and allows himself to be idde shout”? But as in the case of plants, which are assorted according t0 their classes, 30 he deals with his disciples. How can the way of a superior
|| Tsze-hsie virtues, he may pass and
‘Tsze-yu said, "The disciples
man be such as to make fools of any of them? Is it not the sage alone, who can unite in one the beginning and the consummation of learning?"
Tsze-hsia said, The officer, having discharged all his duties, should devote his \cisure to learning, The student, having completed his learning. should apply himself to be an officer.”
Tsze-hsia said, "Mourning, having been carried to the utmost degree of grief, should stop with that.”
‘Tsze-hsia said, "My friend Chang can do things which are hard to be done, but yet he is not perfectly virtuous.”
The philosopher Tsang said, "How imposing is the manner of Chang! Itt is difficult along with him to practice virtue.”
The philosopher Tsang said, "I heard this from our Master: 'Men may not have
shown what is in them to the full extent, and yet they will be found to do so, on the occasion of mourning for their parents."
The philosopher Tsang said, "I have heard this from our Master: —'The filial piety of Mang Chwang, in other matters, was what other men are competent to, but, as seen in
his not changing the ministers of his father, nor his father's mode of government, it is difficult to be attained to,"”
The chief of the Mang family having appointed Yang Fu to be chief criminal judge. the latter consulted the philosopher Tsang. Tsang said, "The rulers have failed in their duties, and the people consequently have been disorganized for a long time. When you
have found out the truth of any accusation, be grieved for and pity them, and do not feel joy at your own ability.”
‘Tsze-kung said, "Chau's wickedness was not so great as that name implies.
Therefore, the superior man hates to dwell ina low-lying situation, where all the evil of the world will flow in upon him,”
Tsze-kung said, “The faults of the superior man are like the eclipses of the sun and moon, He has his faults, and all men see them; he changes again, and all men look up to him."
Kung-sun Ch’ao of Wei asked Tszekung, saying. "From whom did Chung-ni get his warming?"
Tsze-kung replied, "The doctrines of Wan and Wu have not yet fallen to the ground, They are to be found among men, Men of talents and virtue remember the greater principles of them, and others, not possessing such talents and virtue, remember the smaller. Thus, all possess the doctrines of Wan and Wu. Where could our Master go that he should not have an opportunity of learning them? And yet what necessity was there
for his having a regular master?”
Shu-sun Wushu <0 mien Men Serres ape seen Suet Te
Tsze-fu Ching-po reported the observation
; to Tsze-kung, who said, "Let me use the Cormeen Of 3 Heraie sod Ba snohenpscning ol, Nir wel ella feseiens 2 e shoulde may peep over it, and see whatever js valuable in the apartments.
"The wall of my Master is several fathoms high,
, If one do not find the door and enter by ede caer ee Se ate eT ee A ES “But | may assume that they are few who fi observation
chief onty what gars bans unpeth raa bse ore
Shu-sun Wu-shu having spoken revilingly of C Taze-k "itis of use doing so. Chung-ni cannot ee ee hillocks and mounds which may be stepped over. Chung-ni is the sun or moon, which i is pot possible to step over. Although # man may wish to cut himself off from the sage, what harm can he do to the sun or moon? He only shows that he does not know his own
capacity Clvan Tsze-ch' in, addressing Tsze-kung, said, “You are too modest. How can Chung-ni be said to be superior to you?™
m, "For one word a man is often deemed to be wise, and for one
Tsze-kung said to ha med to be foolish. We ought to be careful indeed in what we say.
word be is often dee! «Cur Master cannot be attained to, justin the same way as the heavens cannot be gone
up be the steps of a stair.
“Were our Master in the position of the ruler of a state or the chief of a family, we should
find verified the description which has been given of a sage’s rule: _-he would plant the
people, and forthwith they would be established; he would lead them on, and forthwith
they would follow him; he would make them happy, and forthwith multitudes would would stimulate them, and forthwith they would be
resort to his dominkons: he harmonious. While he lived, he would be ghorious. When he died, he would be bitterly
Inmentod. How ix it possible for him to be attained to?”
Yao said, "Oh! you, Shun, the Heaven-determined order of succession now rests in your person, Sincerely hold fast the due Mean. If there shall be Gistrens and want within the four seas, the Fleavenly revenue will come to a perpetual end
Shun also used the same language in giving charge to Yu,
id, * ild Li im, ard to Tang said, “| the child Li, presume to use a dark-colored victim, presume anwunce to Thee, O most great and sovereign God, that the sinner I dare not pardon, and thy ministers, O God, | do not keep in obscurity. The examination of them is by thy mind. O God. Lf, in my person, | commit offenses, they are not to be attributed to you,
the people of the myriad regions. If you in the myriad regions commit offenses, these offenses must rest on my person.”
Chau conferred great gifts, and the good were enriched.
“Alihough he has his near relatives, they are not equal to my virtuous men, The people are throwing blarne upon me, the One man,"
He carefully attended to the weights and measures, examined the body of the laws, cestored the discarded officers, and the good goverment of the kingdom took its course.
He revived states that had been extinguished, restored families whose line of succession had been beoken, and called to office those who had retired into obscurity, so that throughout the kingdom the hearts of the people turned towards him.
What he attached chief importance to were the food of the people, the duties of mourning, and sacrifices,
By his generosity, he won all, By his sincerity, he made the people repose trust in him. By his carnest activity, his achievements were great. By his justice, all were delighted.
Tsze-chang asked Confucius. saying, “In what way should person in authority act in oeder that he may conduct government properly?” The Master replied, "Let him honor the five excellent, and banish away the four bad, things; —then may he conduct government properly," Tsze-chang sad, “What are meant by the five exeetlent things?” The Master said, "When the person in authority is beneficent without great expenditure: when he lays tasks on the people without their repining: when he pursues what he desires
without being covetous; when he maintains a dignitied ease without being proud: when he is majestic without being fierce.”
Tsze-chany said, "What is meant by being beneficent without great expenditure?” The Master replied, "When the person in authority makes more beneficial to the people the things from which they naturally derive benefit; —is not this being beneficent without great capenditure’? When he chooses the labors which are proper, and makes them labor
om them, who will repiee’? When his desires are set on benevolent and he secuites A, who will socume him of coveloumness? Whether he has to do with mary people
oF few. or with things great or email, he does nod dare to indicate any disrespect; —is not this to mnininin « digeified ease without any pride? He adjusts his chathes and cap, and throws a dignity info his looks, so that thus dignified, he is looked at with awe; —ix mot fis te be mapestic without being fierce Taae-chang then asked, “What ane meant by the four bad things?” The Master said, “To Pat Ehe people to death without having instructed them: —this is called cruelty, To require from them, suddenty, the full tae of work, without having given them waming: —thes ts called oppression. To issue orders as Hf without urgency. a first, and, when the bimme comes, bo Insist on them with severity; —thés is called injury. And, generally, in the giving pay or rewards io men, to do it ima stingy way; —this is called acting the part ofa meere cfTecial,”
The Master said, “Without recognizing the ordinances of Heaven. it ix impossible to be a Superior rma. "Without an aoguainiance with the rules of iety, it is i ible for the charseter to th ee Propuriety, it is impossabl “Without knowing the force of words, it is impossible to know men."